Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Brighton, County of Beaver, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 195,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Brighton, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Brighton,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Brighton and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 4-19-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 BRIGHTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as part
of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the township.
S. Any legislation regulating traffic or parking.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 1-12
1:6
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 1, 1999.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 1-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE I
Brighton Township Municipal Authority
[Adopted 3-1-1948 by Ord. No. 1]
§ 5-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton,
in the County of Beaver, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and said
Board hereby signifies its intention to organize an Authority under the
Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.1
§ 5-2. Article of Incorporation.
In pursuance of said desire and intention and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF THE
BRIGHTON TOWNSHIP MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, Pa.
In compliance with the requirement of the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, approved the second day of May, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended
and pursuant to Ordinance adopted by the municipal authorities of the
Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, that a Municipal
Authority be established under the provisions of the aforementioned law,
the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, desiring that a
Municipal Authority be established and that a Certificate of Incorporation
be issued to said Authority, does hereby certify:
(a) The name of the Authority shall be: Brighton Township Municipal
Authority, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
(b) The Authority is formed under the Act of May 2nd, 1945, P.L. 332, as
amended.
(c) No other Authority has been organized under the provisions of this
Act, or the Act approved the 28th day of June, 1935, P.L. 463, and is in
existence within said Township.
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is Township of Brighton,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania, a Township of the Second Class.
The names and addresses of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, are as follows:
Ray W. Patterson, Chairman - R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa.
Harry T. Kaye, Secretary - R.D. #1 Beaver, Pa.
John C. McCleery, Member - R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa.
1. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:9
(e) The names and addresses and terms of office of the first Members of
the Board of said Authority are as follows:
James W. Lary R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa. 5 years
Wm. T. Henry R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa. 4 years
Robt. L.
McCandless
R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa. 3 years
Frank G. Elkin R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa. 2 years
Paul G. Grine R.D. #1, Beaver, Pa. 1 year
All of whom reside in and are citizens of the Township of Brighton, Beaver
County, Pennsylvania.
(f) The term of existence of the Brighton Township Municipal Authority,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania, is hereby extended 50 years from the
date of approval of this amendment by the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 4-25-1977 by Ord. No. 68]
WITNESS the hands of the Chairman and Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, and
the seal of the said Township.
TOWNSHIP OF BRIGHTON
____________________ (SEAL)
Attest:
(SEAL)
Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania
:
: SS.
County of Beaver :
On this 1st day of March, 1948, before me, the undersigned, personally
came the above named RAY W. PATTERSON and HARRY T. KAYE whose
official positions in the incorporating municipality are respectively
Chairman and Secretary and who in due form of law acknowledged the
foregoing to be the act and deed of the incorporating municipality for the
purposes therein specified.
My Commission expires:
April 14, 1951.
_______________________
Notary Public
§ 5-3. Execution of Articles; notice and filing.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed
by and on behalf of the Township of Brighton, by the Chairman of the Board
of Supervisors of said township, and the seal of said township shall be
§ 5-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 5-3
1:10
thereto affixed, attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of
said township. The Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to cause to
be published the notice of intention and to file the Articles of Incorporation
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by the aforementioned
Act.
§ 5-4. Project.
A. The project to be undertaken is the acquisition of a school building and
the improvement thereof by the construction of additions thereto and
the acquisition of land for said purposes.
B. In addition to the powers heretofore granted to the Brighton Township
Municipal Authority, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, by ordinance of the
Board of Supervisors of the township, dated March 1, 1948, said
Authority is hereby empowered to also undertake projects involving the
constructing, equipping and furnishing of school buildings within the
School District of the Township of Brighton and the acquisition of
necessary lands thereof. [Added 12-5-1949]
C. The Brighton Township Municipal Authority, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania, is further authorized to exercise all powers granted
under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended,2 with
regard to said school buildings so constructed, acquired and improved.
[Added 12-5-1949]
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:11

ARTICLE II
Brighton Township Sewage Authority
[Adopted 7-14-1975 by Ord. No. 55]
§ 5-5. Intent.
It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the Township
of Brighton to organize an Authority under the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented,3
for the purpose of exercising any and all of the powers conferred by said
Act on authorities with respect to projects for sewers, sewer systems or
parts thereof and sewage treatment works, including works for treating and
disposing of industrial wastes.
§ 5-6. Name of Authority.
The name of the proposed Authority is "Brighton Township Sewage
Authority."
§ 5-7. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority are as
follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
OF
BRIGHTON TOWNSHIP SEWAGE AUTHORITY
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the provisions of the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, the
Township of Brighton, a township of the second class under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, situate in the County of Beaver in said
Commonwealth, pursuant to an ordinance duly ordained and enacted by
the Board of Supervisors of said Township being the municipal authorities
of said Township, and published and recorded in accordance with the law,
signifying said Township's desire and intention to form an Authority, hereby
certifies:
1. The name of the Authority shall be BRIGHTON TOWNSHIP SEWAGE
AUTHORITY.
2. The Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:13
3. There has been organized by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Brighton, under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, and there is
now in existence within said Township, a municipal authority known as
Brighton Township Municipal Authority, Beaver County, Pennsylvania,
which municipal authority has all the powers granted to municipal
authorities under said Act with respect to acquisition and
improvement of a school building and, as amended, with respect to
waterworks, water supply works and water distribution systems in the
Township.
No other municipal authority has been organized by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended and supplemented, or under the Act approved June
28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended and supplemented, and is in existence
in or for the incorporating municipality named herein.
4. The purpose of the Authority is to acquire, hold, construct, improve,
maintain and operate, own, lease, either in the capacity of lessee or
lessor, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage treatment
works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial wastes.
For such purposes the Authority shall have and exercise all powers
granted by law.
5. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of
Brighton, situate in the County of Beaver and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the names and addresses of its municipal
authorities, being the members of the Board of Supervisors of said
Township, are as follows:
Name Office Address
Robert M. Shultz Chairman, Board of
Supervisors
120 Duncan Circle
Beaver, Pa. 15009
John T. Prothero Vice Chairman, Board
of Supervisors
Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
John A. Wilson Supervisor 2410 Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
6. The Board of the Authority to be formed pursuant to these Articles
shall consist of five members, each of whom, except for those who
shall be members of the first Board of the Authority, shall be appointed
for terms of five years, and each of whom will be either a taxpayer
in, maintain a business in, or be a citizen of, the Township or any
municipality into which a sewage project of the Authority extends or is
to extend.
7. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first Board of the
Authority are as follows:
§ 5-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 5-7
1:14
Name Address Term of office
Clyde Reno 116 Pinkerton Drive
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Five Years
James R. Kester Wishart Drive
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Four Years
Earl J. Woolever 2020 Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Three Years
Harold Briceland 10th Avenue Westview
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Two Years
Eugene Van
Maldeghem
4965 Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
One Year
WITNESS the due execution of the Articles of Incorporation this ________
day of July, 1975.
(TOWNSHIP SEAL)
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP OF BRIGHTON
__________________________
Township Secretary
By _________________________________
Chairman, Board of Supervisors
By __________________________________
Vice Chairman, Board of Supervisors
By __________________________________
Supervisor
§ 5-8. Appointment of members.
The following persons, each of whom is either a taxpayer in, maintains a
business in or is a citizen of the township or of any municipality into which a
sewer project of the Authority extends or is to extend are hereby appointed
members of the Board of the Authority with the following terms of office:
Name Address Term of office
Clyde Reno 116 Pinkerton Drive
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Five years
James R. Kester Wishart Drive
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Four years
Earl J. Woolever 2020 Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Three years
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:15
Name Address Term of office
Harold Briceland 10th Avenue Westview
Beaver, Pa. 15009
Two years
Eugene Van
Maldeghem
4965 Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver, Pa. 15009
One year
§ 5-9. Execution of documents.
The Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority, in substantially the
form set forth in § 5-7 of this article, shall be executed on behalf of the
township by at least a majority of the Supervisors of the township and the
seal of the township shall be affixed thereto and attested by the Secretary
of the township; and such officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to do all the things necessary and appropriate to effect and
establish said proposed Authority in conformity with the provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented.4
§ 5-10. Powers.
The Authority shall have and exercise all the powers granted by law with
respect to projects for sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
wastes.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 5-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 5-10
1:16
Chapter 11
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 20. PLGIT — See Ch. 27.
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:17

ARTICLE I
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments
[Adopted 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 90]
§ 11-1. Purpose.
The Township of Brighton shall join the Upper Beaver Valley Council of
Governments, a group of participating municipalities, for the purposes
of facilitating agreement and cooperative action on interrelated
developmental needs and policies on common regional needs.
§ 11-2. Withdrawal from Council.
The Township of Brighton may withdraw from the Upper Beaver Valley
Council of Governments at any time upon 60 days' notice, in writing.
§ 11-3. Representation.
The Township of Brighton shall have equal representation with each of the
other participating municipalities upon the General Council of the Upper
Beaver Valley Council of Governments as well as upon its Executive
Committee.
§ 11-4. Membership dues.
Annual membership dues shall be fixed by the Executive Committee of the
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments and approved by a vote of the
participating municipalities.
§ 11-5. Ownership of property.
Ownership of any real property shall be taken in the name of a participating
municipality. Ownership of personal property shall be taken in the name
of the Council. Real property shall be managed by the owner municipality
pursuant to contract with the Council. Personal property shall be managed
by the Council, and upon sale thereof, the proceeds shall be distributed
proratably to those municipalities which contributed to its purchase.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-5
1:19
Chapter 20
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council of Governments — See Ch. 11. PLGIT — See Ch. 27.
§ 11-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 11-5
1:20
ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid
[Adopted 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 102]
§ 20-1. Agreement.
The Agreement between the Township of Brighton, the municipalities which
have executed copies of this Agreement and the County of Beaver, a copy of
which Agreement is attached hereto,5 for intergovernmental cooperation in
providing aid and assistance for fire protection and emergency situations is
hereby accepted and approved.
§ 20-2. Execution of documents.
The proper officials of the Township of Brighton are hereby authorized to
execute said Agreement on behalf of the township.
5. Editor's Note: Said Agreement is on file in the township offices.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2
1:21

ARTICLE II
INVEST
[Adopted 7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 105]
§ 20-3. Membership in INVEST; agreement.
This local government shall join with other local governments in accordance
with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law6 by becoming a member in
INVEST and by entering into an Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement
with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania acting through its Treasury
Department (the "Agreement"), upon such terms and conditions as are
standard in the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement prepared by the
Treasury Department of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the INVEST
Program.
§ 20-4. Duration of Agreement; renewal.
The duration of the Agreement shall be for a period of three years, with
automatic renewal for one-year periods.
§ 20-5. Purpose.
The purpose of the Agreement is to permit the State Treasurer to invest
the funds of this local government, with the objectives of safety of principal,
liquidity and high yield consistent with sound investment strategy.
§ 20-6. Investment manager.
The State Treasurer shall serve as the investment manager under the terms
of the Agreement.
§ 20-7. Purchase and redemption of shares.
This local government is permitted to purchase and redeem shares that
in turn are pooled with other local government shares to acquire and sell
certain investment securities, at a rate of $1 per share.
§ 20-8. Duties of Township Manager.
The individual authorized to make deposits and withdrawals, to establish
accounts and to perform such other duties as are necessary or appropriate
for participation as an INVEST member shall be Bryan K. DeHart, Township
Manager, or his successor in office.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 20-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-8
1:23
Chapter 27
LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT TRUST (PLGIT)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council of Governments — See Ch. 11.
Intergovernmental cooperation — See Ch. 20.
Pensions — See Ch. 43.
§ 27-1. Purpose; Declaration of Trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act7 and other similar
acts by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the "Trust") and entering into the Declaration of Trust,
which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this chapter was adopted.
§ 27-2. Purchase and redemption of shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes, subject to the
terms and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 27-1.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body of this
governmental unit.
§ 27-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 27-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 27-1.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by resolution, subject to the terms and restrictions of the
Declaration of Trust referred to in 27-1.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 20-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 27-4
1:24
Chapter 32
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 43.
§ 32-1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager is hereby created for the Township of
Brighton, subject to the right of the Board of Supervisors, by ordinance, at
any time to abolish such office.
§ 32-2. Appointment and removal of Manager.
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint, by a majority vote of its members,
one person to fill the office of Township Manager, who shall serve until his
successor is appointed and qualifies. The Board of Supervisors retains the
right, by a majority vote of its members, to declare the office vacant and
remove the Township Manager from office.
§ 32-3. Hiring requirements.
The Township Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which
are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with
other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to
in § 27-1.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements in accordance with the terms
and restrictions of the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 27-1.
G. The Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its
employees.
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:25
in or his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the
office as prescribed by the Board of Supervisors and this chapter. The
Township Manager need not be a resident of Brighton Township or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but as soon
as possible thereafter, he shall become, and during his tenure as Township
Manager shall remain, a resident of Brighton Township.
§ 32-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Township Manager shall file with the
Board of Supervisors a corporate surety bond to Brighton Township in the
amount of $10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
The premium for this bond shall be paid by Brighton Township.
§ 32-5. Administrative responsibilities.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of Brighton
Township, and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of Brighton Township. His
powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all township
business not expressly imposed or conferred upon other township officers
by statute or by express direction by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 32-6. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Township
Manager shall include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
not have been delegated to the Manager by the Board of Supervisors.
B. He shall recommend the hiring of employees and, when he shall deem it
necessary for the good of the township, recommend the suspension of
employees to the Board of Supervisors, but the right to discharge any
employee shall remain solely within the authority of the Board of
Supervisors.
C. He shall assist in the preparation and submission to the Supervisors
before the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as the
Supervisors shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. As a part of his assistance in the
preparation of the budget, the Manager shall obtain from the head of
each department, agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he requests. The Manager
shall review such estimates and may revise them before they are
incorporated in the budget.
D. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Supervisors.
§ 32-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 32-6
1:26
§ 32-7. Illness or absence.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the township, the Board
of Supervisors shall designate a qualified individual to perform the duties of
the Manager during his absence or disability.
Chapter 35
E. He shall, under the direction of the Supervisors, execute and enforce
the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the township.
F. He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and of its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and he shall
receive notice of all special meetings of the Board and of its
committees.
G. He shall keep the Board informed as to the conduct of township affairs;
submit periodic reports on the condition of the township finances and
such other reports as the Board shall request; and shall make such
recommendations to the Board as he deems necessary.
H. He shall submit to the Board, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the township for the preceding year.
I. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
township officer by statute.
J. He shall see that all money owed the township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
township claims.
K. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of Brighton Township and he shall
supervise and coordinate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Second Class Township Code,8 the purchase of all supplies and
equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and other
offices of the township as authorized by the Board of Supervisors in its
annual operating budget. He shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall periodically, or when directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a
full written report thereof.
L. He shall perform such other duties and fill such other offices as may be
required by the Board of Supervisors not inconsistent with the Second
Class Township Code or other statutes or ordinances of Brighton
Township.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 32-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-7
1:27
MUNICIPAL RISK MANAGEMENT WORKERS'
COMPENSATION POOLED TRUST
§ 35-1. Authorization and execution of documents.
§ 35-2. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the term of the agreement is four years from the date of
admission to the trust as a participant.
§ 35-3. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in Article V of the
agreement.
§ 35-4. Powers and scope of authority.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II,
Article V, Article VI, Article VIII and Article IX of the agreement.
§ 35-5. Funds for political subdivision's obligation.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the
agreement shall be appropriated from the general funds of the political
subdivision.
§ 35-6. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement
consists of the trust, trustees, service agents and fiscal agents created by
the agreement.
§ 35-7. Property acquired for purposes of trust.
Property acquired for purposes of the trust shall be acquired, managed and
disposed of under the terms of the attached trust agreement.
A. The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and
deliver the following documents:
(1) The Municipal Risk Management Workers' Compensation Pooled
Trust Agreement (hereafter the "agreement").
(2) The participant application.
B. Said documents are attached hereto and made a part hereof and which
may be inspected by any interested citizen at the office of the Municipal
Secretary.
§ 32-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 35-8
1:28
§ 35-8. Group insurance and employee benefits.
The trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security for its
employees.
Chapter 38
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 133.
§ 38-1. Creation.
§ 38-2. Composition.
A. A park and recreation board, to be known as the "Brighton Township
Park and Recreation Board," is hereby established.
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall be comprised of nine members
who shall be residents of Brighton Township and who shall be appointed
by the Board of Supervisors. All members of the Board shall serve
without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary and
reasonable expenses as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The term of each of the members of the Board shall be for five years or
until their successors are appointed, except that the members of the
Board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of
not more than two members shall expire annually thereafter.
C. All persons appointed shall serve their full terms unless they voluntarily
resign or are removed by the Supervisors for dereliction or neglect of
duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
D. The office of any member of the Board who shall fail to attend three
consecutive meetings of the Board without just or good cause may be
declared vacant by the Board of Supervisors.
E. The Chairman of the Park and Recreation Board shall promptly notify
the Board of Supervisors concerning vacancies in the Board, and such
vacancy shall be filled by the Board of Supervisors for the unexpired
term.
F. Vacancies in the Board occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term, in the same
manner as original appointments.
§ 35-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:29
§ 38-3. Organization.
§ 38-4. Powers and duties.
A. The members of the Board shall elect their own Chairman and
Secretary and select and create and fill such other offices as they may
determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed
themselves in the same office.
B. The Board may adopt and alter bylaws, rules and regulations to govern
its procedures consistent with ordinances of Brighton Township and the
laws of the commonwealth.
C. The Board shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as it
may designate and shall advise the Board of Supervisors of such
scheduled meetings.
A. The Board shall keep and maintain on file a full record of its business
and actions. All records and files shall be considered the property of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. The Board shall make a written report annually by March 1 to the Board
of Supervisors. Said written report shall include a report of its
activities, an analysis of community recreation areas, facilities and
leadership, with particular reference to the extent and adequacy of the
programs and effectiveness in view of public expenditure involved and
the public needs to be met.
C. The Board shall promote public interest and participation in, and
understanding of, the recreation areas and facilities of the Township.
D. The Board shall hear and decide upon requests for use of Township
recreational facilities which the Board of Supervisors has placed under
the jurisdiction of the Board, with priority concern given to residents of
the Township. The Board shall, from time to time, make rules and
regulations governing the operation and conduct upon the recreation
facilities under the jurisdiction of the Board. Said rules and regulations
shall, at a minimum, include any requirements established by the Board
of Supervisors.
E. The Board shall, upon its own initiative or upon request of interested
parties, review new recreation events or program proposals and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding their
implementation.
F. The Board shall, upon its own initiative or upon requests of interested
parties, evaluate improvements or additions to recreation programs or
facilities.
G. The Board shall inspect Township parks and recreation facilities
annually and make a written report and recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors regarding the condition of the facilities.
§ 38-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 38-4
1:30
Chapter 43
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Manager — See Ch. 32.
H. The Board shall submit a written budget recommendation to the Board
of Supervisors annually by October 1. Said budget recommendation
shall include recommended improvements to parks and facilities and/or
the purchase of equipment. The Board shall have no authority to enter
into any contract or incur any obligation binding upon the Township.
I. The Board shall review and make recommendations upon any matter
referred to it by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 38-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-4
1:31

ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Pension Plan
[Adopted 1-13-2020 by Ord. No. 2239]
§ 43-1. Membership benefit.
Brighton Township (the Township), having established a nonuniform
pension plan administered by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System (the System), hereby elects to amend its Nonuniform Pension Plan
administered by the System in accordance with Article IV of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S. §881.101 et seq.
(Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be bound by all the
requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S. §895.101 et seq.,
and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities.
§ 43-2. Administration and provision of benefits.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the System shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Nonuniform Pension Plan
document entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Township effective as of the date specified in the adoption
agreement (the contract).
§ 43-3. Acceptance of contract.
The Township acknowledges that by passage and adoption of this article,
the Township officially accepts the contract and the financial obligations
resulting from the administration of the contract.
§ 43-4. Payment for obligations; liability.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Township in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act. The Township hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 43-5. When effective.
The Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract, as amended, and it shall become effective as of the date specified
in the adoption agreement, which is the effective date of the contract, as
amended.
9. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Municipal Employees
Retirement Plan, adopted 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 209.
§ 43-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-6
1:33
§ 43-6. Filing.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the System.
§ 43-7. (Reserved)
§ 43-6 BRIGHTON CODE § 43-7
1:34
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 8-8-1994]
§ 43-8. Title.
This article shall be known and will be cited as the "Police Pension Fund
Resolution of the Township of Brighton."
§ 43-9. Fund established.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 600, approved May 29, 1956, of the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as amended,10 the
Township of Brighton established as of August 12, 1968, a Police Pension
Fund to be maintained by a charge against each member of the police force,
by annual appropriations made by the Township of Brighton, by payments
made by the State Treasurer to the Township of Brighton Treasurer from
the moneys received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty
insurance companies for purposes of pension retirement, for policemen, and
by gifts, devises or bequests granted to such Police Pension Fund pursuant
to the provisions of such Act.
§ 43-10. Use of funds. [Amended 6-14-2004 by Res. No. 04-14]
Such Police Pension Fund and all moneys associated therewith shall be
under the direction of the Supervisors of the Township of Brighton and
applied under such regulations as the Supervisors of the Township of
Brighton may, by resolution in conformity to existing law, prescribe for
the benefit of such members of the police force as shall receive honorable
discharge therefrom by reason of age and service or disability and the
families of such as may be killed in the Township service. All such pensions
as shall be allowed to those who are retired by reason of disability shall be
in conformity with a uniform scale.
§ 43-11. Acceptance of gifts.
The Township of Brighton Police Pension Fund is hereby authorized to take
by gift, grant, devise or bequest any money or property, real, personal or
mixed, in trust, for the benefit of such Police Pension Fund, and the care,
management, investment, and disposal of such trust funds or property shall
be vested in the Supervisors of the Township of Brighton or other person
or persons having the management of the Police Pension Fund under the
direction of the Supervisors of the Township of Brighton, and said trust
funds shall be governed thereby subject to such directions and inconsistent
therewith as the donors of such funds and property may prescribe.
§ 43-12. Maintenance of fund.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 43-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-12
1:35
§ 43-13. Administration.
The Police Pension Fund shall be administered by the Supervisors of the
Township of Brighton or such person or persons as the Supervisors may
designate from time to time.
A. The Police Pension Fund established by § 43-9 hereof shall be
maintained as follows:
(1) By a monthly charge on or against the salaries of each member of
the Township police force of an amount equal to not less than 5%
nor more than 8%, which charge is hereby made, beginning with all
salaries for the month of September 1968.
(2) By gifts, grants, devises or bequests granted to the Police Pension
Fund, if any, pursuant to § 43-11 hereof.
(3) By the payments made by the State Treasurer to the Township
Treasurer from the moneys received from taxes paid upon
premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies for purposes of
pension retirement or disability benefits for the Township
policemen, which payments shall be used as follows:
(a) To reduce the unfunded liability or, after such liability has been
funded;
(b) To apply against the annual obligation of the Township for
future service cost to or to the extent that the payment may be
in excess of such obligation; or
(c) To reduce member contribution.
(4) The remainder of the needed annual contributions, as determined
by the actuary, shall become the obligation of the Township and
shall be paid by the Township to the Police Pension Fund by annual
appropriations.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, any other moneys
paid into the Police Pension fund other than Subsection A(3) above shall
be applied equally against the member and the Township portions of the
future service cost.
C. If, at any time after the enactment of this article, an actuarial study
shows that the condition of the Police Pension Fund of the Township is
such that payments into the fund by members may be reduced below
the minimum percentages as prescribed in Subsection A(1) above, or
eliminated, and that if such payments are reduced or eliminated
contributions by the Township will not be required to keep the fund
actuarially sound, the governing body of the Township may, on an
annual basis, by resolution, reduce or eliminate payments into the fund
by its members.
§ 43-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 43-14
1:36
§ 43-14. Retirement age. [Added 4-13-2020 by Res. No. 2020-1111]
§ 43-15. Credit for military service.
Any member of the police force employed by the Township of Brighton,
who has been a regularly appointed employee of the Township of Brighton
for a period of at least six months and who thereafter shall enter into the
military service of the United States, shall have credited to his employment
record for pension or retirement benefits all of the time spent by him in such
military service, if such person returns to his employment within six months
after his separation from the service.
A. Normal retirement. The Township of Brighton hereby prescribes
normal retirement age to be a minimum of total service in the
aggregate of 25 years in the Township of Brighton and a minimum age
of 55 years after which members of the police force of the Township of
Brighton may retire from active duty. Such members who are retired
shall be subject to service, from time to time, as a police reserve, in case
of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace until unfit for such
service, when they may be finally discharged by reason of age or
disability.
B. Early retirement. The Township of Brighton hereby prescribes early
retirement age to be a minimum of total service in the aggregate of 20
years in the Township of Brighton, after which members of the police
force of the Township of Brighton may retire and receive an early
retirement benefit in an amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of the
accrued benefits as of the date the employment terminates. The
actuarial equivalent shall be a reduction in benefits to reflect early
commencement prior to normal retirement. Selection of an early
retirement benefit must be made on or before July 31, 2020. Thereafter,
the early retirement benefit is not available.
C. Vesting without normal or early retirement. Should any member of the
police force, before completing superannuation retirement age and
service requirements but after having completed 12 years of total
service, for any reason, cease to be employed as a full-time police
officer by the Township of Brighton, he shall be entitled to vest his
retirement benefits by filing with the Township of Brighton within 90
days of the date he ceases to be a full-time police officer a written notice
of his intention to vest. Upon reaching the date which would have been
his superannuation retirement date, if he had continued to be employed
as a full-time police officer, he shall be paid a partial superannuation
retirement allowance determined by applying the percentage his years
of service bears to the years of service which he would have rendered
had he continued to work until his superannuation retirement date to
the gross pension, using, however, the monthly average salary during
the appropriate thirty-six-month period prior to his termination of
employment.
11.Editor's Note: This resolution also repealed former § 43-14, Minimum period of service.
§ 43-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-16
1:37
§ 43-16. Payment of pensions.
Payments to be made by the Police Pension Fund herein established shall
not be a charge on any other fund in the Treasury of the Township of
Brighton or under its control, save the Police Pension Fund herein provided
for. The basis for determining any pension payable hereunder following
retirement of any member of the force meeting the service and age
qualifications of this article shall be as follows:
A. Monthly pension or retirement benefits shall be 1/2 the monthly
average salary (which for the purpose of this calculation shall include
only base salary, overtime pay and longevity pay) of such member
during the last 36 months of employment. Such pension or retirement
benefits for any month shall be computed as the sum of any pension
benefits from pension plans or association for the members of the police
force, but only to the extent that the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the Township of Brighton shall have contributed to such pension plan
moneys raised by taxation, and benefits from the Police Pension Fund
established pursuant to resolution of the Township of Brighton to the
extent necessary to bring the total benefits in any month up to 1/2 the
aforesaid monthly average salary. [Amended 6-14-2004 by Res. No.
04-14]
B. All full-time police officers in the employ of the Township of Brighton as
of December 31, 1992, shall, following receipt of retirement benefits, be
entitled to a cost of living increase; provided, however, that such cost of
living increase shall not exceed the percentage increase in the
Consumer Price Index from the year in which the police member last
worked, and provided, further, that in no case shall the total police
pension benefits exceed 65% of the salary for computing retirement
benefits, and provided, further, that the total cost of living increase
shall not exceed 30%. No cost of living increase shall be granted which
would impair the actuarial soundness of the pension fund.
C. Maximum benefit. [Added 12-11-1995]
(1) In addition to other applicable limitations set forth in the Police
Pension Fund, and notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Police Pension Fund to the contrary, for years beginning on or after
January 1, 1994, the annual compensation of each employee taken
into account under the Police Pension Fund shall not exceed the
OBRA '93 annual compensation limit. The OBRA '93 compensation
limit is $150,000, as adjusted by the Commissioner for increases in
the cost-of-living in accordance with Section 401(a)(17)(B) of the
Internal Revenue Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a
calendar year applied to any period, not exceeding 12 months, over
which compensation is determined (determination period)
beginning in such calendar year. If a determination period consists
of fewer than 12 months, the OBRA '93 annual compensation limit
will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
§ 43-16 BRIGHTON CODE § 43-16
1:38
§ 43-17. Permanently disabled officers. [Amended 6-14-2004 by Res.
No. 04-14]
If prior to retirement a police officer becomes totally and permanently
disabled while engaged in the performance of his duties as a police officer
so as to render him incapable of continuing his usual and customary
employment with the Township, and such condition continues for a period
of six consecutive months, and by reason thereof such police officer's
employment ceases, then such disabled police officer shall be entitled to
receive disability benefits equal to 50% of his average monthly salary at
the time of his disability, offset by any benefits payable under the Social
Security Act because of the same injuries. Such benefits shall continue
until the cessation of the disability or the death of the police officer. Such
disability benefit payments shall be reduced by any statutory benefits that
are awarded to the disabled police officer and by any benefits that are paid
pursuant to any disability insurance and any other compensation provided
by the Township.
§ 43-18. Surviving spouse benefits. [Amended 6-14-2004 by Res. No.
04-14]
number of months in the determination period and the
denominator of which is 12.
(2) For years beginning on or after January 1, 1994, any reference in
this Police Pension Fund to the limitation under Section 401(1)(17)
of the Code shall mean the OBRA '93 annual compensation limit set
forth in this provision.
(3) If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into
account in determining an employee's benefits accruing in the
current year, the compensation for that prior determination period
is subject to the OBRA '93 annual compensation limit in effect for
that prior determination period. For this purpose, for
determination periods beginning before the first day of the first
year beginning on or after January 1, 1994, the OBRA '93 annual
compensation limit is $150,000.
(4) Effective January 1, 1989, no police officer's annual benefit under
the Police Pension Fund and all other defined benefit plans
sponsored by the Township of Brighton may be greater than the
maximum amount calculated under Section 415 of the Internal
Revenue Code and the provisions of Section 415(b)(2)(F) of the
Internal Revenue Code that are specifically applicable to plans
maintained by governments and tax exempt organizations.
A. The surviving spouse of a police officer who has met the age and service
requirements for normal retirement as provided in § 43-14 of this
article, and who dies while still employed by the Township as an active
full-time police officer, shall receive 50% of the monthly accrued
pension benefit the police officer would have received had the officer
§ 43-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-18
1:39
§ 43-19. Refund of contributions. [Amended 6-14-2004 by Res. No.
04-14; 6-11-2007 by Res. No. 2007-13]
retired the day before the date of his death, until the spouse dies. Upon
the death of the surviving spouse, or in the absence of a surviving
spouse, a surviving child or children under the age of 18 shall
collectively receive the same survivor benefits until each child attains
the age of 18, except that any surviving child who is attending college
at an accredited institution of higher learning and carrying a minimum
course load of seven credits per semester shall be entitled to receive
his or her surviving benefits until such child attains the age of 23.
B. The surviving spouse of a police officer who has retired as a result of
meeting the age and service requirements as set forth in § 43-14 of this
article shall be entitled to receive monthly benefits at the rate of 50% of
the retirement benefits that the deceased retired police officer was
receiving at the time of his death. Upon the death of the surviving
spouse, or in the absence of a surviving spouse, any surviving child or
children of the deceased police officer under the age of 18 shall be
entitled to collectively receive the same survivor benefits. Any survivor
benefits to the child or children of a police officer shall cease upon the
child attaining the age of 18 years, except that any surviving child who
is attending college at an accredited institution of higher learning and
carrying a minimum course load of seven credits per semester shall be
entitled to receive his or her surviving benefits until such child attains
the age of 23.
C. Should a police officer of the Township of Brighton be killed while in the
service of the Township, the surviving spouse of the police officer shall
be entitled to receive monthly benefits calculated at 100% of the
officer's base salary at the time of death. Upon the death of the
surviving spouse, or in the absence of a surviving spouse, any surviving
child or children of the deceased police officer under the age of 18 shall
be entitled to collectively receive the same survivor benefits. Any
survivor benefits to the child or children of a police officer shall cease
upon the child attaining the age of 18 years, except that any surviving
child who is attending college at an accredited institution of higher
learning and carrying a minimum course load of seven credits per
semester shall be entitled to receive his or her surviving benefits until
such child attains the age of 23.
A. No person participating in the Police Pension Fund established
pursuant to this article, who becomes entitled to receive a benefit
therefrom, shall be deprived of his right to an equal proportionate share
therein upon the basis upon which he first became entitled thereto.
B. Any member of the police force of the Township of Brighton, who for
any reason whatsoever shall be ineligible to receive a pension after
having contributed any charges to the Police Pension Fund, shall be
entitled to a refund of all moneys paid by him into such fund, plus
§ 43-18 BRIGHTON CODE § 43-19
1:40
§ 43-20. Nontransferability of payments.
The pension payments herein provided for shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall be
payable only to the member or his designated beneficiary and shall not be
subject to assignment or transfer.
§ 43-21. Administrative expenses.
Effective January 1, 1985, the expense of administering the Police Pension
Fund, including actuarial and custodian fees, shall be paid from the assets
of the Police Pension Fund to the extent that such expenses are directly
associated with the pension plan, subject to the condition that any such
expenses must be monitored by the Board of Supervisors of Brighton
Township or the plan administrator to determine that such expenses are
necessary and proper.
§ 43-22. Execution of documents.
The proper officers of the Township of Brighton are hereby authorized and
empowered to execute and deliver on behalf of the Township all documents
as shall be necessary and proper to effectuate and implement the Police
Pension Fund hereby established.
interest at the annual rate of 6%, immediately upon discontinuance of
his employment with the police force.
C. Should any member of the police force of the Township of Brighton die
prior to becoming eligible to receive a pension after having contributed
any charges to the Police Pension Fund, such monies shall be paid to his
designated beneficiary, and in the absence of a designated beneficiary,
then first to his surviving spouse, if any, secondly, to his children, if any,
and if none, then to his estate. To any refund payable to a spouse or
child under this Subsection C hereof shall be added interest at the
annual rate of 6% or other increases in value of the member’s
investment in the Pension Fund.
§ 43-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-22
1:41
Chapter 47
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 38.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 47-1. Creation.
A Township Planning Commission, to be known as the "Brighton Township
Planning Commission," is hereby created and established in accordance
with the Municipalities Planning Code.12
§ 47-2. Appointment of members; terms; vacancies.
A. The Planning Commission shall be comprised of seven members who
shall be residents of Brighton Township and who shall be appointed by
the Supervisors of Brighton Township. All members shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable
expenses, provided that such expenses are approved by the Supervisors
in advance.
B. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be for four
years or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, except
that the terms of the members first appointed shall be so fixed that one
member shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, two for
three years and two for four years; and annually thereafter, members of
said Commission shall be appointed for terms of four years.
C. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
Supervisors of Brighton Township concerning vacancies in the
Commission, and such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
D. Should the Supervisors of Brighton Township determine to increase the
number of members of the existing Planning Commission, the
additional members shall be appointed as provided in this chapter. If
the Supervisors of Brighton Township shall determine to reduce the
number of members on the existing Planning Commission, such
reduction shall be effectuated by allowing the terms to expire and by
making no new appointments to fill the vacancy. Any reduction or
increase shall be by ordinance.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 43-22 BRIGHTON CODE § 47-3
1:42
§ 47-3. Membership.
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of
Brighton Township. No more than two members of the Planning
Commission shall be officers or employees of Brighton Township.
§ 47-4. Removal.
Any member of the Planning Commission once qualified and appointed
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance
in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Supervisors of
Brighton Township taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 47-5. Conduct of business.
The Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers
shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Planning
Commission may make or alter bylaws, rules and regulations to govern its
procedures consistent with the ordinances of Brighton Township and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Planning Commission shall
keep a full record of its business and shall make a written report by March
1 of each year of its activities to the Supervisors of Brighton Township.
§ 47-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Planning Commission shall at the request of the Supervisors of
Brighton Township have the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code and present it for the consideration of the
Supervisors of Brighton Township.
(2) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files
of the Brighton Township Planning Commission shall be in the
possession of the Supervisors of Brighton Township.
B. The Planning Commission at the request of the Supervisors of Brighton
Township may:
(1) Make recommendations to the Supervisors of Brighton Township
concerning the adoption or amendment of an Official Map.
(2) Prepare and present to the Supervisors of Brighton Township a
Zoning Ordinance and make recommendations to the Supervisors
on proposed amendments to it.
§ 47-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-6
1:43
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations, as
provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(4) Prepare and present to the Supervisors of Brighton Township a
building code and a housing code and make recommendations
concerning proposed amendments thereto.
(5) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(6) Prepare and present to the Supervisors of Brighton Township an
environmental study.
(7) Submit to the Supervisors of Brighton Township a recommended
capital improvements program.
(8) Prepare and present to the Supervisors of Brighton Township a
water survey, which shall be consistent with the State Water Plan
and any applicable water resources plan adopted by a river basis
commission. The water survey shall be conducted in consultation
with any public water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
(9) Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(10) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
(11) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(12) Present testimony before any board.
(13) Require from other departments and agencies of Brighton
Township such available information as relates to the work of the
Planning Commission.
(14) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(15) Prepare and present to the Supervisors of Brighton Township a
study regarding the feasibility and practicability of using renewal
energy sources in specific areas within Brighton Township.
(16) Review the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,13 Official Map, provisions for planned residential
development and such other ordinances and regulations governing
the development of land no less frequently than it reviews the
Comprehensive Plan.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning, and Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 47-6 BRIGHTON CODE § 47-7
1:44
§ 47-7. Administrative and technical assistance.
The Supervisors of Brighton Township may employ administrative and
technical services to aid in carrying out the provisions of this chapter either
as consultants on particular matters or as regular employees of Brighton
Township.
§ 47-8. Use of other assistance.
The Brighton Township Planning Commission may, with the consent of the
Supervisors of Brighton Township, accept and utilize any funds, personnel
or other assistance made available by Beaver County, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or the federal government or any of their agencies or
from private sources. The Supervisors of Brighton Township may enter
into agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the
funds or assistance in accordance with the governmental procedures of
Brighton Township.
Chapter 54
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Risk Management Workers'
Compensation Pooled Trust — See Ch. 35.
Pensions — See Ch. 43.
§ 47-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-8
1:45

ARTICLE I
Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 193]
§ 54-1. Adoption of agreement.
§ 54-2. Authorization; purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 54-3. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the trust:
A. The Township adopts the restated trust agreement14 and agrees to
participate in the trust in accordance with the amended and updated
terms of the restated trust agreement, and the Chairman of the Board
of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized to
sign the restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary
for the Township's participation in the trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 1300 Brighton Road, Beaver, Pennsylvania, 15009.
The restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the trust. The Township may withdraw from the trust in
accordance with the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of
Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in the
best interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the restated trust agreement.
14.Editor's Note: Refers to the restated trust agreement for the PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust, amended and restated 7-16-2014.
§ 54-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-4
1:47
§ 54-4. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust upon withdrawal.
§ 54-5. Effective date of participation.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be March 9,
2015.
§ 54-6. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 54-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees.
Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized
to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to perform
various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 54-8. Provision of funds.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 54-9. Power to enter contracts.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including Social Security, for employees
of the trust, if any.
§ 54-10. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 54-11. Copy to Board of Trustees of trust.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the trust.
§ 54-12. Additional actions.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take
any and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of
§ 54-4 BRIGHTON CODE § 54-12
1:48
the attached restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
§ 54-13. Term of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 54-14. Findings and determinations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
§ 54-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-15
1:49
§ 54-15. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable; and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it is
the intent of the Board of Supervisors that such determination by the court
shall not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this article. It is
the declared intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article would have
been enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid,
illegal or unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 54-16. Effect on rights, liabilities, or causes of action.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 54-17. When effective.
This article shall take effect five days from the date of adoption.
§ 54-18. Authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 54-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 54-18
1:50
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 64
ADULT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Obscenity and pornography — See Ch. 127.
Public conduct — See Ch. 138, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 64-1. Purpose; policy; authority; exclusion.
The Township Supervisors find that the crass commercial exploitation of
explicit sexual conduct through the public exhibition of lewd films and
the display and/or sale of lewd materials and sexual devices and the use
of so-called massage parlors and model studios for purposes of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution constitute a debasement and distortion of a
sensitive key relationship of human existence, central to family life,
community welfare and the development of human personality; is indecent
and offensive to the senses and to public morals and interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, in that such interferes with the
interest of the public in the quality of life and total community environment,
the tone of commerce in the township, property values and the public
safety; and that the continued operation of such activities is detrimental to
the best health, safety, convenience, good morals and general welfare of the
Township of Brighton and the residents, citizens, inhabitants and businesses
thereof.15 The Township Supervisors hereby declare such activities to be
a nuisance and to be prohibited. This chapter shall apply to existing and
future establishments which are presently engaged in or in the future
engage in the type of activity herein declared to be a nuisance.
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEWD —
Any matter:
Which the average person, applying contemporary community
standards of the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, would find,
when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and
(1)
Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations of
descriptions of:
(2)
A.
15.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 190, Zoning, Article XV, § 195-136.
§ 54-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:51
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body, for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within the township, which is open to members of the general public, with
or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATTER — A motion-picture film, material or sexual device, as defined
herein.
MODEL STUDIO —
Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including any erotic fondling or touching of the covered or
uncovered genitals, buttocks, pubic area or any part of the
breasts of the female, whether such acts are genital-genital,
oral-genital, oral-anal or anal-genital or which are engaged
in alone or between members of the same or opposite sex
or between humans and animals or humans and inanimate
objects; or
(a)
Sexual excitement as defined herein, sadomasochistic abuse as
defined herein, masturbation, excretory functions or exhibition
of the genitals or genital area.
(b)
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or prescribe any matter
which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it is
used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
B.
Includes:
Any premises on which there is conducted the business of
furnishing figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose
of being observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched,
painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly
depicted for persons who pay a fee or other consideration or
compensation or a gratuity, for the right or opportunity so to depict
the figure model or for admission to or for permission to remain
upon or as a condition for remaining upon the premises; or
(1)
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to
be observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
(2)
A.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public school or any governmental agency wherein the person,
firm, association, partnership or corporation operating it has met
the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
(1)
B.
§ 64-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 64-2
1:52
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
NUDE — Includes:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
MATERIAL — Includes any printed matter, visual representation or sound
recording, including but not limited to books, magazines, motion-picture
films, pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, threedimensional
forms, sculptures and phonograph, tape or wire recordings.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing or bizarre
costume or the condition of such person being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection B(1) of this definition.
(2)
Any studio operated by a tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation devoted
to the development of art and its appreciation.
(3)
A. Film or plate negative.
B. Film or plate positive.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen.
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
With the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with
less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state. For the purpose of this definition, a female breast is considered
uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
B.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:53
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of or transfer of possession of lewd
matter.
SEXUAL DEVICE — Any artificial human penis, vagina or anus or other
device primarily designed, promoted or marketed to physically stimulate
or manipulate the human genitals, pubic area, perineum or anal area,
including dildoes, penisators, vibrators, vibrillators, penis rings and
erection enlargement or prolonging creams, jellies or other such chemicals
or preparations.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The facial expressions, movements, utterances or
any other physical responses of a human male or female, whether alone or
with others, whether clothed or not, who is in an apparent state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or experiencing the physical or sensual reactions of
humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct.
§ 64-3. Lewd films and theaters.
§ 64-4. Lewd materials.
§ 64-5. Sexual devices.
A. Any and every place in the Township of Brighton where lewd films are
publicly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition and
any and every place in the Township of Brighton where a lewd film is
publicly or repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such
exhibitions is a nuisance and is prohibited.
B. Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for
such purpose at a place which is a nuisance under § 64-3A above is a
nuisance and is prohibited.
A. Any and every place in the Township of Brighton in which lewd
materials constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a nuisance and is
prohibited.
B. Any and every lewd material possessed at a place which is a nuisance
under Subsection A above is a nuisance and is prohibited.
A. Any and every place in the Township of Brighton in which sexual
devices constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a nuisance and is
prohibited.
B. Any and every sexual device possessed at a place which is a nuisance
under § 64-5A above is a nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 64-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 64-6
1:54
§ 64-6. Message parlors or model studios.
Every massage parlor or model studio which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution
and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon which acts of
lewdness, assignations or prostitution are held or occur is a nuisance and is
prohibited.
§ 64-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-8. Construal of provisions; severability clause.
If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this chapter is unconstitutional as worded,
the court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
provision so as to enable the same to be constitutional as narrowed or
construed. If the court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision
narrowly so as to render the same constitutional, it shall strike or modify
only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or
paragraphs as will be absolutely necessary to render the remainder
constitutional. In no case shall a clause or phrase or word or other portion
A. Any person who shall own or operate a place in the Township of
Brighton where lewd film is or lewd films are publicly exhibited or
possessed for the purpose of such exhibition or who shall own, lease or
possess any lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for such
purpose at a place which is a nuisance shall, upon conviction thereof
before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding $300 and, in
default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in the Beaver County Jail for
not more than 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Any person who shall own, lease or operate any place, as defined
herein, in the Township of Brighton in which lewd materials and sexual
devices constitute a part of the stock-in-trade shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding $300
and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in the Beaver County
Jail for not more than 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
C. Any person who shall own or operate a massage parlor or model studio,
as defined herein, which as a regular course of business is used for the
purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding $300
and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in the Beaver County
Jail for not more than 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. The Township Supervisors of the Township of Brighton may, in addition
to any other remedies, institute proceedings in a court of equity to
enjoin or prevent the unlawful actions prohibited hereunder.
§ 64-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-8
1:55
hereof render any other word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or
section unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed therefrom entirely,
with the balance of this chapter in its entirety remaining in full force and
effect.
Chapter 70
ANIMALS
§ 64-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 64-8
1:56
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 21416]
§ 70-1. Dogs running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs in Brighton Township
to permit such dog or dogs to run at large upon the public streets and
highways or upon the property of any other than the owner of such dogs in
Brighton Township, unleashed by the owner or keeper.
§ 70-2. Police to seize and detain dogs.
Any police officer of the Township may seize and detain any dog or dogs
found running at large in the Township as set forth herein.
§ 70-3. Transport to Beaver County Humane Society and notice of
seizure to licensee.
Every police officer of the Township shall transport any dog seized to the
Beaver County Humane Society. Such officer shall give immediate notice,
either personal or by registered mail, to the person in whose name the
license was procured, or his agent, if it can be determined, to claim such
dog within 10 days. The owner of a dog so detained shall pay all reasonable
expenses incurred by reason of its detention before the dog is returned.
§ 70-4. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep, possess, harbor,
or control any dog or other animal in Brighton Township which habitually
barks, howls, cries, screeches, yelps or bays, or in any way or manner
disturbs the quiet of persons in the neighborhood. "Habitually" shall mean
incessantly for a period of 15 minutes or more, or intermittently for 30
minutes of more.
§ 70-5. Removal of feces.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to allow feces to
accumulate on private property, owned or controlled by the owner or
keeper, to a level which is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of
persons or property, as determined by the Brighton Township
Enforcement Officer, or police officer conducting the investigation of
the property.
B. No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any
animal shall cause, suffer, permit or allow said animal to defecate on
any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, road, play area, park or
any place where people congregate or walk upon any public property
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Dogs Running at Large, adopted
5-13-1955, as amended.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:57
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning a dog or other animal and violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, before a
Magistrate District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 for the first
offense, and $200 for the second and each additional offense and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, shall suffer imprisonment in the Beaver
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
whatsoever or upon any private property without permission of the
owner of that private property unless immediate cleanup and disposal is
undertaken. "Proper cleanup and disposal" shall mean that such person
shall immediately remove all feces and droppings deposited by such
animal, which removal shall be in a sanitary manner, so as to prevent
any noxious odors, attraction of vermin or any other public health
nuisance to neighbors. This section shall not apply to or be enforced
against blind persons.
§ 70-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 70-6
1:58
ARTICLE II
Wild, Dangerous or Exotic Animals
[Adopted 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 133]
§ 70-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WILD, DANGEROUS or EXOTIC ANIMALS — Any non-naturally occurring
or nonindigenous species of animal or any untamed animal that is typically
found in the wild and that poses a serious threat to the safety and well-being
of the community and citizens if left unattended or escapes from its captive
environment.
§ 70-8. Possession of wild, dangerous or exotic animals prohibited.
No persons shall knowingly keep, maintain or have in their possession or
under their control within Brighton Township any dangerous or carnivorous
wild animal or reptile, or exotic animal, including, but not limited to, those
set forth hereinafter, except as provided in § 70-10 hereof.
§ 70-9. Applicability.
For the purpose of this article the animals listed below are considered
wild, dangerous or exotic animals to which the prohibition of § 70-8 hereof
applies.
A. All venomous snakes and reptiles.
B. All simians, including but not limited to apes, chimpanzees, gibbons,
gorillas, orangutans, baboons and monkeys.
C. Piranha fish or venomous fish.
D. Bears.
E. Bison.
F. Sharks.
G. Deer (includes all members of the deer family).
H. Pachyderm.
I. Constrictor snakes over four feet in length.
J. Crocodilians.
K. Cheetahs, lions, tigers, lynxes, leopards, puma, bobcat, jaguars or
panthers.
L. Foxes, coyotes, hyenas or dingos.
§ 70-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9
1:59
§ 70-10. Exemptions.
Licensed pet shops, menageries, schools and educational facilities,
zoological gardens and circuses shall be exempt from the provisions of
§§ 70-8 and 70-9 hereof if all of the following conditions are met:
§ 70-11. Euthanasia in emergency circumstances or urgent
situations.
M. Wolves whether pure or cross breed.
N. Kangaroos or wallabies.
O. Raccoons, porcupine, skunks, weasels, badgers, mink or mongoose.
P. Hippopotamuses.
Q. Rhinoceroses.
R. Game cocks; i.e., fighting birds.
A. The location conforms to the provisions of the Brighton Township
Zoning Code17;
B. No person resides within one-hundred fifty feet (150') of the quarters in
which the animals are kept;
C. Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their
escape;
D. All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition; and
E. All animals received humane treatment.
A. For purposes of this article, "euthanasia" means the humane
destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves
instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death, or by a method
that causes painless loss of consciousness and death during such loss of
consciousness.
B. Any wild, dangerous or exotic animal possessed or maintained in
violation of this article may be subject to impoundment and euthanasia
by the Chief of Police if any one of the following emergency
circumstances or urgent situations is deemed to exist by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee:
(1) The wild, dangerous or exotic animal presents an imminent
likelihood of serious physical harm to the public, and there are no
other reasonably available means of abatement. For the purposes
hereof, if any wild, dangerous or exotic animal wanders or runs
loose in Brighton Township, it shall be presumed that the animal
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 70-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 70-11
1:60
§ 70-12. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this article is guilty of summary offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $1,000.
presents an imminent likelihood of serious physical harm to the
public and there is no other reasonably available means of
abatement;
(2) There is no reasonable basis to believe that the violation can be or
in good faith will be corrected, and after reasonable search or
inquiry by the Chief of Police no facility as authorized by local, state
or federal law is available to house the wild, dangerous or exotic
animal; or
(3) The wild, dangerous or exotic animal suffers from a communicable
disease injurious to other animals or human beings; provided that
this subsection shall not apply if the animal is under treatment by a
licensed veterinarian and may reasonably be expected to recover
without infecting other animals or human beings.
§ 70-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-12
1:61
Chapter 78
(RESERVED)
Chapter 79
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 79-1. Legislative intent.
The County of Beaver, Pennsylvania, of which the Township of Brighton is
a municipal subdivision, has implemented an emergency telephone system
whereby an individual can dial a 911 telephone number in the event of
an emergency. A Township-wide uniform numbering system of all buildings
will assist emergency personnel in responding efficiently and quickly to an
emergency. It is, therefore, in the best interests of the public health, safety
and welfare of the residents of Brighton Township to establish a uniform
numbering system.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
HOUSE NUMBER — The number which has been legally assigned to a
residence, apartment building or business by the Township of Brighton for
the purpose of identification and for use by the United States Postal Service
for the delivery of mail.[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 165]
PROPERTY OWNER — The person(s), corporation(s) or other legal entity(s)
who own or lease any residence, apartment building or business located
within the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
§ 79-3. Display of house number. [Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No.
165]
The owners of all buildings within the Township of Brighton to which house
numbers have been assigned by the Township of Brighton shall have the
house number prominently displayed at all times in accordance with the
following standards:
A. Except for a building located at a distance greater than 50 feet from the
nearest public roadway, each building to which a house number has
been assigned shall have the house number displayed upon the
building, and, at the owner's option, upon a post within 20 feet of the
public roadway. All other buildings shall have the house number
displayed upon a post within 20 feet of the public highway.
B. The assigned house number shall be either affixed directly to the
building or post or displayed upon a sign affixed to the building or post.
The house number shall be displayed in such a manner that the
numbers will contrast in color with the background and will be
§ 70-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 79-3
1:62
§ 79-4. Prohibited activity.
It shall be unlawful to cover, conceal, obstruct, destroy, remove, deface or
vandalize any house number or road/street name sign or placard, installed
or displayed pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 79-5. Enforcement.
Upon determining that a building or property owner has not complied with
the house numbering regulations of this chapter, the Township Supervisors
or their designated representative, with the Supervisors' consent, may
pursue any of the following enforcement remedies:
observed and readable by those travelling in either direction on the
adjoining public street or other thorofare providing access to the
building, i.e., signage required on both sides of a mailbox. All numbers
shall be in standard Arabic numerals, not less than three inches in
height, and shall be reflective for greater nighttime visibility.
C. If, for any reason, the house number of a particular building is not
readily identifiable by posted signage along the roadway whether due
to the proximity of multiple buildings with different house numbers or
some other reason, then the house number should be affixed to the
building as well as posted by the road. Similarly, if a single building has
multiple house numbers or apartment numbers, such as professional
building or apartments, a building directory should be posted at the
main entrance of the building.
D. The numbers shall be so placed that they will not be obstructed by
trees, shrubbery, porches or any extension of the building.
A. The Supervisors may provide written notices to the owners, occupants
and other persons in possession of buildings or property which has not
been numbered in accordance with these regulations of the violation
and need to comply.
B. In the event that persons persist in refusing to comply with these
regulations despite notices to do so, the Supervisors may issue a
written order directing the owners, occupants or others in possession of
the buildings or property which is in violation of this chapter to comply
with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Any person who is
aggrieved by any order issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal to
the Township Supervisors by filing a written notice of appeal with the
office of the Township Manager within 10 days of the date of the subject
order or notice.
C. In the event the property owners or occupants or possessors fail or
refuse to take action in accordance with the notices and an order issued
pursuant to this chapter, the Township Supervisors may provide the
signage, as necessary, in order to bring the property owner into
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-5
1:63
§ 79-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be found to have engaged in the prohibited unlawful
conduct as set forth in § 79-4 of this chapter, or who shall willfully fail to
comply with any order to comply with the house numbering regulations,
shall be prosecuted by an action brought before a District Justice in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $50, together
with court costs, and upon default in payment of the fine, shall be sentenced
to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
Chapter 82
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 166.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Township of Brighton for the prevention of fires and to
eliminate nuisances caused by smoke, cinders and ashes.
§ 82-2. Permitted activities. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 182]
compliance with the standards promulgated in this chapter. The
Township may recover the cost of materials and labor for the purchase
and installation of signage from the property owners, occupants or
possessors together with reasonable administrative fees, interest or
other charges allowed by law.
D. In the event the owners, occupants or possessors of the subject
property fail to pay the cost of such installation as determined and
approved, then the Township may institute proceedings at law to collect
the full costs together with all penalties, interest, fees and other
charges which are authorized by applicable law, or may take action to
assess these costs and charges against the premises and the owners
thereof and collect same as a municipal lien or may take such other
action to collect these sums as may be permitted by law.
A. The burning of household waste outdoors within the limits of the
Township of Brighton shall be permitted provided such fires are
protected by a salamander, wire basket or masonry enclosure. Such
receptacle must have openings not greater in size than 1/2 inch. The
receptacle must be equipped with a top so constructed as to prevent fly
ash from escaping into the atmosphere.
§ 79-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 82-2
1:64
§ 82-2.1. Prohibited activities. [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 182]
B. Permitted fires, with the exception of those defined in Subsection D,
shall not be kindled or maintained on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday or legal
holidays, but shall be permitted on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or
Saturday of each week between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All
fires must be tended at all times until the fire is totally extinguished. It
shall be unlawful to leave a smoldering fire unattended.
C. It shall be lawful to burn refuse material outdoors which is readily
combustible and will not create nauseous fumes, noxious smoke or
excessive fly ash during the hours set forth under Subsection B above.
D. Charcoal or wood fires kindled for the purpose of outside barbecues
shall be permitted and shall be considered recreational fires exempt
from the restrictions set forth in Subsection B. Such fires shall be
contained within a defined burning ring not to exceed 60 inches in
diameter. Such fires shall be permitted from 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. All
fires must be tended at all times until the fire is totally extinguished.
E. Fireplaces within a private residence are permitted for the purpose of
providing heat or for use as a barbecue, but in no event shall garbage,
rubbish or trash be burned in a fireplace.
F. The burning of large brush piles or grass areas for the purpose of
clearing land shall be permitted, provided that the Township's Fire
Department is contacted in advance and advised of such plans so that
the Fire Department may be aware of the location of said land and be
able to stand by in case of emergency.
G. All persons engaged in the business or occupation of farming shall be
exempt from the restrictions set forth in Subsections B and F.
A. No person shall burn any recyclable materials within the limits of the
Township of Brighton as that term is defined in § 166-2 of the Brighton
Township Code.
B. The outdoor burning of household refuse within the limits of the
Township of Brighton shall be permitted provided that the burning
container is not located within 10 feet of any property line or any
building on the subject property nor within 50 feet of any building on
any adjoining property.
C. The burning of any material is prohibited upon any public street or
alley.
D. In addition to the prohibition against the burning of recyclable
materials in Subsection A above, the burning of garbage, vegetable
waste, rubber, plastics, furniture, glass, metals, crocking, car products
or any other materials which will create nausea or noxious fumes,
smoke, toxic chemicals or excessive fly ash is specifically prohibited.
§ 82-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-2.1
1:65
§ 82-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply herewith shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, for each violation. In the event that the fines and costs are not
paid, the defendant shall be sentenced to serve not more than 30 days in the
Beaver County jail. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 85
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 79.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Housing — See Ch. 108.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 85-1. Adoption of standards.
E. The burning of dry grass and garden waste is specifically prohibited on
all lots of 10 acres or less. The burning of leaves is prohibited,
regardless of the size of the property.
A. The Township of Brighton hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of Act No. 45 of 1999 (Pennsylvania Construction Code Act)18
and all regulations promulgated thereunder by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry.
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as
the building code for the Township of Brighton, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania, including all codes and regulations hereafter adopted by
the Department of Labor and Industry as a part of the Uniform
Construction Code.19 All such codes and regulations are incorporated
herein by reference to the same extent as if they were fully set forth
herein.
18.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
19.Editor’s Note: Act 92, adopted 7-15-2004 by the Pennsylvania Legislature, amended the
Pennsylvania Construction Code to exempt utility and miscellaneous use structures having
a building area of less than 1,000 square feet unless an ordinance is adopted to the
contrary. Pursuant to said Act 92, the Board of Supervisors adopted Ord. No. 137 on
11-4-2004 to provide that the Pennsylvania Construction Code as administered by the
Township of Brighton shall be applicable to utility and miscellaneous use structures
having a building area of 500 square feet or more.
§ 82-2.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 85-2
1:66
§ 85-2. Administration and enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance
with Sections 501 and 502 of Act 45 of 1999 and the Uniform Construction
Code as implemented by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
§ 85-3. Building code official/administrator.
§ 85-4. Permits and fees.
§ 85-5. Board of appeals.
A. The Middle Department Inspection Agency, Inc is hereby designated as
the building code official, which designation may be changed by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton.
B. The code administrator for the Township of Brighton shall be the
Middle Department Inspection Agency, Inc., which agency shall be
certified by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry. The
code administrator may be changed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Brighton.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the code administrator to issue all
permits for the construction, alteration, repair, demolition, location,
maintenance or installation of and/or relating to a building, structure,
elevator or equipment under the Uniform Construction Code.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the building code official to collect all
fees prescribed by this chapter and to supervise, manage and enforce
the Uniform Construction Code.
C. All permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the Uniform
Construction Code in accordance with the schedule of fees attached
hereto, made a part hereof and marked Exhibit A,20 which may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
Brighton Township.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Brighton Township shall appoint a Board of
Appeals to decide requests for variances and extensions of time and to
hear appeals from the decisions of the code administrator under
Section 501(c) of Act 45 of 1999.21
B. The membership of the Board of Appeals shall be as provided in Section
403.121 of the regulations promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and as those regulations may be
amended from time to time.
20.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.501(c).
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:67
§ 85-6. Notice of violations.
§ 85-7. Order to show cause.
C. The members of the Board of Appeals shall be compensated for travel
and other necessary expenses and, in addition, shall be paid such per
diem allowance for each day of their service in the performance of their
duties as shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
of Brighton Township.
A. Should an inspection reveal a violation of the Uniform Construction
Code, the building code official and the code administrator shall discuss
the inspection results with the owner or owner's representative at the
completion of the inspection.
B. The building code official shall issue a written notice of violations to the
owner or owner's agent. The notice shall contain a description of the
violations and an order requiring correction of the violations within a
reasonable period determined by the building code official.
C. After the compliance date contained in the order, the building code
official or his designee shall inspect the building, structure or
equipment to determine whether the violation was corrected. The
building code official shall close the order if the violation was corrected;
the building code official may issue an order to show cause under
Regulation 403.83 to the owner for a violation that was not corrected.
A. A building code official may initiate action to vacate or close a building
or structure or place equipment out of operation for violations of the
Uniform Construction Code by issuing an order to show cause to the
owner of the building or structure or equipment.
B. The order to show cause shall contain a statement of the grounds for
the action, the alleged violations of the Uniform Construction Code, and
notification that the building or structure may be closed or vacated, or
equipment placed out of operation. The order to show cause shall
contain notification that the owner shall submit a written answer within
30 days. The building code official shall serve the order to show cause
upon the owner or owner's agent by certified mail or in person.
C. The owner or owner's agent may file a written answer to the order to
show cause with the building code official within 30 days following
service of the order to show cause. The answer shall contain specific
admissions or denials of the allegations contained in the order to show
cause and shall set forth the specific facts, matters of law, or Uniform
Construction Code interpretation relied upon by the owner. The answer
may contain a request for a variance or an extension of time for
compliance. The building code official shall forward all requests for
variances, extensions of time or issues regarding interpretations of the
Uniform Construction Code to the Board of Appeals within 5 business
days of service of the order to show cause.
§ 85-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 85-7
1:68
§ 85-8. Stop-work order.
D. The Board of Appeals shall assume jurisdiction and consolidate the
answer with a pending request for variance or extension of time, or
appeal filed by the owner with the Board of Appeals. The building code
official shall consider the pending request for variance or extension of
time, or appeal as a stay to an enforcement action.
E. After receipt of the answer, the building code official may take the
following actions if the owner did not previously file an appeal or
request for a variance or extension of time:
(1) Issue a stop-work order.
(2) Vacate or close the building or structure or place equipment out of
operation.
(3) Abate or modify the alleged violation.
(4) Order other action to protect persons or property.
F. The building code official shall inspect the construction at the
expiration of an extension of time or other time period granted for
compliance under this section. If the building, structure or equipment
violates the Uniform Construction Code following inspection, the
building code official may issue an order vacating or closing the
building or structure or placing equipment out of operation. The
building code official shall serve this order upon the owner or owner's
agent by certified mail or personal service.
A. The building code official may issue a written stop-work order when he
determines that construction work violates the Uniform Construction
Code or is being performed in a dangerous or unsafe manner. The stopwork
order shall contain the reasons for the order and list the required
conditions for construction work to resume.
B. The building code official shall serve the stop work order on the permit
owner or the owner's agent by certified mail or in person.
C. A person who continues construction work after service of a stop-work
order, except for construction work that is necessary to remove a
violation or an unsafe condition, may be subject to the penalties under
Section 903 of Act 45 of 1999.22 The building code official may seek
enforcement of a stop work order in a court of competent jurisdiction.
22.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.903.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:69
Chapter 88
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public conduct — See Ch. 138, Art. I.
§ 88-1. Prohibited acts by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any minor person under the age of 18 years to be or
remain in or upon any of the streets, parks or public places in the Township
of Brighton between the hours of 11:00 p.m to 6:00 a.m., prevailing time,
unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person
having the legal custody of such person.
§ 88-2. Prohibited acts by parents or guardians.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
the legal care or custody of any minor person under the age of 18 years
to allow or permit any such minor person to go or be in or upon any of
the streets, alleys, parks or other public places in the Township of Brighton
between the hours specified in § 88-1 of this chapter, except as therein
provided.
§ 88-3. Enforcement procedures.
Any minor person under the age of 18 years found upon the streets, alleys,
parks or public places in the Township of Brighton, in violation of § 88-1
of this chapter shall be taken into custody by the township police and
delivered by the township police to the parents, guardian or person having
the legal custody of such minor person. The apprehending police officer
shall immediately make a report thereof in a book to be kept for that
purpose in the office of the township police. If such minor person shall again
be found in or upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or public places in the
Township of Brighton in violation of § 88-1 of this chapter, he shall then be
prosecuted before the District Justice having jurisdiction.
§ 88-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction before the District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 for
the first offense. For each subsequent violation by any person, that person,
upon conviction before the District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $300. In the event the fine and costs of
prosecution are not paid within the time prescribed by the District Justice,
the District Justice may sentence the defendant to perform a maximum of
10 hours of community service for the first offense and a maximum of 25
hours of community service for each subsequent offense.
§ 85-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 88-4
1:70
Chapter 96
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 5, Art. I. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175.
§ 96-1. Tampering with hydrants prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person, other than the duly authorized representatives of the Supervisors of
Brighton Township, the Brighton Township Volunteer Fire Department and
the Brighton Township Municipal Authority, to open, tamper with or in any
manner interfere with any fire hydrant within the confines of the Township
of Brighton.
§ 96-2. Prohibited plantings and structures.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to plant or maintain any flowers,
plants, shrubs and/or trees within six feet of any fire hydrant, nor shall any
person place, construct or maintain any permanent or temporary structure,
fence or other obstruction within six feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 96-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No.
221]
Chapter 97
FIREWORKS
A. Penalties for violation of § 96-1. Any person violating any of the
provisions of § 96-1, Tampering with hydrants prohibited, of this
chapter, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a
Magistrate District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 and, in
default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall suffer imprisonment
in the Beaver County Jail for a period not exceeding 15 days.
B. Penalties for violation of § 96-2. Any person violating any of the
provisions of § 96-2, Prohibited plantings and structures, of this
chapter, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a
Magistrate District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$300 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of the payment of such fine
and costs, shall suffer imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a
period not exceeding 15 days.
§ 88-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-1
1:71
§ 97-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — The term "display fireworks" shall be defined as
provided in Section 2401 of Act 43 of 2017 as large fireworks to be used
solely by professional pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The
term includes, but is not limited to:
§ 97-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations,
amusement parks, fair associations or other organizations or groups of
individuals to have or to hold public displays of fireworks within the limits
of the Township of Brighton, unless a permit therefor is first granted by the
Board of Supervisors, as hereinafter provided.
§ 97-3. Codes compliance.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
C.
A. Holders of permits to possess and use display fireworks within the
Township must comply with and abide by all Pennsylvania and federal
statutes and regulations governing the use and storage of display
fireworks, including, but not limited to, the International Fire Code and
the Uniform Construction Code (Act 45 of 1999, as amended) ("UCC").
In the event of an inconsistency between the aforementioned state and
federal laws and regulations and this chapter, the more stringent
statutes and regulations shall apply.
B. Before a permit for the possession and use of display fireworks may be
issued, the applicant must apply to the Township's Building Code
Official for a permit under the UCC. If the Building Code Official
indicates in writing that no UCC permit is required, the application
shall be processed in accordance with this Ordinance. If a UCC permit
is required, the applicant must present the valid UCC permit before a
display fireworks permit may be issued under this Ordinance. If an
applicant possesses a valid UCC permit, the site inspection
requirements in § 97-4 of this Ordinance are waived.
§ 97-1 BRIGHTON CODE § 97-4
1:72
§ 97-4. Inspection.
Every use of display fireworks within the Township shall be handled,
arranged, managed and directly supervised by a competent operator. The
Township Fire Chief and/or Fire Code Official, or other such officer
designated by the Township's Board of Supervisors, shall inspect the
proposed site prior to issuing a permit in accordance with the International
Fire Code and other applicable regulations and ensure that the site and
proposed use of display fireworks are not hazardous to property, will not
endanger any person(s) and will be in compliance with said regulations.
§ 97-5. Permit requirements.
A. An application for a permit shall be made in writing to the Township at
least 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed use of display
fireworks, setting forth the proposed, date, time and location, the
character and duration thereof, the name and address of the competent
operator, and the name and address of the owner(s) of the grounds on
which the display fireworks are to be used, with the written consent of
such owner(s) and a copy of any permit application required by the
International Fire Code and/or the UCC. The application shall contain
copies of all state, federal and local permits and/or licenses needed for
the use of display fireworks. All applicants shall pay the Township the
appropriate permit fee identified on the Township's duly enacted fee
schedule and provide proof of liability insurance acceptable to the
Township and the required bond prior to issuance of a permit. The
Board of Supervisors or its designee may attach conditions and/or
restrictions on any permit for the use of display fireworks as deemed
necessary.
B. Permits granted under this section shall be for the approved purpose,
date and time only, unless extended due to unfavorable weather under
§ 93-7.
C. No permit for the use of display fireworks shall be issued to an
individual under the age of 21.
D. No permit for the use of display fireworks shall be issued to an
individual unless said individual provides written documentation that
he or she has all necessary federal licenses and authorizations to
possess, store and use display fireworks.
E. No display fireworks shall be ignited within 300 feet of a permanent or
temporary fireworks facility licensed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Agriculture.
F. No permit shall be issued to a business entity which performs, provides
or supervises the use of display fireworks for profit unless it provides
proof of registration with the Pennsylvania Attorney General.
G. Permits issued pursuant to this Ordinance may be transferred in
accordance with Act 43 of 2017. Such transfers shall take effect only
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:73
§ 97-6. Bond required.
The Township shall require a bond from the applicant in an amount deemed
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors or its designee. The bond amount
shall be no less than $500,000 and shall be provided for the payment of
any and all damages caused to any person(s) and property by reason of
the display and arising from any acts of the permittee or the permittee's
agents, employees, subcontractors or volunteers. The bond shall be in a
form acceptable to the Township and no permit for the use of display
fireworks shall be issued unless an acceptable bond is received by the
Township.
§ 97-7. Extensions.
If by reason of unfavorable weather, the display for which a permit has been
granted does not take place at the time so authorized, the permittee may
apply to the Township within 24 hours, setting forth under oath the fact that
such display was not made, the reason and request for a continuance of
such permit for a specifically designated day, no later than one week after
the day fixed originally in said permit. Upon receiving such application for
a continuance, the Township shall extend the provisions of the permit to the
day fixed in the application, no later than one week after the original day
designated in the permit, if the Township believes the facts to be true. Such
extension of time shall be granted without the payment of any additional fee
or requiring any bond other than the one given for the original permit. The
provisions of the original bond shall extend to and cover all damages which
may be caused by reason of said display taking place at the extended date in
the same manner and to the same extent as if such display had taken place
at the date originally fixed in the permit.
§ 97-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
after 1) the permit holder provides written notice of the proposed
transfer to the Township; and 2) the transferee provides a written
statement that he or she agrees to comply with the requirements
stated in the permit and this Ordinance. Both must be provided to the
Township at least 10 days in advance of the transfer.
§ 97-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 97-8
1:74
Chapter 100
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 85.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 97-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:75

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 100-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,23 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Brighton Township does
hereby order as follows.
23.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1
1:77

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 100-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 100-3. Applicability.
§ 100-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 100-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect; and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 100-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Brighton Township unless a permit has
been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-6
1:79
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Brighton Township
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 100-6 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-6
1:80
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 100-7. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 100-8. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of Brighton Township.
§ 100-9. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator." The
floodplain administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Chairman of the
Supervisors.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);24 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);25 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);26 and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
24.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 100-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-9
1:81
§ 100-10. Application procedures and requirements.
C. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
G. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the floodplain administrator/manager.
I. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by Brighton Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 100-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-10
1:82
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 100-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-10
1:83
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 100-17), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 100-24F, Storage, and § 100-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 100-24F and 100-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 100-25
during a base flood.
§ 100-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-10
1:84
§ 100-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 100-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 100-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard,
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 100-14. Start of construction.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
§ 100-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-14
1:85
§ 100-15. Enforcement.
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request, and the original
permit is compliant with this chapter and the FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a
fine to Brighton Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
§ 100-14 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-15
1:86
§ 100-16. Appeals.
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code27 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 100-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-16
1:87

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 100-17. Identification.
§ 100-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Brighton Township classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated August
17, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), or the most-recent revision thereof, including all
digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Brighton Township and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term
shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS
and FIRM.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless the appropriate permit is obtained from
the Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
§ 100-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-18
1:89
§ 100-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency
or person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained
from FEMA. Additionally, soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(b) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA
for which base flood elevations have been provided but no
floodway has been determined.
[1] No permit shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any AE Area/District
without floodway unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE at any point.
[2] No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 100-18 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-19
1:90
technical or scientific data. See § 100-22B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 100-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by Brighton Township, and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 100-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 100-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-21
1:91

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 100-22. General provisions.
§ 100-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges):
(1) The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12), apply to FEMA for
conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 100-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-23
1:93
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 100-18A(3) of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 100-18A(3) of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
§ 100-23 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-23
1:94
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
§ 100-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-23
1:95
§ 100-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
§ 100-23 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-24
1:96
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 100-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
§ 100-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-24
1:97
§ 100-25. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A below shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
§ 100-24 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-25
1:98
§ 100-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 10
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
prohibited. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 100-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-26
1:99
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 100-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 100-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 100-26 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-28
1:100
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Uses
§ 100-29. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
(4) Nightclubs.
(5) Oil and gas wells.
(6) Public stables.
(7) Public dog kennels.
(8) Sanitary landfills.
(9) Automotive recycling.
(10) Automotive service stations/washing facilities.
(11) Mineral extraction.
(12) Campgrounds.
(13) Personal service establishments.
(14) Indoor theaters and commercial recreation uses.
(15) Fraternal clubs, lodges and social/recreational clubs.
(16) Cemeteries.
(17) Schools.
(18) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
§ 100-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-29
1:101

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 100-30. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 100-31 shall apply.
§ 100-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 100-18A(3).
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District [see § 100-18A(1)], no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway [see § 100-18A(2)], no
new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse,
unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection's regional office.
§ 100-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-31
1:103

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 100-32. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
Brighton Township may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 100-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by Brighton Township in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 100-16 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/Districts, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 100-18A(3).
(2) No variance shall be granted for development regulated by
prohibited uses (Article VI), manufactured homes (§ 100-27),
recreational vehicles (§ 100-28), or to development which may
endanger human life (§ 100-25).
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, Brighton Township shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, Brighton Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, Brighton Township shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
§ 100-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-33
1:105
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Brighton Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual
report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 100-33 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-33
1:106
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 100-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 100-35. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 100-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-35
1:107
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 100-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-35
1:108
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 100-17 and 100-18 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 17, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after September
1, 1986, and before August 17, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
§ 100-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-35
1:109
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated September
1, 1986, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated September
1, 1986, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 100-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 100-35
1:110
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development, provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standards applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 100-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-35
1:111

ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 100-36. Adoption; effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on August 17, 2015, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Brighton Township, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 100-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-36
1:113
Chapter 104
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 85.
Floodplain management — See. Ch. 100.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
§ 104-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Grading Ordinance of
the Township of Brighton."
§ 104-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons and property and to promote the public welfare by preventing
excess erosion, hazardous rock and soil slippage, sediment production, and
other soil and water management problems, by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, use, location, and
maintenance of grading, excavation, and fill.
§ 104-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for a
grading permit, including his heirs, successors, and assigns.
BEDROCK — Natural rock layer, hard or soft, at ground surface or beneath
unconsolidated surficial deposits.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
§ 100-36 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-3
1:114
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BUILDING — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed or permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground, including but not limited to mobile or modular homes, signs,
billboards, barn, silos, stables and sheds.
BUILDING PERMIT — A valid permit issued by the Township pursuant
to the Construction Code (Chapter 85) for the construction, erection, or
alteration of a structure or building.
CLEARING — The clearing, grubbing, scalping, removal of tree or stumps,
and removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the site,
including the conditions resulting therefrom.
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition,
or removal of any building or structure, and the clearing, stripping,
excavating, filling, grading, and regulation of sites in connection therewith.
DEBRIS — Loose refuse, rock, mud, or earth material not suitable for use
as presently situated or constituted, as determined by the Township grading
administrator. See also "waste."
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments or the
wearing away of the surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity, including such
processes as gravitational creep.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, soil, sand, rock, or other natural
mineral material is dug, removed, displaced, or otherwise relocated, and
shall include conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth is accumulated, dumped, transported,
or removed to a new location and shall include the condition resulting
therefrom.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — The act of altering the elevation or slope of the existing ground
surface by excavation or fill material and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
GRADING ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Manager of the Township of
Brighton or his designated representative.
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:115
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under the provisions of this
chapter as a result of or in anticipation of excavation, fill, or grading
activities.
GRADING PLAN — The plan of proposed grading which contains all of the
information required by this chapter for approval of a grading permit.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in Chapter 100 of the Township Code, Floodplain Management,
and Chapter 195 of the Township Code, Zoning, as being inundated by
the one-hundred-year flood. Included are areas identified as floodway (FW),
flood-fringe (FF), and general floodplain (FA).
HAZARD — A danger or potential danger to life, limb, or health or an
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use, or stability of
property waterways, public ways, structures, utilities, and storm sewers,
including stream pollution.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or parcel
of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether
or not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner), or other
persons having a proprietary interest in the lot.
OFF-SITE BORROW AREA — A source of earth fill material used in the
construction of embankments or other earth fill structures that is located
on another parcel of property other than where the principal construction
is occurring.
OFF-SITE SPOIL AREA — An area on another parcel of property, other than
where the principal construction is occurring, where excess earth, rock or
construction material is disposed of.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any landowner, agent of said landowner, or tenant with
the permission of said landowner who has been granted a grading permit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed or otherwise authorized
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice engineering, whose
specialty is in the field of civil engineering, unless another specialty is set
forth herein.
PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A person licensed or
otherwise authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a landscape
architect.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — A person licensed or otherwise
authorized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a surveyor.
RETAINING WALL — A structure composed of concrete, steel, or other
approved building material constructed for the purpose of supporting a
cut or filled embankment which would otherwise not comply with the
requirements of the standards set forth in this chapter, and which is more
than four feet in height, as measured on the exposed vertical surface of the
wall.
§ 104-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-3
1:116
ROUGH GRADE — The state of grading which approximates the finished
grade in a plan of grading.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which soil or other surface material is
accumulated or deposited by water, wind, or gravity.
SITE — A lot, tract, or parcel of land or a series of contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land upon which excavation, fill, or grading work is performed
concurrently or in connection with a single plan of construction or
development.
SLOPE — That ratio formed by the horizontal over the vertical difference of
position and where the vertical difference is usually expressed as one.
SOIL — All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock and may
include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated
by mechanical equipment. The term "clean soil or earth" shall mean that
earthen material consisting only of uncontaminated soils, stones or rocks,
or a mixture or combination of such materials, of appropriate dimensions,
that are raw materials, excavated, or extracted from a borrow pit or some
earthen bank.
SOIL CONSERVATION REPORT — A report, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, that includes a description of a site and topography,
drainage, cover, soils, soil limitations, erosion and sediment potential,
surface runoff changes and recommendations to minimize soil limitations,
erosion and sediment, and surface water disposal problems.
SOILS ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and having training and experience in
the branch of soils engineering.
STEEP SLOPE — Where, in a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, the
slope exceeds 40%.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover.
WASTE — All parts or any combination of material that is an unintended
byproduct of a manufacturing process and/or that is intended to be or
has been discarded. Examples of waste for the purposes of this chapter
include, but are not limited to: ashes, garbage, refuse, radioactive material,
demolition materials, and industrial waste such as food processing wastes,
wood, plastic, metal scrap, or any similar materials.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, drainage way, waterway, gully,
ravine, or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, including any area adjacent thereto which is
subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.
WORK — Any activity authorized under a grading permit, including but not
limited to clearing, construction, grading, and stripping.
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:117
§ 104-4. Interpretation; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 104-5. Grading permit required.
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation, landfill, or
off-site spoil area and off-site borrow area operations without first having
obtained a grading permit from the Township. A separate grading permit
shall be required for each individual site where excavation, fill, or grading
work is to be performed, as follows:
§ 104-6. Exceptions.
A grading permit will not be required, however, in any one of the following
situations, but in all other respects, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual, or an
association of individuals.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive when approved as a variance.
A. All site grading, excavations, and/or landfill or off-site spoil area and offsite
borrow area operations will require a permit unless an exception is
granted based on those conditions of § 104-6, Exceptions. One permit
will cover the grading, excavation, and any fill made on the same site.
B. All large contiguous parcels of land under one ownership for a major
plan development such as a planned residential development will
require only one permit unless an exception is granted based on the
conditions of § 104-6, Exceptions.
C. Where grading, excavation, or filling, except for the basement, will
result in the movement of more than 100 cubic yards of excavation or
create a slope having a height of more than four feet or a slope
exceeding one vertical to three horizontal on a lot, then a grading
permit shall be required in addition to the building permit.
D. Off-site spoil areas require a permit whenever the source of the
materials requires a permit.
E. Off-site borrow areas require a permit whenever the developed site
requires a permit.
§ 104-4 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-6
1:118
§ 104-7. Application for permit.
Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application with
plans, specifications, and a soil conservation report with the grading
administrator in a form prescribed by the Township. Unless a waiver is
granted by the grading administrator to one or more items, the application
shall:
A. An excavation which does not exceed four feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point, measured from the natural ground surface and/or does
not cover an area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the
surfaces of such excavation do not have slope at any point steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical.
B. Fill which does not exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point
measured from the natural ground surface and/or does not cover an
area of more than 1,000 square feet, provided that the surfaces of such
fills do not have a slope at any point steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.
C. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, or a one-family dwelling, swimming pool, or underground
structure authorized by a building permit, and an excavation of
driveway between a building site and the street. A permit is required
for an excavation of a driveway between the building site and the street
when, in the judgment of the grading administrator, extreme conditions
(such as excessive cut or fill) exist.
D. Soil excavated under the authorization of a properly issued building
permit from the Township, which is stockpiled on the same site as the
excavation.
E. Work performed or directed by the Township in a public street or alley,
or in a Township park, playground, or recreation area, or on other
public property.
F. Where residential construction for a single-family house will result in an
excavation or fill, other than for a foundation, less than 100 cubic yards
or will not create a slope exceeding three horizontal to one vertical,
then a grading permit will not be required in addition to the building
permit.
A. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract, street address, or similar description that will readily
identify and definitively locate the proposed work.
B. State the estimated dates for the start and completion of site grading
work.
C. State the purpose for which the site grading application is filed.
§ 104-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:119
D. State whether or not a building, structure, or other improvement (the
construction of which will require a building permit pursuant to the
provisions of the Building Codes28) is intended to be erected on the land
on which the site grading is to be done.
E. Include plans and specifications prepared, signed, and sealed by a
professional engineer, surveyor, geologist, architect, or landscape
architect, and shall accurately portray and describe the site and
proposed soil erosion controls, if any. Plans shall be submitted in
triplicate, one set of which shall be of a reproducible nature, and shall
include:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The name of the landowner.
(3) The permission and approval of the owner of the property if the
applicant is an agent or tenant of the landowner, by affidavit.
(4) An existing condition plot plan giving an accurate location by lot,
block, tract, or street address, which also includes a location map,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, septic systems, springs, wells,
wetlands, drainage maps, underground utilities, and overhead
utilities.
(5) A contour map showing the present contours of the land and the
proposed contours of the land after completion of the proposed
grading at two-foot intervals where the average slope is 15% or less
and at five-foot intervals where the average slope exceeds 15%.
(6) The cross sections of the proposed cut or fill on fifty-foot intervals
which show the method of benching both cut and/or fill; provided,
however, that there shall not be less than two cross sections for
each site.
(7) A plot plan showing the location of the grading boundaries, lot
lines, neighboring streets or ways, buildings, surface and
subsurface utilities and waterways, drainage patterns, and
sufficient dimensions and other data to show all work. Where
grading is to be performed over or adjacent to existing utility lines,
cross sections shall include utility line elevations.
(8) A description of the type and classification of the soil from the soil
survey, other standard surveys, or similar methods.
(9) The details and location of any proposed drainage, structures and
pipes, and walls and cribbing.
(10) A map that shows the seeding locations and schedules, debris
basins, and diversion channels.
28.Editor's Note: See Chapter 85, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 104-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-7
1:120
§ 104-8. Responsibilities of grading administrator.
The responsibilities of the grading administrator shall be as follows:
(11) An approved soil conservation report from the Beaver County
Conservation District.
(12) If truck or trailer loads of soil are to be removed from or delivered
to the site, a description of truck travel routes must be approved by
the Township. Evidence of approval from a state or county agency,
where required, shall also be provided.
F. If proposed grading, excavation, or fill is located entirely or partially
within any identified floodplain area, a document, certified by a
registered professional engineer, geologist, architect, or landscape
architect, which states that the proposed grading, excavation, or fill has
been adequately designed to withstand the one-hundred-year flood
elevations, pressure, velocities, impact, and uplift forces associated
with the one-hundred-year flood and that the plans adhere to the
restrictions of this chapter and the requirements of Chapter 100 of this
Code, Floodplain Management. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of measure that have been
incorporated into the design of the grading, excavation, or fill.
G. All earth disturbance activities greater than 20 cubic yards require a
geotechnical report, including a detailed on-site subsurface
investigation prepared to the satisfaction of the grading administrator,
signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in geological sciences
and erosion control. The professional shall certify that he has inspected
the site and reviewed the subsurface investigation data. The
professional shall provide a statement and certification that it is his
professional opinion that the proposed slope will have sufficient
stability and that the construction will not result in injury to persons,
adjacent property, utilities, streets, alleys, or structures or, when
complete and stabilized, be subject to accelerated erosion. The report
shall include specific findings and recommendations including, but not
limited to, core boring methods of construction, benching, minimum
compaction rates, surface and subsurface drainage and erosion control
measures. During construction, the geotechnical engineer shall be
required to conduct site inspections, conduct or observe compaction
tests, and otherwise attempt to ensure that the construction is
proceeding in accordance with his/her recommendations and good
engineering and construction practices. At the conclusion of
construction, and prior to release of the bond or financial security
provided in connection with the permit, the geotechnical engineer shall
provide a written report including compaction test results and a signed
and sealed certification stating that he has inspected the construction
of the fill slope(s) and that it is his professional opinion that the slope(s)
was/were constructed in accordance with his recommendations and
sound engineering and construction practices.
§ 104-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-8
1:121
§ 104-9. Expiration of permit; extension.
§ 104-10. Permit and fees.
Before issuing a grading permit, the grading administrator shall collect a
permit fee from the applicant in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Where due to special circumstances and conditions, compliance with
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship, the
grading administrator may make reasonable exceptions thereto, upon
recommendation from the Township Engineer, as will not be contrary to
the public interest, and may impose such conditions as it deems
necessary to adequately protect the public interest.
A. Unless otherwise provided by Pennsylvania law, every grading permit
shall automatically expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit has not been commenced with six months or
is not completed within one year from the date of issue, provided that
the grading administrator may, if the permit holder presents
satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work
being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time. The applicant must file an application for
an extension of time before the date of expiration of the grading permit.
B. Any physical changes from the original plan uncovered on the site
during construction, such as surface water drainage, soil and bedrock
dislocations, alteration of groundwater discharge, or any other natural
or man-made modification which would tend to adversely affect the
basis upon which the permit was issued, must be immediately reported
to the grading administrator by the permit holder. If the circumstances
dictate, the grading administrator shall revoke the permit or otherwise
modify the conditions upon which the permit was initially issued.
C. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, the work as proposed
by the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person or any
street or alley or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall
be denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to
endanger properties or streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions,
the Township Engineer shall give due consideration to: possible
saturation by rains; earth movements; runoff surface waters; and
subsurface conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock
aquifers, springs, and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
A. Application fees and deposits. The Board of Supervisors shall establish
from time to time, by resolution, fees and deposits to be paid by the
applicant at the time of filing the relevant application under this
chapter.
B. Posting of security. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant
shall post all necessary security in accordance with the requirements
set forth in § 104-11 of this chapter.
§ 104-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-10
1:122
§ 104-11. Performance security.
Security shall be provided as follows:
§ 104-12. Issuance of permits.
C. Review fees and expenses. The applicant shall reimburse the Township
for all fees and expenses incurred by the Township related to an
application and/or grading permit under this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the reasonable and necessary charges of the Township's
professional consultants, the Township Engineer, and the Township
Solicitor for review and report on an application and/or grading permit
under this chapter and the inspection of improvements and/or work
related thereto.
D. Upon filing an application, the applicant must agree, in writing, to pay
costs actually incurred by the Township, regardless of whether the
work related thereto is ever initiated or completed.
E. An administrative fee of 5% on all services provided to the Township by
professional consultants shall be deducted from the deposit as invoices
are received. Any professional consultants' fees shall be deducted from
the deposit as invoices are received.
A. As a condition of grading permit approval for projects having an
estimated cost of $25,000 or more, the applicant shall post security
acceptable to the Township in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost
to perform the grading and remedial work. The cost estimate shall
include the complete scope of work needed to be performed by the
applicant to comply with this chapter and shall be determined by the
Township Engineer.
B. As a condition of grading permit approval for projects having an
estimated cost to perform the work of less than $25,000, security in the
amount of 50% of the cost estimate as determined by the Township
Engineer shall be provided.
C. No security shall be required if security is posted for construction and/
or site improvements which already covers the cost of grading and
other control facilities.
A. The grading administrator may attach conditions to a grading permit as
reasonably necessary to prevent danger to property, including any
sewer, street, storm drain, or watercourse, or to prevent work from
being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property, or in a
manner likely to create a nuisance. No grading permit shall be issued
until all necessary plans and a cost estimate are approved by the
Township Engineer and the applicant certifies that all work shall be
performed pursuant to the approved plans, specifications, and
schedule.
§ 104-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-12
1:123
§ 104-13. Inspections.
B. If the application conforms substantially to the requirements of this
chapter, the grading administrator shall approve the application and
issue a grading permit to the applicant without unreasonable delay.
C. After the actual work begins, the grading administrator or the Township
Engineer may require additional or revised controls from time to time
in the event the grading administrator and/or Township Engineer
determines that the originally approved controls are inadequate.
D. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility of securing any and all necessary permits and
approvals as required by any other applicable code, ordinance, or
regulatory agency.
A. The grading administrator and/or Township Engineer shall make the
inspections required under this chapter. Following inspection, the
grading administrator shall approve any portion of the work that has
been completed and notify the permit holder of any portion of the work
that fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Where it is found
by inspection that the soil or other conditions are not stated or shown in
the application, the grading administrator may refuse to approve
further work and stop work on the site immediately until the Township
approves a revised grading plan conforming to existing conditions.
B. All plans for grading work bearing the approval of the Township
Engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the
grading work and until the work has been approved.
C. The permit holder shall notify the grading administrator in order to
obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule and at
least 48 hours before the inspection is to be made. Before calling for
any inspection, the owner shall have the property line stakes set and
sufficient grade stakes set by a professional engineer or surveyor to
enable the grading administrator to verify the grading operation.
(1) Initial inspection: when work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading: when all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities: when drainage facilities that connect to or shall
become public facilities are to be installed and inspected before
such facilities are backfilled.
(4) Special structures: when excavations are complete for retaining
and other structural supporting walls (e.g., crib walls) and when
reinforcing steel is in place and before concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection: when all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
§ 104-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-14
1:124
§ 104-14. Hazardous conditions.
§ 104-15. Working conditions.
The following general working conditions will apply to all grading sites.
A. Whenever the grading administrator determines that any existing
excavation, retaining wall, embankment, or fill has become a hazard,
the owner of the property upon which the excavation, retaining wall,
embankment, or fill is located, or another person or agent in control of
said property shall, upon receipt of notice, in writing, from the grading
administrator and within the reasonable period specified therein,
repair, reconstruct, or remove such excavation, retaining wall,
embankment, or fill so as to eliminate the hazard. In addition, the
Township may require as a condition of allowing the work to be done
that reasonable safety precautions be taken as the grading
administrator considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger.
Safety precautions may include but shall not be limited to specifying a
flatter exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, temporary safety fencing, terracing, compaction, or cribbing.
B. If, after such notification, the property owner or other person has not
made the necessary repairs within the time requested, then the
Township may make the required repairs and the cost thereof shall be
borne by the property owner by a lien or judgment obtained as provided
by law.
A. Dust control. During grading operations, excavating, stockpiling, filling
and at dump sites, waste areas and off-site spoil areas and off-site
borrow areas, necessary measures for dust control shall be exercised,
which shall include spraying of water, both temporary and permanent,
seeding, mulching, and fertilizing of areas, or the application of other
dust-control agents.
B. Maintenance. During any grading operations, excavating, stockpiling,
filling and at dump sites, waste areas, and off-site spoil areas and offsite
borrow areas, should none of the above-mentioned work be
performed within any six-month period of time, the permittee shall be
responsible to seed, mulch, and fertilize all disturbed areas so as to
establish venation and prevent problems with dust control and to
reduce erosion and sedimentation from occurring.
C. Cleanup. All soil washed or carried onto public streets during grading
operation shall be cleaned up each day. Temporary driveway or road
surfaces shall be provided as soon as possible. The owner of the
property being graded shall be responsible to protect and clean up
lower properties of silt and debris which have washed down onto the
lower properties as a result of the grading work on the higher property
and to restore the property to original condition.
§ 104-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-15
1:125
§ 104-16. Standards for excavations.
Standards for excavations shall be as follows:
D. Permit hours. The operation of heavy construction or excavation
machinery, including but not limited to bulldozers, high lifts, backhoes,
trucks, power shovels, pump and jackhammers, and the operation of
equipment, such as saws and drills or any other type of machinery used
outside of a structure, in conjunction with work requiring a building
permit, which causes a noise sufficient to disturb the peace and general
tranquility of the general public or any portion thereof, shall be
prohibited in the entire Township between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and all day Sunday and on
holidays.
E. PA One Call. The permittee shall place and keep current a Pennsylvania
One Call telephone number for the work being performed at any time
during the permittee work. The One Call serial number shall be kept at
the work site so that it may be verified by the grading administrator.
F. Burning. The burning of grass areas, brush piles or any other
vegetation or material for the purpose of clearing land shall be
prohibited.
A. Maximum slope steepness of a cut shall be three horizontal to one
vertical for minimizing erosion and landslide hazards. However, upon a
determination by a governmental review agency or a registered
professional engineer that the properties of the types of soil on the site
to be graded, as identified by the soil survey, other standard surveys,
geological surveys, or core borings, require special consideration, then
maximum slopes may then be determined as follows:
(1) Landslide-prone soils or unstable rock formations where existing
slopes are less than 25% shall have proposed cut slopes no steeper
than that are recommended by a registered professional engineer.
A document signed and sealed by said engineer shall be forwarded
to the Township prior to approval of the grading permit. Soil survey
map symbols for landslide-prone soils are:
(a) UGD Urban Land. Guernsey Complex, gently sloping 0% - 8%
slope.
(b) UGD Urban Land. Guernsey Complex, moderately sloping 8% -
25% slope.
B. Cut slopes which are steeper than those specified above may be allowed
under a grading permit, provided one or both of the following is
satisfied:
(1) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope steeper than the slope specified above for
recognized soils conditions on the site. A written statement
§ 104-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-16
1:126
§ 104-17. Standards for fills.
Standards for fills shall be as follows:
supported by a geotechnical investigation report, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer, stating that the
steeper slope will have sufficient stability and that risk of creating
a hazard will be slight, must be submitted to the grading
administrator.
(2) A retaining wall or other approved support designed, signed, and
sealed by a professional engineer and approved by the grading
administrator is provided to support the face of excavation.
C. The bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back a minimum of six feet
from adjacent property lines, except for side property lines and street
right-of-way lines, in which case the distance shall be a minimum of
three feet, in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property or street and to allow for location
of proper drainage facilities and protective devices.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making the
excavation shall notify, in writing, the owners of the adjacent property
or buildings not less than 30 days before such excavation is to be made
that the proposed excavation is to be started. Copies of all such notices
shall be supplied to the grading administrator.
E. The grading administrator may require an excavation to be made with a
cut slope flatter than those specified above if he finds the material in
which the excavation is to be made is unusually subject to erosion, or if
other conditions exist which, under applicable engineering practice,
make such flatter cut slope necessary for stability and safety.
Excavations adjacent to any footing, foundation, or structure shall not
extend below the minimum angle of repose or natural slope of the soil
under the nearest point of same unless such footing, foundations, or
structure is first properly underpinned or otherwise protected against
settlement.
F. All excavations shall have a ten-foot-wide bench every 20 feet in
elevation. This bench shall be placed in order to prevent loose rock and
soil from moving down the cut slope and to control rainfall runoff. The
bench shall be sloped so that rainfall runoff is collected and conveyed
safely off the slope so that there is no rainfall runoff being conveyed
down the slope from one bench to another. At the top of the slope a
drainage swale shall be graded so as to prevent the flow of rainfall
runoff from being conveyed down the cut slope.
A. No fill shall be made in the Township which creates a slope steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical. However, the grading administrator, on
the advice and recommendation of a registered professional engineer,
§ 104-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-17
1:127
may impose conditions requiring that a fill be constructed with an
exposed surface flatter than three horizontal to one vertical if the
professional engineer states that under the particular circumstances
involved, such flatter surface is necessary for stability and for the safety
of persons and property.
B. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time as
determined by the Township Engineer and specified on the grading
permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill, including all embankments, planting areas, and
seeding areas, to a minimum depth of six inches, to effectively
conceal all materials used in the fill other than clean soil or earth.
Prior to spreading topsoil, the subgrade shall be scarified to a
depth of two inches to facilitate the bonding of the subsoil with the
topsoil. If the filing operation is intermittent, the Township
Engineer may require that the top and exposed surfaces of the fill
be so covered at the completion of each lift.
(3) No fill of any kind shall be placed over topsoil, trees, stumps, or
other material that would create a nuisance, potential fire hazard,
or sanitary problem such as decomposition that would attract
rodents, termites, or other pests.
(4) Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material such as
vegetation and rubbish, and any other material determined by the
grading administrator that could prevent proper compaction and
stability.
C. Where fills are located so that earth movement may result in personal
injury or damage to adjacent property, streets, alleys, or buildings, the
bearing value and stability of the material under proposed fills and
embankments shall be determined by subsurface investigation
performed by a professional engineer.
D. Rock may be incorporated into fills and embankments but only in
maximum layers 24 inches thick, as per the latest edition of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Specifications
Publication 408, with voids filled and a blanket of compacted fill
separating one layer of rock from the next. Rock fill shall not be placed
near the bottom of foundations, building caissons, or subsurface utility
installations. Suitable earth shall be reserved or provided to cover rock
fill under proposed seeded or planted areas.
E. No unsuitable material (including but not limited to the following: coal,
bony, red-dog, expansive shale cinders, wood, or soil waste
decomposable material) shall be placed in fill areas.
§ 104-17 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-17
1:128
F. On major fills or embankments, a toe bench shall be located and
constructed below the mantle and under the toe of the embankment. A
porous drain and a discharge pipe shall be installed on the bottom and
the back wall of the toe bench.
G. All fills and embankments shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Specifications Publication 408 and any
special provisions as specified by a registered professional engineer.
H. The bottom edge of final slopes shall be set back a minimum of six feet
from adjacent property lines, except for side property lines and street
right-of-way lines, in which case the distance shall be a minimum of
three feet, in order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property or street and to allow for location
of proper drainage facilities and protective devices.
I. Pursuant to a determination by the grading administrator, if the nature
of a fill or embankment so warrants, a compaction test shall be required
at the end of each eight-inch lift, prior to the start of the next lift of
material. The grading administrator may require the applicant to
provide certifications of compliance with the recommendations of the
geotechnical report for placement of fill by the applicant's third-party
geotechnical consultants prior to release of performance security.
J. All fills shall have a ten-foot-wide bench every 20 feet in elevation. This
bench shall be placed in order to prevent loose rock and soil from
moving down the cut slope to control rainfall runoff. The bench shall be
sloped so that rainfall runoff is collected and conveyed safely off the
slope so that there is no rainfall being conveyed down the slope from
one bench to another. At the top of the slope a drainage swale shall be
graded so as to prevent the flow rainfall runoff from being conveyed
down the cut slope;
K. Within any identified floodplain area, fill, if used, shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Be used only to the extent that it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
§ 104-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-18
1:129
§ 104-18. Standards for retaining walls.
Standards for retaining walls shall be as follows:
A. When the topography and natural condition of the property is such that
a ground slope of three horizontal to one vertical is not feasible, the
grading administrator may consider the submission of a grading plan
showing a retaining wall and ground slope combination that would be
aesthetically acceptable, provided the following conditions are met.
(1) If the plan incorporates terracing, the gradient of the slope
between retaining walls shall not exceed three horizontal to one
vertical, and the horizontal distance between walls shall be at least
equal to the height of the retaining wall.
(2) Where a stable natural rock ledge is existing, as established by a
written statement from a registered professional engineer, a
similar design of rock ledge and ground slope combination may be
considered by the grading administrator.
B. When a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable codes (including, but not limited to, the
Township Zoning and Building Codes29), a building permit will not be
required in addition to the grading permit.
C. Retaining walls must be designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practice. The plans submitted for approval shall
include a description of proposed backfilling and subterranean
drainage facilities and bear the seal of a professional engineer.
D. Specifically, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical
face of the wall shall be set back a minimum of six feet from adjacent
property lines, except for side property lines and street right-of-way
lines, in which case the distance shall be a minimum of three feet. An
exception to this requirement may be granted by the grading
administrator upon an application satisfactory demonstrating that such
an exception is necessary to permit normal use of the property, that is,
for a sideline driveway, or other reasonable consideration.
E. Guide rails or protective fencing that meets the requirements of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 195, are required to be installed
where retaining wall heights are four feet and higher.
F. High walls. A high-wall condition shall be defined to any side of an
excavation in which the temporary or permanent slope of the
excavation exceeds the slope of 1:1. Should a high wall be present
exceeding five feet measured from the bottom of the excavation to the
top of the excavation, the permittee shall be required to place a
protective fence of at least four feet in height at the top of the high wall
at a distance of no less than five feet measured horizontally from the top
29.Editor's Note: See Chapter 85, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Chapter 195, Zoning.
§ 104-18 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-18
1:130
§ 104-19. Standards for drainage.
Standards for drainage shall be as follows:
§ 104-20. Erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The standards for soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be as follows:
of the high wall. The protective fence shall be of sufficient quality
and construction as determined by the grading administrator so as to
adequately keep children, animals, or persons from approaching the
high wall and falling over it. The application of either shotcrete, gunite,
or concrete as a final treatment of exposed cut slope exceeding one
horizontal to one vertical shall be prohibited.
A. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations and/or sloping surface of fills and/
or adjacent properties. Interception and diversion facilities for
stormwater and surface water runoff, both above and below the cut
area, during and after construction, shall be included in the design.
B. Drainage ditches shall be constructed prior to clearing or grading at the
toe and top of cut and fill slopes to divert the surface water to drainage
facilities such as storm sewers, street gutters, or natural watersheds
during and after construction.
C. Drainage ditches with a grade of 5% or greater shall be paved with
concrete, bituminous material, brick, half pipe, rubble, rip rap or other
hard surface material.
D. The grading administrator may approve methods and materials
recommended by governmental agencies and professional engineers
when they are more suitable to the site in preventing damage. Private
drainage facilities of any nature shall be at least designed to
accommodate the largest size storm that would occur on the average of
every 10 years.
E. The grading permit application must comply with the requirements of
Chapter 173, Stormwater Management.
A. An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the provisions of Pennsylvania Title 25, Environmental
Resources, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended,
prior to commencement of any grading or other earth disturbance
activity. For all applications proposing an earth disturbance of 5,000
square feet or greater, documentation that the erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been reviewed and deemed adequate by
the Beaver County Conservation District (BCCD) must be provided
prior to issuance of the grading permit. Documentation of issuance of a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activities must be
§ 104-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-20
1:131
§ 104-21. Maintenance.
The standards for maintenance shall be as follows:
provided for all applications proposing earth disturbances of one acre
or greater.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance,
and, if deemed necessary by the grading administrator, the
replacement of BMPs to control erosion and sedimentation at all times.
This shall include the placement of silt fences, sedimentation basins,
permanent and temporary rock-lined ditches, and piping so as to
prevent sedimentation from occurring and leaving the work site.
C. Individual on-lot controls. Individual on-lot controls shall be used for all
lots in residential developments that do not otherwise discharge to a
designed sediment trap or sediment basin.
D. Rock construction entrance. All individual residential lot development
shall employ a rock construction entrance for vehicular access to the lot
from paved roadways. The construction entrance shall be installed in
accordance with details provided in the most recent version of the PA
DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
E. Slope stabilization. All cut or fill slopes that exceed 10 feet in vertical
height and a 3:1 (horizontal: vertical) slope shall be stabilized with an
erosion control blanket to prevent slope erosion and promote seed
growth in accordance with the most recent version of the PA DEP
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual requirements.
A detail shall be included with the plans specifying the type of blanket
and installation procedures.
F. Energy dissipaters. All energy dissipaters such as riprap aprons, plunge
basins, etc., shall be designed based on outlet velocities associated with
the design storm for the subject outfall pipe.
A. The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been done
pursuant to a grading permit shall maintain in good condition and
promptly repair or restore all damaged grade surfaces, walls, drains,
dams and structures, plantings, vegetation, erosion and sedimentation
control measures, and any other protective devices as may be a part of
the permit requirements. Such repair, restoration, and maintenance
shall be in accordance with the approved plans, specifications, and
grading permit as required by this chapter.
B. If at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work the cut
face or fill slope shows evident signs of deterioration, erosion, or other
evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above or below
the grading site, the grading administrator, upon the recommendation
of its engineer, may direct the property owner to take whatever
necessary remedial steps deemed necessary to restore the grading area
to a safe condition and to do so in a reasonable period of time.
§ 104-20 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-21
1:132
§ 104-22. General requirements.
General requirements shall be as follows:
C. If after such notification the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the allotted time period, the grading
administrator may direct that the required repairs be undertaken and
the cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner.
A. The owner of the property being graded shall notify the grading
administrator of the starting date of grading activity no later than 24
hours prior to the commencement of grading activity.
B. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be set back an appropriate
distance, as established by the provisions of this chapter, from adjacent
property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to permit the normal
rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting property or
street.
C. The owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to protect
and clean up lower properties of silt and debris that have washed down
onto the lower properties as a result of the grading work on the higher
property and restore to original condition.
D. Proposed grading shall be accomplished so that existing stormwater
runoff flow are neither increased from predevelopment rates nor
concentrated at the point of release onto abutting properties.
E. Screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided for all grading
activities as follows:
(1) In a land development, bufferyards shall be provided as required by
the Township Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 195. Existing vegetation,
such as trees, bushes and shrubs, shall remain undisturbed. If none
exist or existing vegetation is ineffective or not hardy, natural
screening shall be provided consisting of trees, bushes or shrubs at
least six feet in height, planted in the buffer area in accordance
with a plan to be approved by the Township.
(2) For all other grading activities, natural screening must be provided
between the proposed area to be graded and the adjacent property
line, consisting of trees, bushes, or shrubs at least six feet in height.
F. No grading, clear-cutting, or denuding of the landscape shall be
permitted on property zoned SC-1, Special Conservation District,
unless zoning approval for development in accordance with the
Township Code has been obtained.
G. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the Township and until all
required permits and approvals have been obtained from the
§ 104-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-22
1:133
§ 104-23. Off-site areas.
§ 104-24. Trenches.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams
and Waterways Management.
H. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending development work shall be so preserved.
I. All distributed soil surfaces shall be stabilized by effective seeding or
other proper means prior to the first day of November of any year. Any
resultant noxious vegetation that results from improper planting or
maintenance of stabilized or partially stabilized soil shall be removed.
J. Within any Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) as delineated in
Floodplain Management, Chapter 100, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) Any new grading, excavation, or filling that would cause any
increases in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new grading, excavation, or filling shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams and Waterways
Management.
K. In order to protect hillsides exceeding 25% in slope, no more than 20%
by area of the natural vegetative cover may be removed unless a
program approved by the Township for restoration of disturbed areas
over 20% by area is guaranteed.
L. Grading and soil excavation are prohibited on any steep slope.
A. All areas proposed to be used for excavation, loading, and hauling of the
excavated material to another site for disposal and filling shall require a
permit as per the requirements of this chapter.
B. All areas proposed to be used for placement of excessive excavate
material, stockpiles, filling, dumping of excavate material, or storing of
any material shall require a permit as per the requirements of this
chapter.
A. All on-site trench excavation made for the installation, repair, or
replacement of utility lines, storm sewers, underdrains, service lines,
sanitary sewers, water lines, and sewage disposal systems shall be
excavated, backfilled, and maintained in accordance with this chapter
and the grading permit.
B. All off-site trench excavation made for the installation, repair, or
replacement of utility lines, storm sewers, underdrains, service lines,
§ 104-22 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-24
1:134
§ 104-25. Seeding.
The permittee shall be responsible to fine grade, respread topsoil, seed,
fertilize, and mulch all disturbed areas so as to establish a suitable ground
cover adequate to eliminate erosion and prevent dust; all in accordance
with this chapter, NPDES permit, and the Beaver County Conservation
District requirements.
§ 104-26. Liability.
Neither the issuance of this grading permit, nor compliance with this
chapter or any conditions imposed by the grading administrator, shall
relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or
property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the
Township for damages to any person or property.
§ 104-27. Violations and penalties; and enforcement.
sanitary sewer lines, and water lines shall be excavated, backfilled,
and maintained in accordance with the highway occupancy permit
requirements of the owner of the public highway and the owner of
the utility. No separate grading permit will be required for off-site
trenching.
C. All trenches shall be excavated in accordance with the requirements of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
D. All trenches shall be covered with a suitable steel plate, be protected
with an approved fence, or completely backfilled at the end of each day
or any time when no work is being performed.
A. When written notice of any of the provisions of this chapter has been
served by the grading administrator on any person, such violation shall
be discontinued immediately or within a reasonable time period
specified in such notice. If the violation is not discontinued, or extends
beyond the specified time limit, the grading administrator shall revoke
the grading permit, and the violator is subject to fine.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a
magisterial district judge in the manner provided for the enforcement
of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor
more than $1,000, plus costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by law for the
punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for
each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this chapter is found
to exist and for each section of this chapter found to have been violated.
The Township may also commence appropriate actions in equity or
§ 104-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-27
1:135
§ 104-28. Appeals.
Chapter 108
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 78.
other to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin, or abate violations of this
chapter. All fines and penalties collected for violations of this chapter
shall be paid to the Township. The initial determination of ordinance
violation is hereby delegated to the Township Manager, the Police
Department, the grading administrator, and to any other officer or
agent that the Township Manager or Board of Supervisors shall deem
appropriate.
C. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any applicant or person aggrieved by a decision of the grading
administrator and/or the Township or a notice or order issued under
this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Township Board of
Appeals established by Chapter 85, Construction Codes, Uniform,
provided that a written application for an appeal is filed within 10 days
after receipt of said decision, notice, or order, along with payment of an
appeal hearing fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted
hereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, or the provisions of this
chapter do not fully apply. All appeals before the Township Board of
Appeals under this chapter shall proceed under the regulations and
procedures established in the Chapter 85, Constructor Codes, Uniform,
of the Township Code.
B. All appeals from decisions of the Township Board of Appeals rendered
pursuant to this section shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of
Beaver County and shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the
decision as provided in 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 5572 (relating to time of entry of
order).
§ 104-27 BRIGHTON CODE § 104-28
1:136
ARTICLE I
Residential Rehabilitation Program Standards
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 73]
§ 108-1. Standards adopted by reference.
The Minimum Design Standards for Rehabilitation for Residential
Properties, as set forth in the Program Participants and Department of
Housing and Urban Development Handbook No. 4940.4 are hereby adopted
by reference as the required minimum design standards for federally
sponsored rehabilitation of existing residential properties within the
Township of Brighton. A copy of said Design Standards is on file at the
office of the Township Police Department, 2295 Tuscarawas Road, Beaver,
Pennsylvania, and may be examined during business days, Monday through
Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., prevailing times.
§ 108-2. Mandatory and optional requirements.
The minimum design standards set forth in HUD Handbook No. 4940.4
aforesaid, and therein identified as "Required Provisions," shall be deemed
mandatory requirements. Those minimum design standards set forth in said
HUD Handbook No. 4940.4, and therein identified as "Guides," shall be
deemed optional on the part of program participants.
§ 108-3. Permits.
A. No work of rehabilitation shall be undertaken within or upon a
residential structure until a permit therefor has been issued by the
Township Zoning Officer. Such permit, when issued, shall be styled
"Residential Rehabilitation Permit." No fee shall be charged for such
permits; such permits may not be transferred or assigned.
B. No rehabilitation permit shall issue except upon prior application made
or joined in by the Beaver County Redevelopment Authority. All such
applications shall contain the name of the owner of the premises for
which work of rehabilitation is proposed, the address (or location), the
tax parcel number of the premises, the intended work of rehabilitation
and the estimated capital value of the proposed work of rehabilitation.
The application shall be accompanied by such other information as may
be deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to determine compliance
with the terms of the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Brighton.30
The application and all required or requested accompanying matter
shall be submitted in triplicate and shall be sworn to by the applicant.
One complete set shall be returned to the applicant upon approval or
rejection of the requested permit; one copy shall be retained in the
permanent files of the Zoning Officer; and the remaining copy shall be
transmitted to the Redevelopment Authority of the County of Beaver for
enforcement and compliance purposes.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:137
§ 108-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this article
or who or which shall make any false statement in any application for the
permit required hereunder or do any work of rehabilitation in substantial
deviation from the mandatory requirements of the Minimum Design
Standards herewith adopted or the permit approving the same shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $300 and, in default of payment of the fine or penalty
imposed and the costs, such person, the members of such partnership or the
officers of such corporation may be committed to incarceration for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
C. No work of rehabilitation shall be undertaken unless the permit issued
by the Zoning Officer shall be first prominently posted on the permitted
premises. The failure or neglect of the applicant to prominently post the
permit and maintain the same throughout the duration of the permitted
work shall be a violation of this chapter. Duplicate permits shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer without additional charge. Loss,
substantial destruction or defacement of any posted permit must be
promptly reported to the Zoning Officer within 24 hours after such
event or casualty, Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays excepted.
D. All permits shall expire upon completion of the work therein authorized
to be done or within one year from the issuance thereof, whichever
event shall first occur. A permit shall expire if the work therein
authorized to be done is not commenced within 180 days from the date
such permit shall be issued.
§ 108-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 108-4
1:138
Chapter 121
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 70. Public conduct — See Ch. 138, Art. I.
§ 108-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-4
1:139

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Intent
§ 121-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of these provisions to protect the public against
nuisances, conduct, behavior, conditions, and activities herein defined
which result in detriment or danger to the public health, safety and welfare
of the residents of Brighton Township. The following purposes are
specifically set forth:
A. To protect the public against the unlawful activities, behavior,
conditions, and conduct herein defined which constitute a nuisance.
B. To protect the local residents use and enjoyment of their property
against trespassing by the activities, conduct, conditions, and behavior
classified as nuisances.
C. To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the activities, behavior, conditions, and conduct
herein classified as nuisances.
D. To preserve to the people their constitutional right, to preserve their
ordinary rules of decency, good morals and public order by regulating
unlawful activities, behavior, conditions and conduct herein described
as nuisances.
§ 121-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-1
1:141

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 121-2. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL STORAGE SITES — A lot or portion
thereof, used by a contractor or builder where equipment and materials
are stored and/or where a contractor or builder performs shop or assembly
work off the construction site and/or a site used as a staging area for
construction off site.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official(s) who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized
representative of Brighton Township, including the Township Manager,
Zoning Officer, Chief of Police, police officer, and any other Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township duly appointed by the Board of
Supervisors.
INFESTED — The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or
premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests in such quantities as to
constitute a health hazard to the property owner and/or general public.
OCCUPANT — Any person living or sleeping in a building; or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is rented or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including, but not
limited to, buildings for any occupancy or use whatsoever, fences, signs,
billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings, water tanks, towers, open
grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, garages, sheds, driveways, swimming
pools, tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is
fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or the ground.
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-2
1:143

ARTICLE III
Nuisances
The following are public nuisances:
§ 121-3. Attractive nuisances.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to create a health and safety
risk, or to fail to maintain or secure any premises or its appurtenances such
that an attractive nuisance is created to children, including, but not limited
to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsecured, open
or dilapidated structures.
§ 121-4. Construction and material storage sites.
A. In order to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons and
property, and to protect and promote the public welfare by regulating
construction and material storage sites, and preventing public
nuisances, no person shall violate the following required provisions.
B. Setbacks. The following yard regulations shall apply to all structures
and material storage:
(1) Front yard:
(a) Minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way line of all major and
minor arterial highways.
(b) Minimum of 30 feet from the right-of-way line of all collector
roads and local streets.
(2) Side yard: A side yard depth of 30 feet per side is required.
(3) Rear yard: A minimum of 30 feet in depth is required.
(4) Parking: A minimum of 20 feet in depth from the right-of-way and
property line is required.
C. Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
D. Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted with the application required in
§ 195-129 which demonstrates compliance with the provisions of this
section, and shows the location of the following:
(1) Traffic circulation route: A minimum of two points of entry shall be
provided to a public street.
(2) Parking: The location of both commercial and noncommercial
vehicle parking.
(3) All permanent and temporary structures.
§ 121-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:145
E. No open burning or incineration or the disposal of materials or fluids on
site shall be permitted.
F. Site debris, whether garbage, rubbish, dust or mud, or construction
materials shall be maintained so that such debris is confined to the
premises, and any such debris shall be immediately removed from
public streets or adjacent property.
G. Dust control.
(1) Dust control measures shall be used to stabilize soil from wind
erosion and to reduce dust generated from construction or site
activities, including:
(a) Stabilize exposed soils using vegetation, mulching, spray-on
adhesives, calcium chloride, sprinkling, and stone and gravel
layering.
(b) Stabilize unpaved haul roads, parking and staging areas within
the site.
(c) Minimize the impact of dust by anticipating the direction of
prevailing winds.
(d) Direct construction and commercial vehicle traffic to stabilized
roadways within the site.
(e) Pave, vegetate, or chemically stabilize access points where
unpaved traffic surfaces adjoin paved public streets.
(f) Provide covers for haul trucks transporting materials that
contribute to dust.
(g) Provide for wet suppression or chemical stabilization of
exposed soils.
(h) Provide for rapid cleanup of sediments deposited on paved
roads.
(i) Furnish vehicle wash-down areas.
(j) Reduce speed to 15 miles per hour or less and reduce trips on
unpaved roads on site.
(k) Implement dust control measures for material stockpiles.
(l) Stabilize abandoned construction/staging areas on site using
vegetation or chemical stabilization methods.
(m) Minimize extent of site areas which is disturbed.
(2) A dust control plan shall be submitted with the site plan,
demonstrating compliance with this subsection.
§ 121-4 BRIGHTON CODE § 121-4
1:146
§ 121-5. Fire and Safety hazards.
No person shall maintain premises in such a condition which creates a fire
hazard.
§ 121-6. Human waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person, municipality, partnership, corporation
or other association to create or cause to be created upon any public or
private property within the Township of Brighton the dumping, storage,
accumulation and/or disposal of excreta from human bodies, in solid or
liquid form, in any manner other than that authorized by the ordinances of
the Township of Brighton, and the gathering together, accumulation and/
or storage in open ponds or similar areas of any matter, either solid or
liquid, containing human waste in any form for the purpose of disposal
by the method commonly known as "a lagoon system," as defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health.
§ 121-7. Infestation.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to fail to maintain any premises
such that it becomes infested with potentially disease-bearing pests as to
constitute a health or safety hazard. "Infested" shall mean the presence,
within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rats, vermin,
or other pests in such quantities as to constitute a health hazard to the
property owner or general public as determined by the Township
Enforcement Officer.
§ 121-8. Public nuisances at common law.
No person shall commit such acts or conditions which have been declared a
public nuisance as a matter of common law.
§ 121-9. Nuisances under statute.
No person shall commit such acts or conditions which have been declared a
nuisance pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6504.
H. Noise. Site and construction noise shall not exceed a noise level of 60
decibels at the property line.
§ 121-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-9
1:147

ARTICLE IV
Notice
§ 121-10. Notice to be provided.
Upon determination by the Enforcement Officer of the existence of a public
nuisance under the terms and provisions of this chapter, the Enforcement
Officer shall, by certified mail addressed to the last known address of the
owner and the occupant, give notice requiring the abatement, removal,
demolition or rehabilitation of the public nuisance within 15 days from
the date of notice. If the property is not occupied and the whereabouts
or identity of the owner is unknown, notice shall be given by posting the
notice on the property and sending notice to the owners at their last known
address.
§ 121-11. Appeal.
The Notice shall inform the owner and the occupant that within five days
of the receipt of the notice he may appeal the notice to the Board of
Supervisors which shall, within 20 days of receipt of the appeal, hear
the appeal, review the order, and, within five days of the hearing, file its
decision thereon. Unless the notice is revoked or modified by the Board of
Supervisors, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner and
the occupant.
§ 121-12. Posting of notice.
If the owner or the occupant refuses to sign for the certified mail or
cannot be located, the posting of the violation notice on the premises shall
constitute proper notice.
§ 121-13. Right of Township to remove or abate nuisance.
Upon failure of the owner or occupant to abate, remove, demolish or
rehabilitate the nuisance, the Township may cause the same to be done
and shall be entitled to collect the cost of removal or abatement of such
nuisance. Collection of the cost shall be accomplished by summary
proceedings or in the manner provided for the collection of municipal claims
or by an action of assumpsit. In the exercise of the powers herein conferred,
the Township may seek relief by bill in equity.
§ 121-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-13
1:149

ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties.
§ 121-14. Violations and penalties for first offense.
If the owner or occupant fails to abate the identified public nuisances within
15 days from the date of notice, he shall be fined $100 per day for each day
that a violation continues, beginning on the 16th day after notice.
§ 121-15. Violations and penalties for second or subsequent
offenses.
For the second offense of these provisions and for all subsequent offenses,
the fine shall be $300 per day for each day the violation continues.
§ 121-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-15
1:151
Chapter 127
OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 64.
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Masturbation, sodomy, normal sexual intercourse or
abnormal sexual intercourse by, between or among adult humans or human
minor children or between humans and animals, or physical contact by a
human with another human's genital or pubic area or a female human's
breast.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, mask or bizarre costume, or the condition
of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained by or as one so
clothed, or the excessive beating and torturing of minor children, whether
clothed or unclothed.
PERSON — A person, firm, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or other legal entity.
§ 127-2. Public display.
§ 127-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall publicly display or shall knowingly permit, on property
owned or controlled by him, the public display, on signs, billboards, outdoor
moving picture screens or other instruments visible to the general public,
of pictures, moving pictures, drawings or other visible material depicting
sexual conduct or sadomasochistic activity shall, upon conviction of the
A. The Board of Supervisors does hereby declare that in its opinion the
public display on signs, billboards, outdoor moving picture screens or
other instruments visible to the general public of pictures, moving
pictures, drawings or other visual material depicting sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic activity, as those terms are defined in this chapter, is
offensive to the general public and constitutes a nuisance.
B. The public display on signs, billboards, outdoor moving picture screens
or other instruments visible to the general public of pictures, moving
pictures, drawings or other visual material depicting sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic activity shall constitute a nuisance and is hereby
prohibited.
§ 121-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 127-3
1:152
same before a District Justice, be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$300 and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned for not more than
30 days.
§ 127-4. Additional remedies.
The Board may, in addition to any other remedies, institute proceedings in a
court of equity to enjoin or prevent the unlawful public displays prohibited
hereunder.
Chapter 133
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 38.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 142.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 133-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, playing courts, athletic fields, open
spaces, recreation structures and facilities and all other land, property or
structures owned, managed, maintained and regulated by the Township for
park purposes.[Amended 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 186]
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
SMOKING — The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device.[Added 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 186]
§ 133-2. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are applicable to all Brighton Township
park and recreation areas.
A. The parks are open to all Township residents and guests daily from
sunrise until sunset throughout the year, except for special events
authorized by the Board of Supervisors and/or Park and Recreation
Board and where rental of park facilities specifies a later time.
B. The following activities are prohibited in all Brighton Township park
and recreation areas:
§ 127-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-2
1:153
(1) Possession and/or use of malt or alcoholic beverages or drugs
which are possessed in violation of law, except the use of malt or
alcoholic beverages in locations approved by the Board of
Supervisors and authorized by permit or rental agreement.
(2) Being under the influence of malt or alcoholic beverages or drugs.
(3) Boisterous, immoral or indecent conduct.
(4) Using threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language
or words.
(5) Disturbing the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other
person using the park for recreational purposes.
(6) Gambling, except as permitted under the Local Option Small
Games of Chance Act31 and possession of a valid small games of
chance permit, and with prior approval of the Board of Supervisors
and/or Park and Recreation Board.
(7) Discarding of trash, garbage or other litter except into containers
provided for that purpose.
(8) Damaging, defacing, destroying or moving Township-owned
property, trees, shrubs, plants, turf, signs, buildings, structures,
lights, fixtures, equipment or other material or property of the
Township.
(9) Contamination of any waterway.
(10) Fires, except in facilities provided for such purposes.
(11) Dogs or horses or any other domesticated animals.
(12) Minibikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, go-carts, ATVs or other selfpropelled
vehicles, other than automobiles in parking areas.
(13) Bicycles on or around any playing field or surface.
(14) Hitting of golf balls on any playing field or surface.
(15) Climbing on fences, backstops or buildings.
(16) Injuring, defacing, destroying or removing any notice, rule or
regulation posted at any place within the park by authority of the
Board of Supervisors and/or Park and Recreation Board; or the
posting of any notice or placard within the park other than by
authority of the Board of Supervisors and/or Park and Recreation
Board.
(17) Setting up of any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or
service whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission
31.Editor's Note: See 10 P.S. § 311 et seq.
§ 133-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 133-2
1:154
of the Board of Supervisors or the Park and Recreation Board;
distributing, selling, servicing or renting any services or
commodity or soliciting for any purpose without permission of the
Board of Supervisors or the Park and Recreation Board.
(18) Operating commercial vehicles, unless providing services
authorized by the Board of Supervisors and/or Park and Recreation
Board.
(19) Carrying or discharging any firecrackers, fireworks or other
pyrotechnics. [Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 192]
(20) Disobeying a proper order of a police officer or disobeying or
disregarding or failing to comply with a rule or regulation, warning,
prohibition, instruction or direction given by an authorized person
and posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card or poster or
when notified or informed as to its existence by an authorized
person.
(21) Hunting in areas designated as no hunting by the posting of the
property in compliance with Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife
Code.32 Hunting on properties covered by this chapter shall be in
accordance with Pennsylvania game laws. Pavilions, dugouts,
playgrounds, comfort stations, courts and lodges shall be
considered buildings and subject to the one-hundred-fifty-yard
safety zone area as specified in the Pennsylvania game laws.
(22) Cleaning, polishing, greasing, lubricating or making repairs to any
vehicle except those of a minor nature and then only in cases of
emergency.
(23)No person shall be permitted to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device within, on or
throughout all properties owned, managed, maintained and
regulated by the Township for park purposes with the exception of
specifically designated smoking areas marked with signs stating
"smoking permitted." [Added 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 186]
C. The following traffic regulations shall be in force and effect in all
Township parks:
(1) The Pennsylvania Vehicle Code Act of 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, as
amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., is hereby declared to be in
effect in all Township parks and on all streets and roadways
therein, with like effect as though set forth herein in full, and the
traffic rules and regulations set forth herein are in addition to and
supplement the Vehicle Code.
32.Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 133-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-2
1:155
§ 133-3. Fees.
There may be a fee charged, as established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors, for rental and use of park facilities. Said rental
fee schedule may also require the posting of a security deposit to guarantee
that park facilities are left in good and orderly condition.
§ 133-4. Authority to close areas.
Park and recreation areas and facilities which become hazardous for public
use due to weather, water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed
upon recommendation of the Park and Recreation Board and/or Chief of
Police at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) A rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour is prohibited.
Operating a vehicle in a reckless or negligent manner or in excess
of the posted speed limit is prohibited.
(3) All persons shall at all times heed and comply with directions of
Township police officers or other persons authorized by the Park
and Recreation Board and/or Township Supervisors, indicated by
gesture or otherwise, and shall further comply with directions on
traffic signs. Directions on such traffic signs may be disregarded
only on an order of a police officer.
(4) No driver shall stop on the improved or paved roadway of the park
for the purpose of removing or replacing a tire. No person shall
remove or replace a tire unless the vehicle is completely off the
improved or paved roadways.
(5) Motorcycles are not to be operated on any other area of the park
except on established roads and streets in said park for the purpose
of ingress, egress and regress from a public street into the park
area, and on a parking area for parking only in any area provided
and designated as a parking area.
(6) No automobile shall be left in any park after closing hours without
special permission from the appropriate Township officials; the
Township shall be under no obligation to reopen the park or any
parking lot, road or gate locked after closing hours in order to allow
said vehicle to be removed during a period of time when the park is
closed. Leaving said vehicle in said park after closing hours without
permission aforementioned shall be a violation of this chapter.
(7) No person shall operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other
means of conveyance except in areas where permitted or
designated by proper authority of the Board of Supervisors and/or
Park and Recreation Board, nor operate the same in a reckless or
negligent manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a
manner as to become a nuisance to other area users.
§ 133-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 133-5
1:156
§ 133-5. Enforcement.
The police officers of the Township are charged with enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code33 in all parks within the Township.
§ 133-6. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by an action brought before
a District Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any
person guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction in
the proceedings before the District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000 for each violation.
Chapter 138
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 70.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 82.
Curfew — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 121.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 142, Art. I.
Solid waste — See Ch. 166.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 189.
§ 138-1. Noise. [Amended 4-13-2020 by Ord. No. 226]
§ 138-2. Gunfire.
No person shall discharge any firearm, air rifle or spring gun of any type
whatsoever within 450 feet of any occupied building, except as otherwise
provided in the Game Law of Pennsylvania.
A. No person or persons shall make or cause to be made any loud or
boisterous noise or disturbance to the annoyance of the peaceable
residents nearby or near to any public highway, street, sidewalk or way
whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public
annoyed, nor shall any person or persons create, make or engage in any
riot or violent assembly.
B. No noise shall exceed a noise level of 60 decibels at the property line
during the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
33.Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:157
§ 138-3. Fireworks and firecrackers.
No person shall sell, use or discharge fireworks, firecrackers, sparklers or
other pyrotechnics in any public or private place except as authorized by
state law.
§ 138-4. Advertising material.
No person, except a public officer legally authorized to do so, shall affix any
show bill, placard, poster or other advertising device upon any pole, tree
or structure within the Township without first obtaining the consent of the
owner thereof.
§ 138-5. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks.
No person shall fix, put up or erect upon the pavement, sidewalk, curb
or gutter in front of or along any dwelling house, store or other building
or premises any signboard, bulletin board or any obstruction of any type
whatsoever which will interfere with the complete and full use, at all times,
by the public of said pavement, sidewalk, curb and gutter.
§ 138-6. Graffiti.
No person shall deface, disfigure, write upon or in any manner cause to be
placed upon any house or wall or building of any kind whatsoever or any
part thereof or upon fences or road signs any marks, lines, figures, letters
or caricatures of any kind.
§ 138-7. Interference with Police Department.
No person shall falsely impersonate a police officer or any other officer
belonging to the Police Department of the Township; nor shall any person,
with the intention to deceive, use or imitate any sign, signal or device
thereof; nor shall any person obstruct or resist any of said officers in the
performance of official duty; nor shall any person, in any manner, aid any
prisoner in custody to escape or to attempt to escape.
§ 138-8. False alarms.
No person shall originate any false alarm of fire.
§ 138-9. Prohibition of dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firms or
corporations to dump, or cause to be dumped, any ashes, garbage, rubbish,
refuse, and any other refuse material upon highway, street or other public
or private way, or upon private or public property in Brighton Township, or
into any Brighton Township trash receptacle, except such areas as may be
designated by the supervisors of Brighton Township for such dumping.
§ 138-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 138-10
1:158
§ 138-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding before a Magistrate District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $100 for the first offense, and $200 for the second
and each additional offense and, in default of the payment of such fine and
costs, shall suffer imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period not
exceeding three days.
Chapter 142
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 138-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-10
1:159

ARTICLE I
Transient Merchants
[Adopted 7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 94]
§ 142-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
SOLICITING AND PEDDLING —
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any
goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery or for
subscriptions or contributions upon any of the streets or sidewalks
or from house to house or by visitation to private residences or
by entering in or upon private property within the Township of
Brighton, and shall further mean the seeking or taking of contract
or orders for home or other building repairs, improvements and
alterations and also orders or contracts for any mechanical,
electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for house or
other building improvements or repairs upon or from the places
aforesaid within the township.
(1)
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services or merchandise for immediate delivery which the person
selling or offering for sale carries with him in traveling or has in his
possession or control upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from
house to house or by visitation to private residences or by entering
in or upon private property within the township.
(2)
The words "soliciting and peddling" shall not apply to:
Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own
products.
(a)
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds of which are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(b)
The seeking or taking of orders for insurance, by insurance
agents or brokers, licensed under the insurance laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c)
Persons, corporations, partnerships and associations, their
agents or employees, who have complied with the provisions
of the Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
of 1935, P.L. 64, as amended, governing solicitations for
charitable, benevolent, patriotic or other purposes.34
(d)
(3)
34.Editor's Note: See now 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-1
1:161
§ 142-2. License required.
No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling or in the business of
transient merchant in the Township of Brighton without first having secured
a license as herein provided.
§ 142-3. Application.
§ 142-4. Fees.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who is engaged in the business
of soliciting and/or peddling shall be termed a "transient merchant."
B. Word usage. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to engage in the business of transient merchant
in the Township of Brighton shall first make application to the Chief of
Police of Brighton Township for a license. If such person shall also be
required to obtain a license from any county officer, he shall, on making
such application, exhibit a valid county license. The application shall be
upon a form prescribed by the Township Supervisors and shall contain
at least the following information:
(1) Full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(2) Permanent address.
(3) Name of employer or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed.
(4) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise offered for
sale.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the
nature of the offense or offenses and the punishment or
punishments imposed there.
(6) The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
B. Upon request, the applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting and
furnish a photograph, provided that where a person makes application
for himself and one or more helpers, all applicable personal information
specified above shall be given for each helper and verified or affirmed
by oath or affirmation by the applicant and an individual license shall be
required for each helper. No license under this article shall be
transferable from one person to another.
A. No license to engage in the business of transient merchant shall be
issued under this article until the required license fee shall be paid to
the Township of Brighton. Such fees shall be in accordance with the
Schedule of Fee35 then in effect in the township and established by
§ 142-1 BRIGHTON CODE § 142-4
1:162
§ 142-5. Display of license; standards of conduct.
§ 142-6. Record of license; duties police.
The Chief of Police of Brighton Township shall keep a record of all licenses
issued under this article. The Brighton Township Police Department shall
supervise the activity of all holders of such licenses.
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. A separate application shall
be filed and a separate license fee shall be paid by each person who
shall actually conduct the soliciting or peddling and shall apply where
an employer desires to secure licenses for his employees, agents or
servants.
B. The Fee Schedule adopted by the Board of Supervisors may provide for
different fees for different periods of times. No license shall be issued
for a period of time in excess of one month. Should the transient
merchant desire to continue his activities for a period longer than one
month, a new application must be filed and the appropriate fee paid. All
fees shall be nonrefundable.
A. Such license when issued shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold
or services to be rendered by the licensee. Every transient merchant
shall at all times, when engaged in soliciting or peddling in the
Township of Brighton, carry such license upon his person and shall
exhibit it upon request to all police officers, township officials and
citizens.
B. The transient merchant shall conform to the following standards of
conduct:
(1) No transient merchant shall engage in selling any product or
service not specified on his license.
(2) No transient merchant shall enter or attempt to enter any dwelling
house without invitation or permission of the occupant and shall
immediately leave any premises upon request.
(3) No peddling or soliciting of business shall occur on Sundays or
official holidays.
(4) No peddling or soliciting of business shall occur prior to 9:30 a.m.,
prevailing time, and shall cease at sunset or 6:00 p.m., prevailing
time, whichever shall occur first.
(5) No person licensed as a transient merchant under this article shall
occupy any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks, streets,
highways or alleys of the township for the purpose of soliciting or
peddling with or without any stand or counter.
35.Editor's Note: Said Schedule of Fees is on file in the township offices.
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-7
1:163
§ 142-7. Suspension and revocation of license.
§ 142-8. Request for reinstatement.
Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear, with
counsel, if he so desires, before the Board of Supervisors at any regular or
special meeting and be heard in behalf of a request for reinstatement of his
license.
§ 142-9. Noise.
No person licensed as a transient merchant under this article shall hawk
or cry his wares or services upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the
township nor shall he use any loudspeaker, bell, whistle or other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 142-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who
permits the violations of this article by any of his helpers shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township of Brighton, pay a fine of $300 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, incurred by the Township of Brighton. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of a violation
by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township of Brighton may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure.
A. Any license which has been issued under the terms of this article may
be suspended by the Chief of Police upon the filing of complaints by two
or more residents of the township regarding the misconduct or adverse
behavior of any licensed transient merchant. The license shall be
revoked or reinstated within seven days following an investigation into
the merits of the complaints by the Chief of Police.
B. Any license which has been issued under the terms of this article may
be revoked by the Chief of Police upon failure of the licensee to comply
with the standards of conduct established herein or upon ascertainment
that the licensee has made a false statement in his application for a
license hereunder or that the licensee was convicted of a crime after
the issuance of such license or was convicted of disorderly conduct
under any law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any ordinance
of the Township of Brighton. Notice of revocation shall be given by
written notice personally served or sent by certified mail to the address
designated for this purpose in the application for license.
§ 142-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 142-10
1:164
Chapter 147
FIRE LOSS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 85. Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 147-1. Municipal certificate required prior to payment of claims.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange doing business in this
commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to
a structure located within Brighton Township where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,000 unless the insurance company, association or exchange is
furnished with a certificate pursuant to Subsection B of this section and
unless there is compliance with the procedures set forth in Subsections
C and D of this section.
B. Certificate.
(1) The Township Treasurer shall, upon the written request of the
named insured specifying the tax description of the property, name
and address of the insurance company, association or exchange,
and the date agreed upon by the insurance company, association or
exchange and the named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss
report of the claim, furnish the insurance company, association or
exchange either of the following within 14 working days of the
request:
(a) A certificate or, at the discretion of the municipality, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insured,
to the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there
are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property and that, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate or verbal notification, the Township has
not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the
Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property; or
(b) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property
as of the date specified in the request that have not been paid
as of the date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date
of the Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the total costs, if
any, certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred by the
Township for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property. For the purposes of this
subsection, the Township shall certify to the Treasurer the total
§ 142-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-1
1:165
amount, if any, of such costs. A tax, assessment, penalty or user
charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien
could otherwise have been filed against the property by the
municipality under applicable law.
(2) Upon receipt of certificate.
(a) Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection B(1)(a)
of this section, the insurance company, association or exchange
shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with
the policy terms, unless the loss agreed to between the named
insured and the company, association or exchange equals or
exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or other structure. In the case of
such a loss, the insurance company, association or exchange,
the insured property owner and the Township shall follow the
procedures set forth in Subsections C and D of this section.
(b) Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to
Subsection B(1)(b) of this section, the insurance company,
association or exchange shall return the bill to the Township
Treasurer and transfer to the Township Treasurer an amount
from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes,
assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill.
The Township shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to
payment of the items shown in the bill.
C. When the loss agreed to between the named insured and the company,
association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits
of liability on all fire policies covering the building or other structure,
the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds to the Township Manager in the aggregate $2,000
for each $15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim, or, if at
the time of a loss report the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurance
company, association or exchange shall transfer from the insurance
proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. The transfer of proceeds
shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges
insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining
after the transfer to the Township shall be disbursed in accordance with
the policy terms. The named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure after the transfer, and the designated officer shall
return the amount of the fund in excess of the estimate to the named
insured if the Township has not commenced to remove, repair or secure
the building or other structure. The municipal duties of this chapter
shall be carried out by the Township Manager on behalf of Brighton
Township.
§ 147-1 BRIGHTON CODE § 147-1
1:166
D. Upon receipt of proceeds by the Township as authorized by this chapter,
the Township Manager shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be
used solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing or
securing incurred by the Township. When transferring the funds as
required in Subsection C of this section, an insurance company,
association or exchange shall provide the Township with the name and
address of the named insured, whereupon the Township shall contact
the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by the
Township and notify the named insured that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed. The fund shall be returned to the named
insured when repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed and the required proof received by the
Township Manager if the Township has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing. If the Township has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure, the costs
shall be paid from the fund, and, if excess funds remain, the Township
shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of the Township to recover
any deficiency. Further, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the Township and the named insured from entering into an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if
some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
E. Proof of payment by the insurance company, association or exchange of
proceeds under a policy in accordance with Subsection C of this section
is conclusive evidence of the discharge of its obligation to the insured
under the policy to the extent of the payment and of compliance by the
company, association or exchange with Subsection C of this section.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make an insurance
company, association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of
proceeds payable under its insurance policy or for any other act
performed pursuant to this chapter or to make the Township of
Brighton an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an
obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or
expenses other than as provided in this chapter.
G. An insurance company, association or exchange making payments of
policy proceeds under this chapter for delinquent taxes or structure
removal liens or removal expenses incurred by a municipality shall have
a full benefit of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and of
assignment.
H. This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to
deter the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and
deterioration.
§ 147-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-2
1:167
§ 147-2. Township fees.
The Brighton Township Board of Supervisors may from time to time by
resolution adopt reasonable fees to be charged for municipal services
performed by the Township pursuant to this chapter, including but not
limited to cost for providing the certifications, administration of the security
fund, agreements with the insured, and cost and fees for the administration
and work performed by the Township pursuant to this chapter.
§ 147-3. Escrow release policy.
The Brighton Township Board of Supervisors may from time to time by
resolution adopt a policy for escrow release which may include the
requirement for demolition permit, requirements if the property owner
does not intend to rebuild the structure, and requirements for escrow
release. Final release of all escrow funds shall occur following issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and upon approval by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 147-4. Filing of provisions.
Upon enactment, an exact copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the
Governor's Center for Local Government Services of the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development (formerly the
Department of Community Affairs).
Chapter 148
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 108.
Nuisances — See Ch. 121.
Solid waste — See Ch. 166.
§ 148-1. Repeal; adoption of Code by reference.
Chapter 148 of the Township Code is hereby deleted, and the 2015 edition
of the International Property Maintenance Code, which is on file with the
Township Secretary, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code
of Brighton Township, Chapter 148, with revisions set forth herein.
§ 148-2. Amendments.
The following sections of the 2015 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 101.1, 102.3, 103.1, 103.5, 104.1, 106.3, 106.4, 106.5,
107.2, 108.1, 108.1.5(10), 111.1, 111.2.5, 112.4, 202, Definitions, 301.3,
302.4, 302.8, 304.3, 602.3, 602.4, are hereby amended to read as follows:
[Amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 218]
§ 147-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 148-2
1:168
Section 101.1. Title.
These regulations shall be known as the International Property
Maintenance Code of Brighton Township, hereinafter referred to as "this
code."
Section 102.3 Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code, adopted by Brighton Township Code, Chapter
85, and the codes referenced therein.
Section 103.1. General.
The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby created and
the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official.
Section 103.5. Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Township in carrying
out its responsibilities under this Code shall be as indicated in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Supervisors.
Section 104.1 - General.
The Code Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this Code. The Code Official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this Code. Such interpretations shall be in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this Code and shall not waive requirements
specifically provided for in this Code.
Section 106.3 Prosecution of violations.
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with Section 107 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a
summary offense, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense.
If the notice of violation is not complied with, the Township may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this Code or of the
order or direction made pursuant thereto. In addition, the Township may
correct or abate the violation and charge the cost thereof, plus penalty of
10% to the owner, and place a lien on the real estate. All such liens shall be
collectable by the Township as provided for all municipal liens.
Section 106.4 Violation penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $300 for the first offense, and $1,000
for the second and each additional offense and, in default of the payment of
such fine and costs, shall suffer imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-2
1:169
a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 106.5. Abatement of violation.
The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate
a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises.
Section 107.2. Notices and orders: form.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs
and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, easement, exterior
property, premises, or structure into compliance with the provisions of this
code.
Section 108.1 - Unsafe structures and equipment.
When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be unsafe, or
when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful,
such structure shall be condemned by the Township, upon recommendation
of the Code Official.
Subsection 10 of Section 108.1.5 - Dangerous structure or premises.
10. Any building or structure, because of lack of sufficient or proper
electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or
other cause, is determined by the Code Official to be a threat to life or
health.
Section 111.1 Application for appeal.
Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of
appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed as follows:
1. Within 10 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served
under Section 302.4.
2. Within 15 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served
under Section 302.8.
3. Within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served
under all other sections.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section 111.2.5.
§ 148-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 148-2
1:170
The members of the Board of Appeals shall serve without compensation.
Section 112.4.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000.
Section 202 - General Definitions.
Revised: Code Official. The official(s) who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized
representative of Brighton Township, including the Township Manager,
Zoning Officer, Chief of Police, police officer, and any other Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township duly appointed by the Board of
Supervisors.
Added: Yard. An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure. No portion of any principal or accessory structure, as
defined, shall project into any required yard except as otherwise provided.
Added: Exterior Property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises, or
easement, or property between premises owner's property line and the
adjacent curbline of an improved street or private drive upon which their
property abuts.
Section 301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and
premises thereon, and yards shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure,
and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting
problem or adversely affect the public health and safety.
Section 302.4. - Weeds.
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject
to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the
authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor
hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in
violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs
of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property.
302.8 - Motor vehicles.Except as provided for in other regulations, no
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle without a
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-2
1:171
current inspection, shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair,
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such
purposes.
Section 304.3 - Premises identification.
See Chapter 79, Buildings, Numbering of, of the Brighton Township Code.
Section 602.3. - Heat Supply.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units of sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period
from September 1 to April 30 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°
F. in all habitable rooms and bathrooms. Exception: When the outdoor
temperature is below the winter outdoor designed temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required provided that the heating system is operating in its full designed
capacity. The winter outdoor designed temperature for the locality shall be
as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
Section 602.4. Occupiable work space.
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period
from September 1 to April 30 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°
F., during the period the spaces are occupied. Exceptions: 1. Processing,
storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions. 2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
§ 148-3. Deletions.
The following sections of the 2015 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code are deleted as follows:
Section 302.2 Grading and drainage.
Section 304.2 Protective treatment.
Section 402 Light.
Section 403.1 Ventilation - Habitable spaces.
Section 403.2 Ventilation - Bathrooms and toilet rooms.
§ 148-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 148-4
1:172
§ 148-4. Additions.
The following section is added to the 2015 edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, Brighton Township's Code, Chapter 148,
Property Maintenance Code as follows:
111.9 The appeal process may be revised as established by action of the
Board of Supervisors of Brighton Township.
§ 148-5. Title revision.
Section 404 of the 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance
Code shall apply to residential rental property only and the title shall be
revised to read:
Section 404 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS for residential rentals.
§ 148-6. References.
All references, and requirements for compliance herein, to the International
Zoning Code are deleted.
Chapter 152
RENTAL PROPERTY, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 108. Property maintenance — See Ch. 148.
§ 152-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted by the Supervisors of Brighton Township for a twofold
purpose. It is important for the Brighton Township police to know
the address of all of its residents in order to locate them in the case of
emergency. It is also important that the tax levies imposed on all residents
of Brighton Township be equitably and uniformly distributed.
§ 152-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any person having the legal title to real estate as shown upon
the official records of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, or otherwise having
control of the real estate as the agent of the owner or as landlord.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
RENTAL PROPERTY — Any real estate, whether an entire house or one
or more rooms for living and sleeping purposes, for the use of which
§ 148-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:173
the occupant pays a rental fee. Rental property includes an apartment,
townhouse, condominium, trailer, mobile home or any other similar living
accommodations.
TENANT — Any person who has the use, either by himself or with others,
of a rental property owned by another for a period exceeding 30 days for
which use such person pays a rental fee.
§ 152-3. Registration required.
Each and every owner of any rental properties situated within the Township
of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, is required within 60 days of
the effective date of this chapter to file with Brighton Township, on forms
provided by the Township, the number of rental properties, including
location, then being leased or available for lease by the owner, and the
names and addresses and employers' names of all tenants age 18 and over
occupying such rental properties.
§ 152-4. Semiannual renewal of registration required.
After the initial registration of the rental property with Brighton Township,
the owner of such property is required to renew its registration on or before
February 1 and August 1 of each succeeding year, advising the Township
in such registration renewal of any change in the occupancy of the rental
properties under its control.
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before the District Justice, as is in
the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be committed for each day during
which a violation continues to exist.
Chapter 160
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brighton Township Sewage Authority — See
Ch. 5, Art. II.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Human waste — See Ch. 121, Art. II.
Street excavations — See Ch. 175, Art. II.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 152-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 152-5
1:174
ARTICLE I
Dawson Ridge Sewer District
[Adopted 1-27-1958 by Ord. No. 21]
§ 160-1. District boundaries.
The following described tract of land be and is hereby constituted a sewer
district to be known as "The Dawson Ridge Sewer District":
ALL that certain tract of land lying and being situate in the Township
of Brighton, County of Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, more
particularly bounded and described as follows, to wit:
BEGINNING at a point, which point is the intersection of the center line of
Pennsylvania Highway Route No. 930, also known as the Tuscarawas Road,
with the center line of Township Road No. 434, also known as Neville Road,
thence along the center line of Neville Road, South 0 degrees, 30 minutes
East, a distance of 509.62 feet; thence South 1 degree, 18 minutes East, a
distance of 546.97 feet; thence South 1 degree, 4 minutes East, a distance
of 495.45 feet; thence South 88 degrees, 56 minutes West, a distance of 400
feet; thence South 1 degree, 4 minutes East, a distance of 340 feet; thence
North 88 degrees, 56 minutes East, a distance of 15 feet; thence South 1
degree, 4 minutes East, a distance of 200 feet; thence South 88 degrees,
56 minutes West, a distance of 15 feet; thence South 1 degree, 4 minutes
East, a distance of 300 feet; thence South 88 degrees, 56 minutes West, a
distance of 1,320 feet; thence South 1 degree, 4 minutes east, a distance
of 192.46 feet; thence South 88 degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds West, a
distance of 212.70 feet; thence by an arc to the right having a radius of 125
feet for a distance of 98.17 feet; thence South 43 degrees, 56 minutes, 30
seconds West, a distance of 99.88 feet; thence by an arc to the right having
a radius of 134.50 feet, a distance of 72.97 feet; thence South 1 degree,
3 minutes, 30 seconds East, a distance of 88.93 feet; thence South 88
degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of 125 feet; thence South
1 degree, 3 minutes, 30 seconds East, a distance of 15.30 feet; thence South
88 degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of 175 feet; thence
North 1 degree, 3 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of 280 feet; thence
South 88 degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of 175 feet;
thence North 1 degree, 3 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of 242.30
feet; thence South 88 degrees, 56 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance of
125 feet; thence North 1 degree, 3 minutes, 30 seconds West, a distance
of 1,040.55 feet; thence North 44 degrees, 39 minutes, 34 seconds East,
a distance of 1,243.26 feet; thence South 83 degrees, West, a distance of
443.76 feet; thence North 6 degrees, 45 minutes West, a distance of 345.03
feet; thence North 13 degrees, 13 minutes, 33 seconds East, a distance of
310.87 feet; thence South 50 degrees, 19 minutes East, a distance of 62.85
feet; thence North 54 degrees East, a distance of 609.80 feet; thence by an
arc to the right having a radius of 155 feet, a distance of 91.98 feet; thence
North 2 degrees West, a distance of 487.38 feet to a point in the center
line of Pennsylvania Highway Route No. 930, also known as the Tuscarawas
Road; thence by the same, South 87 degrees, 28 minutes East, a distance
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-1
1:175
of 147.69 feet; thence South 85 degrees, 52 minutes East, a distance of 100
feet; thence South 81 degrees, 1 minute East, a distance of 100 feet; thence
North 8 degrees, 59 minutes East, a distance of 465 feet; thence South 81
degrees, 1 minute East, a distance of 380.35 feet; thence South 8 degrees,
59 minutes West, a distance of 576.71 feet; thence South 48 degrees, 18
minutes East, a distance of 100 feet; thence South 41 degrees, 58 minutes
East, a distance of 79.43 feet; thence South 38 degrees, 13 minutes East,
a distance of 189.10 feet; thence South 39 degrees, 59 minutes East, a
distance of 60.19 feet; thence South 44 degrees, 38 minutes East, a distance
of 125.56 feet, thence South 55 degrees, 54 minutes East, a distance of
131.49 feet; thence South 64 degrees, 49 minutes, 37 seconds East, a
distance of 40.32 feet; thence South 61 degrees, 44 minutes East, a distance
of 150.0 feet; thence South 61 degrees, 48 minutes East, a distance of
163.50 feet; thence South 60 degrees, 23 minutes East, a distance of 68.05
feet; thence South 56 degrees, 26 minutes East, a distance of 81.67 feet;
thence South 53 degrees, 56 minutes, 27 seconds East, a distance of 118.29
feet to a point, the place of beginning.
Said described tract of land being comprised in the main part by land of the
Beaver Area Joint Municipal Authority and the following plans: Dawson Plan
and Dawson Ridge Farm Plans Sections I, II, III and IV.
§ 160-2. Unlawful acts.
From and after the effective date of the creation of the aforesaid sewer
district, no septic tank or sewage disposal shall be constructed within said
district and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the
flowing, discharge or drainage of waste, sewage or other similar foul matter
except into the sanitary sewer system serving said district.
§ 160-3. Charges.
The Supervisors of Brighton Township shall prescribe by resolution the
charges to be made to each person or persons whose property connects
with the sanitary sewer system and the method and manner of payment,
which charge or charges shall constitute a lien upon the property connected
with the sanitary sewer system until paid and the amount of such charge
may be recovered by due process of law.
§ 160-4. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Supervisors of Brighton Township may prescribe such rules and
regulations by resolution as they shall deem necessary to the conduct and
operation of such sanitary sewer system.
§ 160-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-1958 by Ord. No.
27]
Any party or parties failing to comply with the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations adopted by resolution hereunder shall be liable
upon conviction to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300,
§ 160-1 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-5
1:176
together with the costs of prosecution for each offense, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs shall suffer imprisonment in the Beaver
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-5
1:177

ARTICLE II
Little Beaver Plan Sewer District
[Adopted 10-9-1967 by Ord. No. 39]
§ 160-6. District boundaries.
The following described tract of land be and is hereby constituted a sewer
district to be known as "The Little Beaver Plan Sewer District":
ALL that certain tract of land lying and being situate in the Township
of Brighton, County of Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, more
particularly bounded and described as follows, to wit:
BEGINNING at a point, which point is the Southeast corner of Lot No. 1 in
the Little Beaver Plan No. 1, recorded in the Recorder's Office of Beaver
County, Pennsylvania, in Plan Book, Volume 9, Page 9, which point is also
common to land of Thomas T. McElhaney and land of the Beaver Area
School District; thence from said point, the place of beginning, North 84°,
36' West, a distance of 518 feet to a point; thence North 5°, 24' East, a
distance of 300 feet to a point; thence North 84°, 36' West, a distance of
248 feet to a point; thence North 5°, 24' East, a distance of 15 feet to a
point; thence North 84°, 36' West, a distance of 442 feet to a point; thence
North 5°, 24' East, a distance of 155 feet to a point; thence in a Westerly
direction by an arc to the right having a radius of 79.22 feet, an arc distance
of 121.17 feet to a point; thence North 3°, 2' East, a distance of 20 feet to
a point; thence South 86°, 58' East, a distance of 124.89 feet to a point;
thence South 3°, 2' West, a distance of 10.07 feet to a point; thence South
86°, 58' East, a distance of 124.89 feet to a point; thence South 3°, 2' West,
a distance of 2.70 feet to a point; thence South 86°, 58' East, a distance
of 174.89 feet to a point; thence South 3°, 2' West, a distance of 12 feet
to a point; thence South 86°, 58' East, a distance of 124.89 feet to a point;
thence North 3°, 2' East, a distance of 27.78 feet to a point; thence South
86°, 58' East, a distance of 309.12 feet to a point; thence North 5°, 24' East,
a distance of 25 feet to a point; thence North 31°, 51', 30" East, a distance
of 58.96 feet to a point; thence South 81°, 3', 50" East, a distance of 359.41
feet to a point; thence South 5°, 24' West, a distance of 240 feet to a point;
thence North 84°, 36' West, a distance of 22.77 feet to a point; thence South
5°, 24', West, a distance of 120 feet to a point; thence South 84°, 36' East,
a distance of 68 feet to a point; thence South 5°, 24' West, a distance of 300
feet to a point, the place of beginning.
Said tract of land containing all of Lots 1 through 8 in the Little Beaver
Plan No. 1 and 9 through 21, 38, 39, 49, 50 and 63 through 71 in the Little
Beaver Plan No. 2.
§ 160-7. Unlawful acts.
From and after the effective date of the creation of the aforesaid sewer
district, no septic tank for sewage disposal shall be constructed within said
district and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the
§ 160-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-7
1:179
flowing, discharge or drainage of waste, sewage or other similar foul matter
except into the sanitary sewer system serving said district.
§ 160-8. Charges.
The Supervisors of Brighton Township shall prescribe by resolution the
charges to be made to each person or persons whose property connects
with the sanitary sewer system and the method and manner of payment,
which charge or charges shall constitute a lien upon the property connected
with the sanitary sewer and until paid and the amount of such charge may
be recovered by due process of law.
§ 160-9. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Supervisors of Brighton Township may prescribe such rules and
regulations by resolution as they shall deem necessary to the conduct and
operation of such sanitary sewer system.
§ 160-10. Violations and penalties.
Any party or parties failing to comply with the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations adopted by resolution hereunder shall be liable
upon conviction to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300,
together with the costs of prosecution for each offense.
§ 160-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-10
1:180
ARTICLE III
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 8-11-1977 by Ord. No. 66]
§ 160-11. Composition of sewer system.
All sewers and branches thereof for the disposal of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes within the township at any time heretofore and hereafter
constructed or otherwise acquired by the township and/or any municipal
authority the township may have or may cause to be created for such
purposes are hereby adopted and declared to be, for the purposes of this
article, a common system of sanitary sewers for the township and are
hereinafter called the "sewer system."
§ 160-12. Mandatory connection after notice.
The owner or owners of each property accessible to and whose principal
building, heretofore and/or hereafter constructed, is within 150 feet of
the sewer line of the sewer system shall connect therewith at any time
within 60 days after notice to make such connection is served on such
owner or owners by the Township Supervisors, either by personal service
or by registered mail. The terms "to connect," the "connection" and the
"sewer connection," as used herein, shall mean the extension of the sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes drainage system of the building or
premises to the Y's or T's or extensions thereof forming a part of the sewer
system.
§ 160-13. Failure to comply; collection of costs.
In case any property owner or owners of such building or premises shall
neglect or refuse to connect with the sewer system within the sixty-dayperiod
immediately following service of the notice to connect with the sewer
system, the Township Supervisors or their agent may enter upon such
property and construct such sewer connection. Upon construction of such
sewer connection by the Township Supervisors or their agent, the Township
Supervisors shall send an itemized bill of costs of the construction of such
sewer connection to the owner or owners of such property, which bill shall
be payable forthwith. In case such owner or owners neglect or refuse to pay
such bill of costs, the Township Supervisors may file a municipal lien for
the costs of said construction within six months after the completion of the
construction of such sewer connection, as provided by law, or the Township
Supervisors may pursue any other legal or equitable remedy available to
them to collect such bill of costs. This section is not intended to restrict or
limit any legal or equitable remedy that the township may have with respect
to the failure of a property owner to connect to the sewer system.
§ 160-14. Annual permit required.
No person shall be authorized to uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, alter or disturb the sewer system without having received
§ 160-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-14
1:181
an annual permit from the township to do so, having registered with the
Township Secretary and posted with the Township Secretary a bond payable
to the township as the township's interests may appear, complying with the
requirements set forth in § 160-16 hereof as applicable to such person.
§ 160-15. Sewer connection permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb the sewer system without the owner or
owners of the building or premises affected first obtaining a written sewer
connection permit. The owner or owners of a building or premises desiring
or required to connect with the sewer system shall first make application
therefor, in writing, to the Township Supervisors or their agent, who, upon
approval of the application, shall refer it to the Township Secretary.
§ 160-16. Bond.
If the owner or owners of such building or premises will have to connect
with the sewer system by means other than through an existing Y or T
on any sewer system and extension thereof to the curbline or cartway line
of the road or street or public right-of-way line, as the case may be, the
Township Secretary, upon receipt of the approved application, shall prepare
and deliver to the applicant a form of bond payable to the township in the
sum of $2,000, with sufficient corporate sureties to indemnify the township
and any municipal authority it may have, if applicable, against all damages
for injury to the sewer system, to replace in good condition any curbing,
pavement or earth disturbed, to indemnify and save harmless the township
and any municipal authority it may have, if applicable, for two years from
the completion of the work, from all damages, repairs, costs and expenses,
injuries and such actions and suits as are caused or occasioned by defective
materials and workmanship and from all damages from any accident and
from all costs and attorneys fees incurred by reasons of any matter or thing
done, committed or omitted by such owner, his agents or employees under
such permit, and to comply in all respects with the ordinances, resolutions,
rules and regulations of the township or any other governmental agency
having jurisdiction with respect to the same now in force or hereafter to be
passed. Upon receipt by the Township Secretary of the bond duly executed,
he shall submit the bond to the Township Supervisors or their agent for
approval.
§ 160-17. Issuance of sewer connection permit.
Upon the return to the Township Secretary of the bond approved by the
Township Supervisors or their agent in all cases where a bond is required
as above provided and in all cases upon payment of the sewer connection
charge hereinafter provided, the Township Secretary shall issue a sewer
connection permit authorizing the approved applicant to connect such
building or premises with the sewer system.
§ 160-14 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-18
1:182
§ 160-18. Payment of connection charge.
The sewer connection charge shall be paid by the owner or owners of such
building or premises being connected to the sewer system in accordance
with the following schedule: the greater of the actual cost incurred by the
township and/or the owner of the sewer system in connection with such
connections or $350 for a single-family dwelling unit and, for connections
of other than single-family dwelling units, at such sewer connection charge
as the Township Supervisors may set from time to time by resolutions duly
adopted.
§ 160-19. Costs and expenses responsibility of owner.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation of the sewer connection
and the connection of such building or premises with the sewer system
shall be borne by the owner or owners of such building or premises. Such
owner or owners shall indemnify and save harmless the township and any
municipal authority it may create, if applicable, from any loss or damage
directly or indirectly caused by or arising out of such installation and
connection.
§ 160-20. Separate sewer connections required; exception.
A separate sewer connection shall be provided for every principal building,
except that where a building stands at the rear of another and no separate
connection to the sewer system can be made through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the sewer connection from the front building may
be extended to the rear building upon written approval of the Township
Supervisors or their agent.
§ 160-21. Approval of materials.
All sewer connections, materials therefor, jointing materials and methods
used shall at all times be subject to the direction, supervision and approval
of the Township Supervisors or their agent according to uniform rules and
standards as adopted from time to time by the Township Supervisors.
§ 160-22. Size and slope of connection.
The size and slope of the sewer connection shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Supervisors or their agent, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches nor shall the slope of such four-inch pipe
be less than 1/8 of an inch per foot. The invert of the sewer connection at
the point of connection with such building or premises shall be at the same
or at a higher elevation than the invert at the point of connection with the
sewer system.
§ 160-23. Drilling or tapping restricted.
No person or persons shall connect with the sewer system other than
through, by or into Y's and T's in the sewer system without a special sewer
§ 160-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-23
1:183
connection permit and the designation of the location of the Y's and T's
by the Township Supervisors or their agent. No person shall drill into or
tap any of the sewer system without written permission from the Township
Supervisors or their agent.
§ 160-24. Inspections.
The owner or owners holding sewer connection permits shall notify the
Township Supervisors or their agent when the sewer connection is ready for
inspection and connection with the sewer system. In no case shall backfill
be placed until such inspection has been made.
§ 160-25. Barricades and lights for excavations.
All excavations for sewer connections shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazards. All streets,
sidewalks and public property disturbed in the course of making a sewer
connection shall be restored to the same condition they were in prior to
such disturbance, to the extent practicable, in a manner satisfactory to the
Township Supervisors or their agent.
§ 160-26. Privies, cesspools, septic tanks, etc., prohibited.
After 60 days have lapsed since such owner or owners received notice to
connect with the sewer system as above provided, such owner or owners
shall forthwith abandon all privies, cesspools, sinkholes, septic tanks and
other receptacles on the premises for receiving sewage and/or industrial
wastes (unless specific written permission to the contrary has been given
by the Township Supervisors) and shall not at any time thereafter erect,
construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility for the
discharge of sewage and/or industrial wastes except into the sewer system;
and all privy vaults or cesspools or similar receptacles for human excrement
shall be cleansed and filled under the direction of the Township Supervisors
or their agent; and no connection shall be permitted from any privy vault or
cesspool to the sewer system.
§ 160-27. Runoff.
No such owner or owners shall discharge or permit the discharge of any
stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, swimming pool waters, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into the
sewer system.
§ 160-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 for each and every offense and costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned in the Beaver County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days until such fine and costs are paid.
Whenever such person shall have been notified in writing by the Township
§ 160-23 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-28
1:184
Supervisors or its agent that such person is violating this article, each full
week that he shall continue such violation after receipt of such notification
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine hereunder upon
conviction thereof.
§ 160-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-28
1:185

ARTICLE IV
Industrial Discharges
[Adopted 8-11-1977 by Ord. No. 67]
§ 160-29. Definitions.
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any industrial waste having a
suspended solid content or BOD appreciably in excess of that normally
found in municipal sewage. For the purposes of this article, any industrial
waste containing more than 320 parts per million (ppm) of suspended solids
or a chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm or having a BOD in excess
of 320 ppm, regardless of whether or not it contains other substances in
concentrations differing appreciably from those normally found in municipal
sewage, shall be considered to be abnormal industrial waste.
AGREEMENT — The Sewage Treatment Service Agreement, dated as of
October 1, 1972, among the Township and Borough Township Municipal
Authority, as hereafter amended and supplemented, pertaining to the
acceptance, transportation, treatment and disposal of acceptable sanitary
sewage and/or industrial wastes from users in certain parts of the township
(as established in the Agreement).
AUTHORITY — The Brighton Township Sewage Authority and its
successors.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the township and its successors and
assigns.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demanD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of the organic matter in sewage or industrial waste
under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
ppm by weight. It shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods
described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association (hereinafter
termed an "acceptable method").
BOROUGH AUTHORITY — The Borough Township Municipal Authority and
its successors.
CONSUMER — Each consumer as defined by the regulations of the water
utility serving such consumer at that time.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, enclosure, etc., occupied or
intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by a family or other
group of persons living together or by persons living alone. Each dwelling
unit in a double house, in a row of connection houses or in an apartment
shall be a separate entity for sewer service charge purposes.
§ 160-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-29
1:187
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking an dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
H.P. — Horsepower.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes from
industrial manufacturing, commercial or business establishments or
processes or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resources, as distinguished from sanitary sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, or
either thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships, associations, private
and public corporations, clubs, societies, institutions and governments and
governmental agencies and subdivisions thereof.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter, and shall be determined by an
acceptable method.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — A property accessible
to and whose principal building is within 150 feet of the sewer system.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale
of food products and produce that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business and other buildings, institutions, schools,
churches and industrial and commercial establishments, exclusive of
stormwater runoff, surface water or groundwater.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business and other buildings, institutions, schools, churches and industrial
and commercial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface
water and stormwater runoff as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS — An assemblage of devices, structures
and equipment for treating and disposing of treated sewage and industrial
wastes, including the sewage treatment plant of the Borough Authority.
SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage or industrial wastes, or a
combination of both, and to which stormwater runoff, surface water and
groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewers for the disposal of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes now or hereafter constructed or otherwise acquired by the
township and/or the Authority in the Ohio River watershed of the township.
§ 160-29 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-29
1:188
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall which reaches a
channel, trench, sewer or sink.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtration. Quantitative determination of suspended
solids shall be made by an acceptable method.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton situated in Beaver County,
Pennsylvania, and its successors.
TOWNSHIP USERS — At any particular time, property owners and all
persons in the township (within the Ohio River watershed of the township)
using, directly or indirectly, the sewer system at such particular time and
their heirs, personal representatives, administrators, successors and
assigns.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTES — Any water or wastes containing none
of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis, phenols
or other substances imparting taste and odor or color to receiving waters;
toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution;
obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than 10,000 ppm by
weight of dissolved solids, of which not more than 1,500 ppm shall be as
chloride and not more than 3,200 ppm each of suspended solids and BOD.
The color shall not exceed 50 ppm. Analysis for any of the above-mentioned
substances shall be made by an acceptable method.
VOLUME OF WATER USED — Includes, for sewer service charge and
surcharge purposes, metered water purchased from the water utility and
in addition thereto all water obtained from wells, springs, streams, etc., as
determined by water meters installed and maintained by the water utility,
water meters installed and maintained by the property owner or water user
or estimates or measurements made by the water utility, the township or
the Authority, as the case may be.
WATER UTILITY — The water company or any other utility, public or quasipublic
corporation or utility supplying water within the territorial limits of
the Ohio River watershed of the township and its successors and assigns.
§ 160-30. Admission of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage to
sewer system.
A. The economy and desirability of the combined collection, transportation
and treatment of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized.
Any and all industrial wastes and sanitary sewage may be discharged
into the sewer system except those which are deemed harmful to the
sewer system or the sewage treatment works or the operation thereof
or are specifically prohibited by this article, the Authority or under the
provisions of the Agreement. However, it is also recognized that the
collection, transportation and treatment of any wastes and sewage from
time to time determined to be acceptable but which are abnormal
industrial wastes and abnormal sanitary sewage may add to the cost of
operating and maintaining the sewer system and the sewage treatment
§ 160-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-30
1:189
works. Such additional cost should be borne by the person receiving the
benefit of such collection, transportation and treatment.
B. The Board reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer system
for discharge of deleterious industrial wastes or to compel users of the
sewer system to discontinue the use of the sewer system for such
wastes or to require pretreatment thereof in order to prevent harmful
or adverse effect upon the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment
works. The design, construction and operation of such pretreatment
facilities shall be subject to the approval of the Board. The standards to
be used by the Board in the enforcement of this article, and particularly
this Subsection B and § 160-31A, C and D, shall be at least comparable
to those used by the Borough Authority in connection with its sewer
system and sewage treatment plant.
C. The Board reserves the right to require industries having large
variations in the rate of discharge of industrial waste to install suitable
regulating devices, approved by the Board, for equalizing industrial
waste flows and as may be required by the Authority.
D. Industrial waste and sanitary sewage will be considered harmful to the
sewer system and the sewage treatment works if it may cause any of the
following damaging effects:
(1) Chemical reaction either directly or indirectly with the materials of
construction of the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment
works in such a manner as to impair the strength or durability of
such structures;
(2) Mechanical action that will destroy such sewer structures;
(3) Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of such sewer structures;
(4) Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of such sewer
structures;
(5) Danger to public health and safety; or
(6) Obnoxious condition inimical to public interest.
E. The Board may, at its discretion, require any person discharging
industrial wastes or combined industrial wastes and sanitary sewage
into the sewer system to install a suitable manhole or manholes on his
connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the flow of wastes from the premises. Such manhole or
manholes shall be installed by such person at his expense, maintained
by such person so as to be safe and accessible to the Board at all times
and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Board.
F. The Board shall have the right of access at all reasonable times to
dwelling units, residences, business and other buildings, institutions,
schools, churches and industrial or commercial establishments and to
any meters used for establishing, analyzing or determining water
§ 160-30 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-30
1:190
§ 160-31. Prohibited wastes and sanitary sewage.
consumption, water excluded from the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works and sewage and/or industrial wastes discharged into
the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works.
A. The discharge of excessive amounts of unpolluted water or waste into
the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works is expressly
prohibited. The Board reserves the right to define the amount it deems
excessive in each particular instance and to determine the adequacy of
a sewer's capacity.
B. The discharge of garbage to the sewer system is expressly prohibited
except from single-family dwelling units, and in such cases, the garbage
must be first properly shredded by a mechanical garbage grinder or
disposer of a type approved by the Board.
C. No person shall discharge or permit the discharge or infiltration into
the sewer system or the sewage treatment works of any of the following
substances:
(1) Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, greases, lime or
acetylene sludges, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, sawdust, paunch manure, cotton, chemical or paint
residues, wool, plastic or other fibers, hair, hides, dead animals,
spent mash and grain, pulp from food processing, water or wastes
containing grease, fat or oil in excess of 100 ppm or any other
liquids, gases, solids or viscous substances which by reason of their
quality, quantity or characteristics may cause fire, explosion,
obstruction to the flow in the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works or in any other way interfere with or be
deleterious to persons, the structure, the persons, the structures or
the proper operation of the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works.
(2) Wastes or sanitary sewage having a temperature in excess of 120°
F. or less than 32° F.
(3) Wastes or sanitary sewage having pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.0 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damaging
or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works. When the Board deems
it advisable, it may require any person discharging wastes or
sanitary sewage to install and maintain, at his own expense, in a
manner approved by the Board, a suitable device to continuously
measure and record the pH of the wastes or sanitary sewage so
discharged.
(4) Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded
garbage from a private dwelling unit, resulting from the proper use
of a garbage grinder or disposer of a type approved by the Board
§ 160-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-31
1:191
and maintained in good operating condition; provided, however,
that no private dwelling unit shall operate more than one grinder or
disposer which shall be not greater than 3 H.P. in size and, when so
required by the Board, shall be equipped with an approved water
meter and limited in use to the consumption of an average of not
more than 1,500 gallons of water per day.
(5) Wastes containing mineral acids, waste acid, pickling or plating
liquors from the pickling or plating of iron, steel, brass, copper or
chromium or any other dissolved or solid substance which will
endanger health or safety, interfere with the flow in or attach or
corrode or otherwise interfere with or be detrimental to the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works or the operation of
either thereof.
(6) Chemicals.
(a) Wastes or sanitary sewage containing cyanides or cyanogen
compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on
acidification; and wastes or sanitary sewage containing any of
the following substances in concentration exceeding those
shown in the following table:
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
Phenolic compounds as C6H5OH 1 ppm
Cyanides as CN 1 ppm
Cyanates as CNO 10 ppm
Iron as Fe 15 ppm
Trivalent Chromium as Cr 3 ppm
Hexavalent Chromium as Cr 0.5 ppm
Nickel as Ni 3 ppm
Copper as Cu 2 ppm
Lead as Pb 2 ppm
Tin as Sn 2 ppm
Zinc as Zn 2 ppm
(b) Wastes and sanitary sewage containing other chemicals or
other matter detrimental to the operation of or causing
erosion, corrosion or deterioration in the sewer system and/or
the sewage treatment works.
(7) Wastes or sanitary sewage containing more than 10 ppm of any of
the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide
or any of the halogens.
(8) Wastes or sanitary sewage containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in quantities sufficient to inure or interfere with any
§ 160-31 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-31
1:192
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create any hazard in the sewer system and/or the
sewage treatment works operation, and such toxic substances shall
include but shall not be limited to substances containing cyanide,
chromium and/or copper ions.
(9) Wastes or sanitary sewage containing toxic substances in
quantities sufficient to interfere with the biochemical processes of
the sewage treatment works or that will pass through the sewage
treatment works and exceed the state requirements in respect
thereof.
(10)Wastes or sanitary sewage containing any toxic radioactive
isotopes, without a special permit.
(11) Fats, entrails and the like from meat processing plants, rendering
plants and similar industries and establishments.
(12) Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or
from sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water
treatment plants.
(13)Wastes or sanitary sewage containing any noxious or malodorous
gas or substance which either singly or by interaction with sewage
or other wastes is likely, in the opinion of the Board, to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or prevent entry to the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works for maintenance and
repair.
(14)Wastes or sanitary sewage containing gases or vapors, either free
or occluded, in concentrations toxic or deleterious to humans or
animals.
(15)Wastes or sanitary sewage containing insoluble, non-flocculent
substances having a specific gravity in excess of 2.65.
(16)Wastes or sanitary sewage containing soluble substances in such
concentration as to cause the specific gravity of the waste to be
greater than 1.1.
D. The Board may from time to time adopt such further particular rules
and regulations, in addition to those set forth in this article, as the
Board, with the advice of its consulting engineer, shall deem necessary
or appropriate for the efficient operation, maintenance and
preservation of the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works or
the sewer business operation. The construction, meaning and
application of the prohibited wastes and sanitary sewage regulations
set forth in Subsection C above shall be made by the Board and shall be
binding and conclusive with respect to users of the sewer system and/or
the sewage treatment works, as the case may be, and shall be
consistent with any such construction, meaning and application made
§ 160-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-31
1:193
§ 160-32. Sewer service charge; schedule of rates.
by the Authority of any similar prohibited wastes and sanitary sewage
regulations.
A. There is hereby imposed upon the owners of or the users of water in or
on all properties situate within the geographical limits of the township
and served by the sewer system a sewer service charge for the
collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of industrial wastes
and sanitary sewage, payable as hereinafter provided in the amounts
hereinafter provided. Said owners and users shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of the sewer service charge and the
penalty herein prescribed for delinquent payment thereof. The sewer
service charge for the collection, transportation, treatment and
disposal of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage shall begin to accrue
with respect to any owners and users connecting, directly or indirectly,
to the new sanitary sewer lines to be constructed by the Authority or
any extensions or capital additions thereto, from and after the earlier of
when the owners and users connect to the sewer system or on a date 60
days after notice to connect to the sewer system is given as provided in
the ordinances of the township.
B. The sewer service charge for the collection, transportation, treatment
and disposal of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage in every case
shall be based on the volume of water used in or on said properties as
follows:
(1) The sewer service charge of township users, which includes the
sewage charge required under the terms and conditions of the
Agreement, shall be:
(a) Metered water users. The following schedule of rates shall be
applicable to each township user of metered water, and the
sewer service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water
used as measured by the most recent available water meter
reading; and the sewer service charge shall consist of the
following two component parts:
[1] For operation and maintenance of the sewer system and
the treatment plant, the quarterly charge shall be $0.95
per 1,000 gallons of water used per quarter; and
[2] For debt service, the quarterly charge shall be:
Water used per Quarter
Year
Sewer Service Charge
For the first 12,000 gallons or
any part thereof
$25.80 per quarter
(minimum)
For excess over 12,000 gallons $2.15 per 1,000 gallons
feet
§ 160-31 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-32
1:194
(b) Nonmetered water users. All owners of or users of water in or
on all properties having an unmetered private water supply
and/or supplied with unmetered water service by any water
utility shall pay a flat rate sewer service charge equal to 12,000
gallons per quarter per dwelling unit or its adjusted equivalent
for sewer service periods of less than 1/4 of one year. These
charges will be billed at the same rate per 1,000 gallons as
metered water users. [Amended 7-12-1979 by Ord. No. 71]
C. Owners and users shall be billed monthly. The first two monthly billings
shall be based upon the minimum applicable service charge or upon
estimated water uses as the Board may determine and the third
monthly billing being based on actual water usage shown by the water
utility's most recent available water meter reading or upon the
appropriate minimum sewer service charge, whichever is greater. All
bills for sewer service charges shall be due when rendered and, if not
paid within 30 days from the date the bill is rendered, shall be subject
to a penalty of 10%; and if the bill is not paid within 45 days, the billing
shall include interest of 1/2 of 1% per month or part thereof upon 110%
of the sewer charge until paid. [Amended 7-12-1979 by Ord. No. 71]
D. The measurement by two or more meters of the quantity of water used
in or on one property by one owner or user may be combined and the
sewer service charge billed to said owner or user as though the quantity
of water was measured by one meter, if the Board so elects.
E. Where two or more families or dwelling units receive water through one
water meter, multiple minimum sewer service charges shall be billed.
F. In the event that the owner of or the user of water in or on any
industrial or commercial property served by the sewer system and/or
the sewage treatment works obtains part or all of the water used in or
on such property from sources other than the water utility, such owner
or user shall, upon demand of the Board and at no expense to the
township, install and maintain a water meter or meters satisfactory to
the Board for measuring all water used other than that obtained from
the water utility, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewer
service charge shall be the quantity of water measured by all such
meters plus the quantity of water obtained from the water utility.
G. In the event that it is established to the satisfaction of the Board that a
portion of the water used in or on any property served by the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works does not and cannot enter
the sewer system and/or sewage treatment works, the Board may
require or permit the installation of additional meters in such manner
as to determine either the quantity of water excluded from the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works or the quantity of water,
sewage and industrial wastes actually entering the sewer system and/or
the sewage treatment works, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface
water and groundwater. The sewer service charge shall be based upon
the quantity of water measured or computed by the Board to be actually
§ 160-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-32
1:195
§ 160-33. Surcharge for certain industrial wastes.
entering the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works,
exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water and groundwater, subject
to the minimum charge set forth in Subsection B hereof. [Amended
7-12-1979 by Ord. No. 71]
H. Any person requesting a reduction of the amount of the sewer service
charge because of water purchased which does not enter the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works shall make written
application to the Board, giving the name of such person, his address
and setting forth supporting data fully describing other sources of
water, if any, as well as the disposition of water alleged not to be
entering the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works. The
application shall be accompanied by a sketch to approximate scale
showing the plan of the property, the water distribution system, sewer
layout, existing meters and proposed meters in the scheme to
determine the quantity of flow entering or not entering, the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works. The cost of furnishing,
installing and maintaining any meters other than those utilized to
measure water purchased from the water utility shall be borne by the
applicant. The type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of
such meters shall be subject to the approval of the Board and the water
utility.
I. The Board may require the exclusion from the sewer system and/or the
sewage treatment works of noncontaminated waste waters and waters
used for cooling purposes.
A. There is hereby imposed a surcharge upon the owners of and the users
of water in or on all properties discharging or permitting to be
discharged or infiltrated into the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works abnormal industrial wastes, which surcharge is
intended to cover the additional cost to the sewer system and/or the
sewage treatment works resulting from the treatment and disposal of
such abnormal industrial waste. Such surcharges shall be in addition to
the regular sewer service charge set forth in § 160-32 of this article and
shall be payable as hereinafter provided in the amount hereinafter
provided.
B. The strength of any industrial waste, the discharge of which is subject
to surcharge, shall be determined monthly or more frequently from
samples taken either at the manhole referred to in § 160-30E hereof or
at any other sampling point mutually agreed upon by the Board and the
producer of such wastes. The frequency and duration of the sampling
period shall be such as, in the opinion of the Board, will permit a
reasonably reliable determination of the average composition of such
wastes, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water and groundwater.
Samples shall be collected by the Board in proportion to the flow of
wastes, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water and groundwater,
and composited for analysis in accordance with the latest edition of
§ 160-32 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-33
1:196
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage as
published by the American Public Health Association. Except as
hereinafter provided, the strength of such wastes so found by analysis
shall be used for establishing the surcharge or surcharges. The Board
may, if it so elects, accept the results of routine sampling and analyses
by the producer of such wastes in lieu of making its own samplings and
analyses.
C. In the event that any industrial waste is found by the Board to have a
BOD in excess of 300 ppm, the owners of and the users of water in or on
the property from which such wastes are discharged shall be
surcharged an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of
wastes in thousand gallons per billing period, exclusive of stormwater
runoff, surface water and groundwater, discharged to the sewer system
and/or the sewage treatment works; and the BOD surcharge rate. The
BOD surcharge rate shall be determined by the following formula:
Rc = 0.00834 P (C-300)
Where:
Rc = the BOD surcharge rate in cents per 1,000 gallons of waste
discharged
P = the average annual fixed, operating and maintenance cost
of treatment processes per pound of BOD received at the
sewage treatment works including chlorination. (Prior to
completion of the first year of operation, the value of P shall
be deemed to be $0.04.)
C = the average BOD of the industrial waste expressed in ppm
as determined in accordance with Subsection B hereof.
The figure "300" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum BOD permissible without surcharge. The figure "0.00834"
is the factor to convert parts per million to pounds per 1,000 gallons.
No discount will be permitted for sewage or industrial wastes having a
BOD less than 300 ppm.
D. In the event that any industrial waste is found, by the Board, to have an
average suspended solid concentration in excess of 275 ppm, the
owners of and the users of water in or on the property from which such
wastes are discharged shall be surcharged an amount equal to the
product of the actual volume of wastes in thousand gallons per billing
period, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface water and groundwater,
discharged to the sewer system and/or the sewage treatment works,
and the suspended solids surcharge rate. The suspended solids
surcharge rate shall be determined by the following formula:
Rs = 0.00834 x B (S - 275)
Where:
Rs = the suspended solids surcharge rate in cents per 1,000
gallons of waste discharged
§ 160-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-33
1:197
§ 160-34. Billing and collection.
B = the average annual fixed, operating and maintenance cost
of the sludge digestion, sludge drying and sludge disposal
operations per pound of suspended solids received at the
sewage treatment works. (Prior to completion of the first
year of operation, the value of B shall be deemed to be
$0.04.)
S = the average suspended solids concentration of the
abnormal industrial wastes expressed in ppm, as
determined in accordance with Subsection B hereof.
The figure "275" appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum suspended solids concentration permissible without
surcharge. The figure "0.00834" is the factor to convert parts per
million to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No discount will be permitted for
sewage or industrial wastes having a suspended solids concentration
less than 275 ppm.
E. The surcharges provided for in this article will be added to the service
charges set forth in § 160-32. They will be billed monthly and shall be
due at the same time and shall be subject to the same penalty as set
forth in § 160-32C hereof.
A. The sewer service charge and the surcharges, where applicable,
provided for in this article shall be payable in monthly payments each
year as provided in § 160-32C hereof.
B. The Board, either directly or through any person whom it may by
resolution appoint or with whom it may contract, including the
Authority or its agent, will render such bills for the sewer service
charges and surcharges imposed by this article and will make
collections thereof in accordance with this article and the Agreement.
C. Bills and notices relating to the sewer service charges and surcharges
will be mailed or delivered to the property owner's and/or the water
user's last address as shown on the books of the Board and/or the water
utility, and the Board shall not be otherwise responsible for delivery of
such bills and notices. No change of address will be honored unless and
until such change shall have been furnished in writing to the Board and
the water utility.
D. The Board shall have access at all reasonable times to residences,
business and other buildings, institutions, schools, churches and
industrial and commercial establishments connected to the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works and to any water meters
measuring water used in such places and establishments to inspect
such meters, the connection with the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works and/or the discharge of sanitary sewage, water of any
kind and industrial waste into the sewer system and/or the sewage
treatment works.
§ 160-33 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-34
1:198
§ 160-35. Delinquencies; violations and penalties; remedies.
E. The Board shall have the power and authority at any time and from time
to time to make such other rules and regulations or to change the
foregoing provisions with respect to the manner and procedure of
billing and collections as said Board, in its sole discretion, may
determine, consistent with the Agreement.
A. Each sewer service charge, surcharge, penalty and interest imposed by
this article shall be a debt due the township and shall be a lien on the
property served and if not paid within 30 days after the date rendered
shall be deemed delinquent. In such event, the township may proceed
to file a lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Beaver County,
Pennsylvania, and collect the same in the manner provided by law for
the filing and collection of municipal claims; or the township may
proceed to collect such delinquent sewer service charge, surcharge,
penalty and interest by an action in assumpsit or by distress of personal
property on the premises or by any other legal or equitable remedy then
available to the township. In the event of failure to pay the sewer
service charge, surcharge, penalty and interest after they become
delinquent as herein provided, the township shall be authorized, in
addition to any other remedies authorized by law and to the extent
authorized by law, to shut off or cause to be shut off the water to be
delivered to such property and/or to remove or close the sanitary sewer
connection and shall have the right to enter upon the property served
for such purposes and to take such steps as may be necessary to
accomplish the same; and any expenses with respect thereto, as well as
the expense of restoring any such water and/or sewer service or
connection, shall likewise be a debt due the township and a lien on the
property served and may be filed and collected as hereinabove
provided, and such water and/or sanitary sewer connection may not
again be turned on or restored for the same owner or user until all
sewer service charges, surcharges, penalties and interest, including the
expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $300 for each and every offense and costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned in the Beaver
County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days until such fine and costs
are paid. Whenever such person shall have been notified in writing by
the Board that that he is violating this article, each three-day-period
that he shall continue such violation after receipt of such notification
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine hereunder
upon conviction thereof.
C. Change of ownership or occupancy of any property served by the sewer
system and/or the sewage treatment works as to which the service
charge, surcharge, penalty or interest imposed by this article is
delinquent, as provided in Subsection A hereof, shall not be a cause for
§ 160-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-35
1:199
§ 160-36. Transfer of administrative duties.
reducing or eliminating the rights and remedies of the township set
forth in this section.
A. The Board may, by agreement with the Authority or any other person or
firm, delegate, transfer, set over and assign to the Authority or to such
other person or firm any and/or all administrative duties, obligations
and rights of the Board under this article. As used herein, any
discretionary findings or determinations by the Board are to comply or
be consistent with any similar findings or determinations by the
Authority with respect to the same matters.
B. The proper officers of the township are hereby authorized and directed
to make, execute and deliver the necessary drafts or vouchers in
payment for and discharge of the township's obligation or obligations of
this article, if any, and the work herein directed and to do and perform
all and every act and thing necessary or convenient to fully and
completely carry out the obligations and purposes of the township set
forth in this article.
§ 160-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-36
1:200
ARTICLE V
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 6-6-2011 by Ord. No. 17436]
§ 160-37. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
DEP — Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or its successor agency.
DEP REGULATIONS — The Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapters 71, 72
and 73.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage and/or effluent conveyed by
a waste-carrying system and which is designed and constructed to facilitate
the ultimate disposal of the sewage and/or effluent at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure the
sewage and/or effluent shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, by virtue of a deed, lease, agreement or as an occupier of any
property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
PUMPER/HAULER BUSINESS — Any sole proprietor, company, partnership
or corporation which engages in cleaning any or all components of a holding
tank system and evacuates and transports the sewage and/or effluent
cleaned therefrom, whether for a fee or free of charge.
PUMPER/HAULER TRUCK OPERATOR — A natural person who engages in
cleaning any or all components of a holding tank system and evacuates and
transports the sewage and/or effluent cleaned therefrom, whether for a fee
or free of charge.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by the
State Board for the Certification of Sewage Enforcement Officers, who is
appointed by the Township to administer the provisions of this article, the
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Holding Tanks, adopted
4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 70.
§ 160-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-37
1:201
provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and the regulations in
PA Code Title 25, Chapters 71, 72 and 73.
TOWNSHIP — Brighton Township, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The chief administrative officer duly appointed as
the Manager for the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
§ 160-38. Design standards for holding tanks.
Holding tanks shall only be permitted to be constructed and installed if their
design meets the standards and requirements of the DEP regulations and
the provisions of this article and any regulations adopted hereunder, and
further, same must be designed and constructed to include the following:
§ 160-39. Permits.
Prior to the issuance of a holding tank permit by the Township, and the
initial construction, installation, covering and operation of such holding
tank, such proposed holding tank must and shall have received all necessary
approvals of the DEP. In addition, the owner shall supply the Township
with a copy of a contract by and between the owner and pumper/hauler of
sewage and/or effluent that provides for proper and timely disposal of the
sewage and/or effluent at a DEP approved disposal site and which contract
shall include provisions:
A. Provision for easy access for periodic inspection, service and
maintenance; and
B. Provision for easy and reasonable vehicular access as needed for the
ability to, and purpose of, the removal of sewage and/or effluent from
the same for hauling and proper disposal at another site.
A. That the hauler contracted by the owner shall notify the Township if, for
any reason, the contract is terminated, voided or otherwise not in
existence by and between the owner and the pumper/hauler.
B. The owner or said pumper/hauler shall provide pumping receipts to the
Township of the quantity of sewage and/or effluent removed and hauled
from the holding tank and further certification by the pumper/hauler to
the Township, that all hauled sewage and/or effluent was or is being
disposed of at a DEP permitted sewage disposal facility.
C. The owner or said pumper/hauler shall provide receipts of and from the
disposal facility to which the pumper/hauler has taken the sewage and/
or effluent from the subject holding tank for ultimate disposal, which
receipts of the ultimate disposal site shall verify to the Township the
§ 160-37 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-39
1:202
§ 160-40. Submission of plans.
Upon the construction of a holding tank, the owner shall provide the
Township with a complete set of as-built plans for the holding tank. No
alternation or change in the design, location or the construction of such
holding tank shall be made by the owner without first obtaining an
additional holding tank permit from the Township.
§ 160-41. Maintenance.
So long as a holding tank shall remain in existence and be necessary
to collect and hold sewage and/or effluent from the property for which
same was or is permitted to be installed, constructed and operated, the
landowner shall properly maintain, repair and operate said holding tank
and provide for the proper disposal of the sewage and/or effluent at a DEPapproved
disposal site.
§ 160-42. Pumping receipts and annual inspection.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and
the regulations promulgated hereunder, the Township, by the enactment of
this article, has and does assume full responsibility for maintaining holding
tanks and for the proper collection and disposal of the contents thereof. As
to any holding tank for which it issues a holding tank permit, the Township
does hereby:
§ 160-43. Conditions of the permit.
The conditions, included in the issuance of any holding tank permit by the
Township, are that:
quantity of sewage and/or effluent removed and hauled from the
holding tank.
A. Specify and direct that the pumping receipts, the disposal site receipts
and certifications required under this article shall be filed with the
Township Manager;
B. Specify and direct the annual inspection of the holding tanks existing
within the Township by the Township Engineer, SEO, or other
designated official, who shall make a written report as to such
inspection and shall file the same with the Township Manager.
A. The owner in possession and control of the land as to which any holding
tank has been approved to be installed and constructed, and so long as
such holding tank shall remain in existence and be necessary to collect
and hold sewage and/or effluent from the land for which same was or is
permitted to be served, has granted and does grant and acknowledge
the right and privilege to the Township by its designated agent, the
right of entry on the subject land to conduct inspection and testing of
the subject holding tank by and on behalf of the Township for the
§ 160-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-43
1:203
§ 160-44. Required financial security.
On or before any holding tank permit being issued by the Township, and
for so long as any holding tank shall remain in existence and be necessary
to collect sewage and/or effluent from the land for which same was or is
permitted, the owner shall provide and maintain financial security to assure
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and the provisions of
this article of such type and in such amount as Township Supervisors shall
from time to time prescribe by resolution. The purpose of the financial
security is to provide immediate funds to the Township to cover any and all
costs incurred for, but not limited to:
§ 160-45. Collection of any costs or expense incurred by Township.
The owner of any land for which a holding tank has been permitted shall be
responsible for payment of all cost or expenses incurred by the Township
in the administration of enforcement of this article. Upon notice by the
Township to the owner of noncompliance by the owner with the terms and
provisions of this article, the required financial security may be declared
forfeited and/or payable to the Township, at its sole option. In the event
said financial security is insufficient to reimburse the Township for such
excess costs or expenses, or in the event the required financial security
is reduced below the amount set by the Township, upon notice from the
Township the owner shall immediately cause the same to be increased to the
required amount. In the event the owner shall fail to deliver to the Township
purpose of ascertaining that the holding tank is being maintained and
operating properly, and for the purpose of taking any remedial action in
the event the owner is not maintaining and/or removing sewage and/or
effluent from the same properly.
B. In the event the owner fails to achieve timely compliance with the
provisions of this Code or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act or regulations promulgated hereunder for the repair,
maintenance and operation of a holding tank, the Township or DEP
shall have the right to enter upon the subject land to perform any
repairs, replacement or maintenance with respect to the holding tank
as necessary, and to remove and haul sewage and/or effluent therefrom
to a DEP-approved sewage disposal site, all of which shall be done at
the sole cost and expense of the owner.
A. Inspection of the holding tank and the resultant required written
report;
B. The review of receipts as to the pumping and disposal of sewage and/or
effluent from the holding tank;
C. The removal of sewage and/or effluent from the holding tank;
D. The repair and/or maintenance of the holding tank system; and
E. The enforcement of the provisions of this article or DEP regulations.
§ 160-43 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-45
1:204
any sum of money required to maintain financial security, or to reimburse
the Township for any costs or expenses incurred by the Township, or to
reimburse the Township for any costs or expenses in excess of the financial
security forfeited to the Township, the Township may, at its sole option,
either:
§ 160-46. Violations and penalties.
This article is enacted and promulgated pursuant to the provisions,
requirements and authority of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and
regulations promulgated thereunder, and the Second Class Township Code.
Any violation of this article or the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act or
regulations promulgated thereunder, as to the construction, maintenance,
repair, operation, discharge of sewage or effluent, or in improper removing,
hauling or disposal of sewage and/or effluent, shall constitute and is a public
nuisance. Any person who shall violate any such provision, or who is the
owner of property on which such condition exists and which constitutes a
nuisance, or who interferes with any officer, or agent, or employee of the
Township in the performance of duties pursuant to this article, the said
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act or regulations promulgated thereunder,
shall be guilty of a summary offence. Upon conviction thereof, such person
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
plus costs, or to be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 160-46.1. Civil penalties.
In addition to proceeding under any other remedy available at law or in
equity for violation of any provision of this article or any directive issued
by the Township pursuant to this article, the Township, after notice and
hearing may assess a civil penalty against any person for the violation in
accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1535, § 1 et seq., as amended.
§ 160-46.2. Rules and regulations.
Township Supervisors are hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such
rules and regulations concerning holding tanks which they may deem
necessary from time to time to affect the purposes of this article. All such
rules and regulations adopted by the Township Supervisors shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Township,
A. Institute suit against the owner in a civil action to collect such cost or
expenses incurred by the Township, including cost of suit and
reasonable attorney fees; or
B. Cause a lien to be filed on the subject property of the owner for which a
holding tank was permitted under this article in accordance with the
Municipal Lien Law37 for all cost or expenses incurred by the Township,
including reasonable attorney fees.
37.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 160-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-46.2
1:205
and all applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 160-46.3. Rates and charges.
Township Supervisors shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge
and collect rates, assessments, and other charges as authorized by
applicable law.
§ 160-46.2 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-46.3
1:206
ARTICLE VI
Individual Sanitary Disposal Systems
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 99]
§ 160-47. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Brighton Township
Sanitary Sewage Facilities Ordinance."
§ 160-48. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the citizens of the Township of Brighton.
§ 160-49. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the words and phrases contained in
this article shall be construed to have the meanings as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,38 PA Code Title 25,
Environmental Resources, Chapters 71, 72 and 73, which definitions are
incorporated herein by reference and made a part thereof.
§ 160-50. Inside sanitary sewage disposal system required.
§ 160-51. Requirement of permit for sewage system.
A. Inside sanitary facilities and a sanitary sewage disposal system shall be
provided for every improvement hereafter erected and intended to be
used for dwelling purposes even though such structure is fabricated or
manufactured elsewhere and placed on a lot and intended to be used as
a dwelling, whether affixed thereto permanently or temporarily and
whether mobile or immobile.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership, association or
corporation to permit the flow of sewage except into a municipal
sanitary sewer system or into an approved on-lot sanitary sewage
disposal system.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction or alteration of an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bids for construction thereof,
nor shall any person occupy any building or structure for which an
individual sewage system or a community sewage system is to be
installed, without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site and
the plans and specifications of such system are in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended,39 and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to said Act, as promulgated by the
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-51
1:207
§ 160-52. Obtaining a sewage permit.
Applications for a sewage permit shall be obtained from the township
office and completed by the applicant. All applications for sewage permits
shall be subject to all the conditions that may be required by the rules
and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection and the
Township of Brighton. At the time of filing the completed application with
the township, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting a plan of
the sewage disposal system to the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer
so that he may determine that such plan is in accordance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 160-53. Building permit.
No building permits for the construction of a new residential dwelling or
commercial building shall be issued by the Township of Brighton unless
and until an on-lot sanitary sewage disposal application or an application to
connect to the public sewer system has been filed with the proper township
office and been approved by the Township Manager or other designated
official.
Department of Environmental Protection or as supplemented by the
Township of Brighton.
B. A sewage permit shall be required in every instance where a person
desires to install, construct, alter or change an individual or community
sewage system on any tract of land of any size in any location in the
Township of Brighton.
C. The rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, adopted pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, the Act of January 24, 1966, P.L.
1535, may be found in PA Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapters 71, 72 and 73, as amended, which rules and regulations as
revised are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof
and adopted by the Township of Brighton. A copy of such rules and
regulations and those promulgated by the Township of Brighton are on
file in the office of the Township Manager.
A. All applications must be accompanied by a plan of the sewage disposal
method which the applicant proposes to use and by the appropriate fee
as prescribed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Where the property abuts the public sewer system, a connection shall
be made to that sanitary sewer for the discharge of all sewage, unless a
special exception or variance is granted by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Brighton, upon application made by the property
owner.
C. Where the property does not abut the public sewer system, all sewage
shall be discharged into an individual or community sewage disposal
§ 160-51 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-53
1:208
§ 160-54. Fee schedule.
The cost of an application for a sewage permit shall be set by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton and shall be reviewed
annually with the Sewage Enforcement Officer. The fee does not include
and the township assumes no responsibility for the cost of labor, materials
and equipment for preparing test pits and percolation holes for conducting
required percolation tests. These costs are the responsibility of the property
owner/applicant.
§ 160-55. Expiration of permit.
The construction and installation of all improvements authorized by the
issuance of a sewage permit shall be completed within three years of the
date of issuance of the permit.
§ 160-56. Malfunction of an on-lot sewage disposal system.
In the event that an on-lot sewage disposal system is not properly
maintained so that it malfunctions and is permitted to fill up and overflow
onto the surrounding surface or otherwise fails to meet the rules,
regulations and requirements of the Township of Brighton and/or the
Department of Environmental Protection, upon receipt of any complaint
or notice of any malfunction, the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall
immediately investigate and report to the Board of Supervisors. If the
investigation supports the complaint and the existence of a health hazard,
it shall be the duty of the Sewage Enforcement Officer to give written
notice to the offending person, firm or corporation to make the necessary
corrections within 30 days or such other reasonable time as is appropriate,
at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, in order to bring the sewage
disposal system into conformity to the regulations, requirements and
specifications of this article. Upon failure to comply within the time granted,
such persons, firm or corporation shall be deemed to have violated the
provisions of this article, and each subsequent day in which the malfunction
continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 160-57. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by an action brought before
a District Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of
summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any
person guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, upon conviction
in the proceedings before the District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $100 for each violation.
system, the plan for which must be reviewed and approved by the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer before any construction activity
of any nature has taken place.
§ 160-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-58
1:209
§ 160-58. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided for in this article, any violation
of § 160-56 of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by
the Township of Brighton by seeking appropriate, equitable or legal relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 160-58 BRIGHTON CODE § 160-58
1:210
Chapter 166
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 82. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 121, Art. I.
§ 160-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-58
1:211

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal of Garbage, Municipal Waste and
Recyclable Materials
[Adopted 6-30-2005 by Ord. No. 14240]
§ 166-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Township of Brighton Solid Waste and
Recycling Ordinance."
§ 166-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101.
ALUMINUM — Any aluminum beverage or food cans comprised of 100%
aluminum.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Any food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the Township to collect,
remove and dispose of combustible and noncombustible refuse and garbage
and recyclable materials from residences or authorized by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services through Township contracts to collect such materials from those
properties.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE (either domestic or commercial) — Waste
substances capable of incineration or burning and comprised of garbage,
paper, rags, excelsior and other like materials.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment whose primary use
is commercial and is engaged in nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing
business, including but not limited to markets, office building, restaurants,
shopping centers, stores and residential buildings containing four or more
dwelling units.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin and set aside in a
mixed agglomeration for the purpose of being recycled. Newspapers and
magazines are excluded.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars,
40.Editor's Note: This article also repealed former §§ 166-1 through 166-38, which consisted
of Art. I, Collection and Disposal of Refuse, adopted 6-4-1954 by Ord. No. 10, as amended;
Art. II, Dumping, adopted 4-13-1970 by Ord. No. 42; Art. III, Licensing of Vehicles,
adopted 12-14-1987 by Ord. No. 81; Art. IV, Recycling, adopted 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 84;
and Art. V, Municipal Waste Flow Control, adopted 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 88.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:213
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Material consisting of two or more pieces of kraft
liner separated by corrugated (fluted) linerboard. Excluded are materials
without a corrugated interliner and those materials with a corrugated liner
made from rice or other non-wood-based materials.
COUNTY — The County of Beaver, a municipal subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid
waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted
into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
FERROUS CANS — Any empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
GARBAGE — All refuse and animal and vegetable matter which was used for
human consumption, every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or
other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption,
dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or
decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal
or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents. It shall
also include excess fruits from trees on residential property but not from
trees on farms and/or orchards. Excluding items designated for recycling,
the term "garbage" shall also mean "dead animals" and mixed and waste
fragments resulting from the use and occupancy of the premises, including
but not limited to rags, paper and packaging material, glass, crockery,
bottles, tin cans, leather, rubber, plastics, newspaper and other general
small household refuse.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Any bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass; expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, automotive
glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper, copier paper,
letterhead, mimeograph paper and computer paper, typically sold as white
ledger paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments and in home occupation businesses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — An establishment whose primary
purpose is public in character, including those establishments engaged
in charitable, educational and service occupations, and also including
hospitals, nursing homes and congregate homes.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Including but not limited to automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings,
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
§ 166-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 166-2
1:214
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Periodical publications containing
sketches, stories, essays and pictures. For purposes of recycling, junk mail,
phone books, paper and hardback books are expressly excluded.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the Township
and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial, lunchroom, office
waste, or other material, including solid, liquid or semisolid materials,
including any containing gaseous materials, resulting from the operation
of residential, municipal, commercial, institutional establishments or
community activities and any sludge from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply, treatment plant or air pollution control facility
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act. The term does not include source-separated recyclable
materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE REFUSE (either domestic or commercial) — Waste
substances not ordinarily subject to incineration or burning and including
pottery, china and like material.
PERSON(S) — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Plastic food and beverage containers. Due to the
wide variety of types of plastics, the Township may stipulate specific types
of plastic which shall be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences,
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the Township to be recycled and which can be separated from municipal
waste and returned to commerce to be reused as resource in the
development of useful products. Recyclable materials may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, ferrous and
bimetallic containers, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated paper,
plastics and any other item selected by the Township or specified in future
revisions to Act 101. The recyclable materials selected by the Township may
be revised from time to time as deemed necessary by the Township.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed or processed as municipal waste.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having
up to and including three dwelling units per structure.
RUBBISH — Rags, broken glass, crockery, containers for nonedible
products used in the home, paper, hedge cuttings, incinerator ashes, refuse
§ 166-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:215
from paper burners and household refuse generally, ashes from household
heating plants, incinerators, and coal stoves, but excluding bulky waste and
hazardous waste.
SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin and set aside for the
purpose of being recycled.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq., and the Department regulations promulgated thereunder.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton, a municipal subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania situate in Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
§ 166-3. Contract with collector.
A. The Township Supervisors shall provide for the collection, removal and
disposal of combustible and noncombustible refuse and garbage, as
well as the collection, removal and disposal of designated recyclable
materials, within the Township of Brighton.
B. The Township Supervisors shall provide for such collection, removal
and disposal by contract, after receipt and review of competitive bids,
with responsible persons who shall be appointed and licensed by the
Township.
C. The contract with the designated collector(s) shall provide and include:
(1) Description of area in which the collector shall be authorized to
operate.
(2) The frequency and time of collections which the collector shall
make and a requirement that his customers be so notified.
(3) The manner in which the collector shall dispose of the refuse,
garbage and recyclable materials.
(4) The schedule of rates which the collector will be authorized to
charge.
(5) The type and make of the equipment which the collector will use in
collecting the refuse, garbage and recyclable materials.
(6) A statement that the contract is for the personal services of the
collector and is nonassignable.
(7) Provisions specifying the length of the contract.
(8) A statement of the public liability insurance coverage that the
collector shall carry, which shall be not less than $500,000 personal
liability and $1,000,000 property damage.
(9) A statement that any violation of the contract and this article shall
be cause for immediate cancellation of the license.
§ 166-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 166-3
1:216
§ 166-4. Mandatory participation and collection.
§ 166-5. Preparation of garbage and refuse for collection.
D. Each collector shall be required to furnish to the Township of Brighton a
performance bond in the amount of $50,000 before undertaking his
responsibilities.
E. The contract shall incorporate by reference this article.
F. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Township or one licensed by the Board of Supervisors to
collect garbage, municipal waste and/or recyclable materials from any
residential unit, commercial, municipal or industrial establishment
within the Township of Brighton.
A. Each residential property within the Township of Brighton is required
to participate in the contracted refuse and recycling program. No
person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to collect, remove or
dispose of any garbage, refuse or designated recyclable materials from
any residential property within the Township other than the licensed
collector(s) or their duly authorized agents and employees.
B. The Township may authorize the discontinuance of service for a
residential unit when the owner or occupant can provide
documentation to the Township's satisfaction that they have an
approved method of refuse disposal and recycling as a result of owning
their own business establishment where they dispose of their refuse
and recycle by other means. Application for discontinuance must be
made by written letter to the Board of Supervisors and be accompanied
by sufficient documentation of a contract for service at an owned
business location. Requests for exclusion should be submitted no later
than June 1, 2005. Any approved application shall be limited in duration
to one year from July 1. Any request for continuation of the exemption
must be accompanied by appropriate documentation and be filed with
the Township not later than June 1 of each year. Such request shall be
acted upon by the Board of Supervisors within 30 days thereafter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm or
corporation to dump or cause to be dumped any ashes, garbage, refuse
and any other refuse materials upon any highway, street or other public
or private way or upon any private or public property in the Township of
Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
B. All garbage, refuse and, where practical, bulky waste shall be placed for
collection in containers or in separate waterproof bags which, when
filled with refuse, shall not weigh more than 40 pounds.
C. No infectious waste shall be placed in any container; no garbage shall
be permitted to accumulate so that it might become a breeding area for
§ 166-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:217
§ 166-6. Preparation of recyclable materials for collection.
rats, flies, or other vermin; no garbage shall be permitted to accumulate
for more than one week.
D. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their residences, apartments and other residential
establishments for disposal in accordance with the rules and
regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
E. No garbage or municipal waste shall be placed at the curbside for
collection prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before scheduled pickup. Should
early placement of the garbage or municipal waste result in the
contents of the containers or bags becoming scattered about upon the
public street or adjoining property, it shall be the obligation of the
resident placing the container and/or bags for pickup to clean up the
debris.
A. All persons who are residents of the township shall separate all of those
recyclable materials designated by the township from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments, shall store such materials for collection and
shall place the same for collection in accordance with the guidelines
established hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside
in containers provided for collection by the Township. Any
containers provided to residences for collection of recyclable
materials shall be the property of the Township. Residents shall be
responsible for leaving the allocated containers with the residence
or shall pay the replacement cost of said containers. Use of
recycling containers for any purpose other than the designated
recycling program or use of the recycling containers by any person
other than the person allocated such containers shall be a violation
of this article.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with four or more units may
comply with its recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collection and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. Owners, landlords or agents of an owner or
landlord who comply with this article shall not be liable for
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
B. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, and such other materials as may be designated by the Township
generated at commercial, municipal and institutional establishments
§ 166-5 BRIGHTON CODE § 166-6
1:218
§ 166-7. Vehicles.
and from community activities and store the recyclable materials until
collection.
C. All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the
Township or authorized collector pursuant to this article shall from time
of placement at the curb become the property of the Township or the
authorized collector. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair
the ownership of separated recyclable materials by the generator
unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside for collection.
A. From and after the effective date of this article, all vehicles being used
for the collection and/or transportation of refuse, including industrial
waste, and/or garbage within the Township of Brighton shall be
required to be registered with and be licensed by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Brighton.
B. A license application for each vehicle shall be made on a form to be
provided and shall be submitted to Brighton Township or other
designated agent. The application shall contain a complete description
of the vehicle, in such detail as will enable Brighton Township to
determine that the requirements of this article have been met. With
each application for a license, the applicant shall exhibit his county
license obtained pursuant to County Ordinance No. 082092-SWM.
C. Each license application shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Each license must be renewed
annually on or before April 1.
D. All vehicles used for the collection and removal of garbage must be
equipped with watertight beds and sides, constructed of impervious
material and with a permanent covering on top. Their operation must
be in a manner to conform to all local, county or state health
requirements regarding the sanitary handling of such refuse.
E. Vehicles used in collecting and removing or transporting other classes
of refuse and recyclable materials shall be of such construction as to
prevent the contents from littering the streets or public or private
property and shall be covered at all times while the vehicle is in motion
or is standing unattended. The operation of any vehicle in such a
condition as to permit any garbage, refuse and recyclable materials to
spill, fall or drip upon any street and any public or private property shall
not be permitted.
F. The authorized collector is required, at his own cost and expense, to
furnish and operate all the vehicles or other equipment necessary to
properly collect, remove and dispose of all garbage, refuse and
recyclable materials. All vehicles or other equipment must be operated
and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The careless handling
§ 166-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-7
1:219
§ 166-8. Disposal of municipal waste and recyclables.
§ 166-9. Collection schedule.
Garbage shall be collected from each residential unit within the Township of
Brighton at least once every seven days, with daily collections from hotels
and restaurants. Municipal refuse shall be collected from each residential
unit and each business establishment within the Township of Brighton at
least once every seven days. Recyclable materials shall be collected from
each residential unit within the Township of Brighton not less frequently
than biweekly.
§ 166-10. Fees.
§ 166-11. Violations and penalties.
of items to be collected by the collector's employees will not be
permitted.
G. Each vehicle and other piece of equipment used by the collector in the
collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and recyclable
materials must be clearly marked "Licensed Township Collector" and
give the license number and date of issue.
A. All licensed collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal waste
generated within the municipality, other than designated recyclable
materials, at the site(s) designated in the Beaver County Municipal
Solid Waste Management Plan.
B. The collected recyclable materials shall be taken to a recycling facility.
Disposal by collectors or operators of recycling facilities of separated
recyclable materials in landfills or by burning in incinerators is
prohibited unless markets do not exist and the collectors or operators
have notified the Board of Supervisors, or its designee, in writing and
have secured the permission of the Board of Supervisors for such
disposal.
C. Disposal of recyclable materials with municipal waste by any residential
unit owner or occupier or by any licensed collector is prohibited and
shall be considered a violation of this article.
A. The fees to be charged to the property owner shall be established in the
contract entered into with the licensed collector after competitive
bidding. The established fee shall include collection, removal and
disposal of garbage, municipal waste, including bulky items, and
recyclable materials. Excluded, however, are tires, yard waste,
Christmas trees, construction debris, vehicle parts, lead acid batteries,
paints, liquids, fluids, steel, iron and all similar items.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner/occupier to pay the
fee, and the responsibility of the licensed contractor to collect.
§ 166-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 166-11
1:220
§ 166-12. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction hold any part of this article
unconstitutional, illegal, or unenforceable, such invalidity shall not affect,
impair, nullify, nor otherwise prevent the enforcement of the remainder of
this article. It is hereby declared that such parts as are legal would have
been enacted independently of the invalid portion had the invalidity of such
part been known, and it is the intention of the Township that such remainder
shall be and remain in full force and effect.
§ 166-13. Repealer.
Ordinance Nos. 10, 32, 42, 81, 82 and 84, which includes §§ 166-1 through
166-38 of the Brighton Township Code, are specifically repealed as well as
all ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with the provisions of
this article.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this article shall receive an official written warning of
noncompliance from the Township Manager for the first offense.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail
to comply herewith, after receipt of written notification for the first
offense, shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, for each violation. In the
event the fines and costs are not paid, the defendant shall be sentenced
to serve not more than 30 days in the Beaver County Jail. Each day the
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the Township
may institute a suit in equity for an injunction to restrain a violation of
this article, if such unlawful conduct should amount to a public
nuisance. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose the
penalties authorized in § 166-11.
§ 166-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-13
1:221

ARTICLE II
Yard Waste Composting Site41
[Adopted 1-8-2001 by Ord. No. 116]
§ 166-14. Applicability.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of its Yard Waste
Composting Site located at 1250 Brighton Road:
§ 166-15. Acceptable yard waste.
§ 166-16. Prohibited items.
The following items are specifically prohibited from being deposited at the
Yard Waste Composting Site:
§ 166-17. Hours and days of operation; closing of site.
A. "Acceptable yard waste" is defined as including only leaves, grass,
hedge clippings, brush or tree trimmings limited to a maximum length
of five feet and a maximum diameter of six inches, and Christmas trees.
B. All yard waste shall be deposited on the site in the designated space.
A. Tree stumps.
B. Construction materials of any nature and including lumber.
C. Stones, brick, asphalt or concrete.
D. Cans or any form of metal.
E. Plastic bags.
F. Paper waste.
G. Dog, cat or other animal waste.
H. Garden produce such as tomatoes, apples, pumpkins, etc.
I. Burning barrel waste.
J. Garbage or litter of any kind.
A. The hours of operation for the compost site shall be as follows:
(1) Monday through Saturday, 7:30 a.m. to sunset.
(2) Sunday, 12:00 noon to sunset.
(3) The site shall not be open on Sunday, December through March.
41.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, containing §§ 166-39 through 166-45, has been renumbered
as Art. II, §§ 166-14 through 166-20, respectively, for purposes of codification.
§ 166-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-17
1:223
§ 166-18. Permit required; application.
Use of the compost site shall be by permit only, which permit shall be
displayed in the motor vehicle conveying yard waste to the compost site.
§ 166-19. Prohibited acts.
The following circumstances shall constitute a violation of this article:
§ 166-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits the violation of any of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to this Township article shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000 and costs and, in default of the payment of
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
(4) Brighton Township reserves the right to close access to the
compost site at any time for the purpose of operating the
equipment upon the site, as well as for the inspection and
maintenance of the equipment and the site.
A. Township residents shall be entitled to receive a permit for the deposit
of their personal yard waste by making application therefor at the
Township offices, 1300 Brighton Road, and paying such fee as may be
established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Brighton
Township.
B. Commercial haulers may be permitted to deposit yard waste at the
compost site by making application for the appropriate permit and
paying such fee as may be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Brighton Township.
A. The deposit of any material, other than acceptable yard waste, at the
compost site.
B. The deposit of any material at the compost site by any person not
holding a valid permit, or in violation of the provisions of the permit
issued to such person.
C. The deposit of any material at the compost site at any time other than
the designated hours of operation.
§ 166-17 BRIGHTON CODE § 166-20
1:224
Chapter 171
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 189.
§ 171-1. Designation of enforcement agency.
The Police Department of the Township of Brighton is hereby designated as
the proper enforcement agency within the Township of Brighton to enforce
all regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Brighton pursuant to Section 6109 of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.42
§ 171-2. Speed limits.
The Police Department of the Township of Brighton is hereby authorized
to enforce all maximum speed limits as are now, or may be hereafter,
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Township of
Brighton on any streets or highways within the Township of Brighton.
§ 171-3. Authorized devices.
The Police Department of the Township of Brighton is hereby authorized to
use any and all electronic, mechanical, electrical, or electrical-mechanical
devices as are now, or may be hereafter, authorized for use by a second
class township by the Pennsylvania Legislature or Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, including but not limited to the VASCAR - PLUS speedtiming
device, to enforce all the maximum speed limits established upon the
streets and highways within the Township of Brighton.
Chapter 173
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 85.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
42.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109.
§ 166-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-3
1:225

Part 1
Stormwater Management
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 173-1. Statement of findings.
§ 173-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted and implemented to achieve the following general
purposes and objectives:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater
and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtax the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, and greatly increases
the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
B. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
C. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
D. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion
and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood-control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water
resources.
E. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated
small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
A. To manage stormwater runoff resulting from land alterations and
disturbance activities in accordance with the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as amended);43
B. To utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems
and to preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams;
43.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-2
1:227
§ 173-3. Statutory authority.
The Township also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.44
§ 173-4. Applicability.
Stormwater management facilities shall be provided for subdivisions, land
developments, and all activities which change the slope of the land or
the land cover and shall be designed to ensure that the maximum rate of
stormwater runoff from the site shall be no greater after development than
is the rate of runoff from the site prior to development.
§ 173-5. Repealer.
This Part 1 shall repeal all other Code provisions, or parts thereof, which
are contrary to or conflict with the provisions of this Part to the extent
necessary to give this Part full force and effect.
§ 173-6. Severability.
Should any part of this Part 1 be declared invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of any other part, nor the Part as a whole.
§ 173-7. Compatibility.
Actions taken under this Part 1 do not affect any responsibility, permit or
approval for any activity regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or
ordinance.
§ 173-8. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 1, the terms used herein shall have the
following definitions. The words "shall" and "must" shall be mandatory;
single and plural, and feminine and masculine, are equivalent.
C. To encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve groundwater
supplies and stream flows;
D. To provide for adequate maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management facilities in the Township;
E. To provide review procedures and performance standards for
stormwater planning and management;
F. To manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which
requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes; and
G. To maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
44.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-2 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-8
1:228
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy-use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as defined by this Part, who has
filed an application for development, including his/her heirs, successors and
assigns.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Part 1.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this Part, "nonstructural
BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff;
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL — A natural stream that conveys water; a man-made ditch or
open channel excavated for the flow of water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Beaver County Conservation District
(BCCD).
COUNTY — County of Beaver, Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under
a highway, railroad, canal, or other embankment.
DESIGN CRITERIA — Engineering guidelines specifying construction
details and materials, or objectives, results, or limits which must be met by
a facility, structure or process in performance of its intended functions.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event,
measured in probability of occurrence, such as the one-hundred-year storm,
and duration, such as twenty-four-hour, and used in designing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of runoff entering
the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by temporarily
holding water in areas such as detention basins, reservoirs, rooftops,
streets, parking lots, or within the drainage system itself.
§ 173-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:229
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. A
detention basin is designed to drain completely after a storm; also called a
"dry basin."
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use
or similar action that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — A lot, parcel or tract of land on which development
is taking place or is proposed.
DISCHARGE RATE — The rate of flow, specifically fluid flow; a volume of
fluid (in this case water) per unit of time flowing in or from a conduit or
channel, usually expressed in cubic feet per second.
DRAINAGE — The interception and conveyance of excess surface water or
groundwater from land by artificial or natural means.
DRAINAGE AREA — The area which contributes runoff to a designated
point of a drainage system, usually expressed in acres or square miles; also
called a "catchment area," "watershed," or "river basin."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMBANKMENT — A mound of earth or stone constructed above the natural
ground surface, and in stormwater management with the specific purpose
of detaining or diverting stormwater runoff.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind,
ice, or other geologic agents, including such process as gravitational creep.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion of
land surfaces.
FLOODPLAIN — A normally dry land area adjacent to stream channels that
is susceptible to being inundated by overbank stream flows. For regulatory
purposes, the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act (Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166)45 and regulations pursuant to the Act define
the floodplain as the area inundated by the one-hundred-year flood and
delineated on a map by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) or
by the applicant in accordance with Township Code requirements.
45.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 173-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-8
1:230
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silviculture principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of groundwater by
infiltration, naturally by precipitation or runoff or artificially by spreading
or injection.
HYDRAULICS — The branch of science concerned with the mechanics of
fluids, especially liquids; as applied in stormwater management, the study
of the characteristics of water flowing in conveyance channels and from
control facilities.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are
affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils
are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum
infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) defines the four groups
and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified
from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or
Conservation District offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies
from A to D (NRCS).
HYDROLOGY — The science dealing with waters of the earth and their
distribution and circulation through the atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Material which resists the entrance or passing
through of water or other liquids.
INFILTRATION — The flow or movement of water through the interstices or
pores of a soil or other porous medium, or the absorption of liquid by the
soil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group
of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or
lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or the division or
allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets, common
areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features, or a
subdivision of land.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or
filling or stripping of vegetation or any other activity which causes land
to be exposed to erosion. This includes the disturbance of site stone base
below pavement materials.
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of physical
properties.
§ 173-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:231
MUNICIPALITY — Brighton Township, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — The National Resources Conservation Service (formerly the Soil
Conservation Service), United States Department of Agriculture.
OUTFALL — The point or location at which stormwater leaves a site, which
may include streams, storm sewers, swales or other well-defined natural or
artificial drainage features, as well as areas of dispersed overland flow.
OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE — A structure designed to control the rate
of stormwater runoff released from a detention system.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point
and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PEAK FLOW — Maximum flow.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end result
or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe specific means
for achieving it.
PERVIOUS — A surface which permits the passage or entrance of water or
other liquid.
POINT OF INTEREST — A point of hydraulic concern, such as a bridge,
culvert, or channel section, for which the rate of runoff is computed or
measured.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities
are planned, conducted, or maintained in the Township.
QUALIFIED PERSON or QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by
law to perform the work required by this Part.
RATE OF RUNOFF — The instantaneous rate of water flow is usually
expressed in cubic feet per second.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbances or any activities that
involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect
post-construction stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE — Earth disturbance activity of one
acre or more. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part of,
or during any stage of, a larger common plan of development. For road
maintenance activity, this only applies where stone base is disturbed.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The percentage of predevelopment peak
rate of runoff from a watershed subbasin (as delineated in the watershed
plan), which defines the allowable post-development peak discharge from
any development site in that subbasin.
RETENTION POND — A basin, usually enclosed by artificial dikes, that is
used to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff for an
extended period of time and releasing it at a predetermined rate. These are
"wet ponds."
§ 173-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-8
1:232
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The hydrologic, geologic, and land cover
characteristics of any watershed which affect the rate, amount, and
direction of stormwater runoff. These may include but are not limited to:
vegetation, soils, slopes, and man-made landscape alterations.
SCS — The Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.
SMALL DEVELOPMENT — Any subdivision or land development which
results (or will result when fully constructed) in the creation of 5,000 or
fewer square feet of impervious surface area.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS and utilized in its publication, "Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds," Technical Release No. 55, SCS, June, 1986 (or the mostcurrent
edition).
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.46
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other drainage, but excluding domestic sewage and domestic
wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Natural or
engineered structures which collect and transport stormwater through or
from a drainage area to the point of final outlet, including, but not limited to,
any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets, and pumping stations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff from a specific development site within the watershed.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this Part. "Stormwater
management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout
this Part.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water generated in a drainage basin resulting
from snow melt or precipitation events.
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 173-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:233
STORMWATER RUNOFF VOLUME — The quantity of water resulting from
a storm event, usually expressed in cubic feet, acre feet, or inches over
acreage of the watershed.
STREAM — A watercourse, whether relatively permanent or non-relatively
permanent.
SUBBASIN — A portion of the watershed that has similar hydrologic
characteristics and drains to a common point.
SWALE — A low-lying trench which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time period necessary for surface runoff
to reach the outlet of a subarea from, hydraulically, the most remote point
in the tributary drainage area.
TOWNSHIP — Brighton Township, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The professional engineer duly appointed by the
Board of Supervisors as the Engineer for the Township.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire area drained by a river, stream, or other body of
water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
§ 173-9. Design calculations and reports.
A. Stormwater runoff and design calculations shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and approval with the application for
combined preliminary and final approval of a land development plan.
Cross sections and specifications showing complete construction
details shall be submitted with the application for final approval.
B. The stormwater runoff and design calculations shall be prepared by a
Pennsylvania registered engineer with qualifications and experience in
preparing stormwater management plans.
C. Additional analysis, calculations and design criteria may be required for
both on-site and off-site stormwater systems where it has been
determined by the Township Engineer that further study is necessary.
D. Upon request by the Township Engineer, stormwater runoff calculations
shall be provided for: the outlet and inlet sides of all stormwater
drainage and storage facilities and structures; at points in a public
street with a change of grade; or where water from a proposed
structure, facility or vehicular way is to enter an existing public street,
§ 173-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-9
1:234
§ 173-10. Exemptions for small developments. [Amended 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 201]
existing storm sewer, existing drainage ditch or existing stormwater
storage facility.
E. Techniques described in Appendix 3 (Low-Impact Development)47 of
this Part are encouraged, because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this Part and the state water quality
requirements.
A. At the time of application, the Township shall determine if the
development qualifies as a small development and, therefore, is eligible
for a simplified stormwater plan submission. For the purposes of this
chapter, a "small development" is:
(1) Any development which results (or will result when fully
constructed) in the creation of 5,000 or less square feet of
impervious surface area, including roofs, patios, driveways, and
sidewalks.
B. The small project stormwater management plan application, available
upon request at the Township office, may be used for projects under
5,000 square feet of proposed impervious surface. The small project
stormwater management plan application documents new impervious
surface at the project site and assists in sizing of stormwater controls
for a small development.
C. Should the applicant choose not to use the small project stormwater
management plan application, a plan, prepared and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania,
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
which describes, narratively and graphically, the type and location of
proposed on-site stormwater management techniques or the proposed
connection to an existing storm sewer system must be submitted.
Depending upon actual site conditions, the number of lots proposed and
similar considerations, the Township Engineer shall determine if the
plan must be prepared by a Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania.
D. The Township Engineer shall review the proposed provisions for
stormwater management for small developments. Where the applicant
is proposing to connect to an existing storm sewer, the applicant's
engineer shall determine that sufficient capacity exists in the storm
sewer from the point of connection to the point of outlet in the natural
drainage system. The Township Engineer shall also determine if the
proposed development site is part of a larger parcel or tract which was
subject to any specific stormwater management controls contained in a
prior plan.
47.Editor's Note: Appendix 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 173-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-10
1:235
§ 173-11. Additional requirements.
§ 173-12. Stormwater management plan required; exemptions;
contents.
E. For a parcel or tract of land held in single ownership, only one
application for a small development, as defined above, shall be
permitted before requiring a stormwater management plan for the
entire parcel. A project cannot be phased to circumvent the stormwater
requirements by using the exemption for small developments. When
calculating new impervious area for determining whether a
development qualifies as a small development, the cumulative total of
all impervious areas constructed within five years of the application
date shall be considered.
A. In conjunction with meeting the requirements of this Part 1, the
applicant shall refer to and meet all conditions and requirements set
forth in Brighton Township's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) Prohibited Discharge Ordinance.48
A. No final subdivision or land development plan shall be approved, no
permit authorizing construction issued, nor any earthmoving or land
disturbance activity initiated until the final stormwater management
plan for the development site is approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1.
B. A letter from the Beaver County Conservation District (BCCD)
approving the erosion and sedimentation control plan must also be
received prior to the initiation of any grading. In the event that
submission to the BCCD is not required by the Township, an erosion and
sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the mostrecent
version of PADEP Chapter 102, Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Program Manual, must be approved by the Township.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are specifically exempt from this
Part:
(1) Use of land for gardening primarily for home consumption.
(2) Use of land for construction of landscaping improvements,
provided such improvements do not significantly alter the runoff
characteristics for the land.
(3) Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a farm
conservation plan approved by the BCCD, or when it is determined
by the BCCD that such use will not cause excessive erosion and
sedimentation.
48.Editor's Note: See Part 2, MS4 Prohibited Discharges, of this chapter.
§ 173-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-12
1:236
D. The stormwater management plan for all developments, except small
developments as defined in § 173-10, shall consist of the following four
components:
(1) Narrative report. The narrative report shall consist of a general
statement of the project giving the purpose and engineering
assumptions and calculations for control measures and facilities.
The following information shall be included.
(a) General description of the project.
(b) General description of the accelerated runoff control plan.
(c) General description of the erosion and sedimentation control
plan.
(d) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start
and completion dates.
(e) Location and watershed characteristics.
(f) Hydraulic and hydrologic calculations, methodology and basis
of design.
(g) Brief soils description.
(h) The name, address, and phone number of the consultant who
prepared the stormwater management plan.
(i) Stormwater management report date and date of the latest
revision to the report.
(j) Typewritten narrative report that shall include sections
describing the following items:
[1] Stormwater management plan objectives.
[2] Hydrologic procedures used to develop the plan.
[3] Description(s) of predevelopment watershed conditions.
[4] Description(s) of post-development watershed conditions.
[5] Description(s) of the proposed plan and method(s) to
handle post-development runoff.
[6] Description(s) of the proposed detention facility(ies) and
proposed outlet control.
[7] Summary tables for predevelopment and postdevelopment
peak flows, detention facility(ies) allowable
release rates, stage-storage-outflow characteristics and
storm-routing results.
§ 173-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-12
1:237
(k) Watershed maps delineating predevelopment and postdevelopment
watershed boundaries, as well as the flow path
and segments used to determine times of concentration for
each watershed.
(l) Storm sewer calculations and watershed map delineating all
subareas used to size and compute flow for the storm sewer
system.
(m) Operation and maintenance program. The report shall contain
a proposed maintenance plan for all stormwater control
facilities, in accordance with the following:
[1] Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., Township,
property owner, homeowners' association, other
management entity).
[2] A maintenance program for all facilities, outlining the type
of maintenance activities, probable frequencies, personnel
and equipment requirements, and estimated annual
maintenance costs.
(2) Preliminary plan. The preliminary plan shall provide, and be
accompanied by, maps and other descriptive material indicating
the feasibility of the plan and showing the following:
(a) A key map showing the development site's location within the
designated watershed and watershed subsheds (consult
watershed stormwater plans for boundaries). On all site
drawings, show the boundaries of the watershed(s) and
subarea(s) as they are located on the development site and
identify the watershed names and/or subshed numbers.
(b) Location of the one-hundred-year floodplain on the
development site based on the Brighton Township Flood
Insurance Study Maps or a determination by the applicant's
engineer.
(c) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries within the
development site.
(d) The streets, storm sewers and other storm drains to be built,
the basis of their design, the outfall and outlet locations and
elevations, the receiving stream or channel and its high-water
elevation and the functioning of the drains during high-water
conditions.
(e) The parts of the proposed parking area pavements, if any,
which are planned to be depressed to provide stormwater
storage or conveyance. A maximum of six inches' depth of
water may be ponded in a proposed parking area.
§ 173-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-12
1:238
(f) Existing streams and watercourses to be maintained and new
channels to be constructed, their locations, cross sections and
profiles.
(g) Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, if any, their
materials, elevations, waterway openings and basis of design.
(h) Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained,
enlarged or otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be
built and the basis of their design.
(i) The approximate location and percentage of the total land area
in the development which will be covered by impervious
surfaces after construction is completed.
(j) The slope, type and size of all proposed and existing storm
sewers and other waterways.
(k) Existing contours at intervals of two feet, except in areas with
slopes greater than 15%, in which case five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(l) All natural features, including bodies of water (natural and
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales,
wetlands and other natural drainagecourses on the
development site and those off site which will be affected by
runoff from the development.
(m) Approximate depth, shape, size and storage of any proposed
retention facility.
(n) Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out and shallow as much as
practicable.
(o) One or more typical cross sections of all existing and proposed
channels or other open drainage facilities, showing the
elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes
thereto, together with the high-water elevations expected from
the one-hundred-year storm under the controlled conditions
called for by this Part and the relationship of structures,
streets and other utilities.
(p) A site plan showing the property lines, dimensions of the site
and location of existing and proposed structures, sewers,
waterlines, easements and rights-of-way.
(q) Certification of the registered Pennsylvania engineer
responsible for preparation of the plan.
(r) A list of the permits and approvals relative to stormwater
management that will be required from other governmental
agencies and anticipated dates of submission and receipt.
Copies of the applications may be requested by the Township
§ 173-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-12
1:239
Engineer where they may be helpful for the stormwater plan
review.
(3) Final plan. Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the final plan
shall be submitted to the Township. The final plan shall provide all
descriptive material and maps previously submitted and required
prior to the final plan, in addition to the following items:
(a) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
the storm sewer system, detention facilities and sediment and
erosion control operations. Hydraulic and energy grade lines
shall be provided for proposed storm sewers if, in the opinion
of the Township Engineer, they are required to evaluate the
storm system.
(b) All plans and profiles of proposed storm sewers and open
channels, including horizontal and vertical controls, elevations,
sizes, slopes and materials.
(c) Locations, dimensions and design details required for the
construction of all facilities.
(d) For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes
with corresponding water surface elevations and basin outflow
rates for those water surface elevations.
(e) For all detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and
outflow for the peak design flows from the site under natural
and developed conditions.
(f) A description of operation for all detention basins.
(g) Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two feet,
except in areas with slopes greater than 15%, in which case
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(h) The staging of earthmoving activities and program of
operation, including a schedule for the installation of all
temporary and permanent stormwater control measures and
devices.
(i) All information relative to the design and operation of
emergency spillways.
(j) Emergency routing of outfall for stormwater runoff in the event
of failure of off-site drainage structures.
(k) When major control facilities, such as retention basins,
requiring a PADEP permit, are planned, soil structures and
characteristics shall be investigated. Plans and data prepared
by a licensed professional engineer or geologist with
experience and education in soil mechanics shall be submitted.
These submissions should consider and offer design solutions
§ 173-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-12
1:240
§ 173-13. General standards.
for frost heave potential, shrink/swell potential, soil bearing
strength, water infiltration, soil settling characteristics, fill and
backfilling procedures and soil treatment techniques as
required to protect the improvements or structures.
(l) All erosion and sedimentation control measures, temporary as
well as permanent, in sufficient detail to clearly indicate the
effectiveness of the plan.
(m) Project specifications relative to stormwater control, erosion
and sedimentation.
(n) Evidence that all on-site and off-site easements required to
convey runoff flow to an existing public drainage facility or a
permanent stream have been granted to the operating entity.
(o) Provide the information to conform with the requirements
noted in §§ 173-11, 173-12 and 173-13.
(p) Provide a list of adjacent property owners within 200 feet of
the subject property and documentation that the adjacent
property owners have been notified of the proposed project.
(q) A note shall be placed on the recorded plan: "As per the
approved stormwater management plan, the Township shall
have right of access to the on-site detention facility for the
right of maintenance in the event the owner, assigns or heirs
do not adequately maintain the facility. The owner, assigns or
heirs shall reimburse the Township for all costs associated with
said maintenance. The aforementioned rights granted the
Township in no way diminish the responsibility of the owner,
assigns or heirs of said maintenance, and no liability will be
assumed by the Township associated with required access for
maintenance purposes."
(4) Maintenance plan and agreement. A maintenance plan establishing
ownership and maintenance responsibilities for all stormwater
control facilities (identifying the specific person or entity
responsible) and detailing financial requirements and sources of
funding shall be submitted with the final plan. Any legal
agreements or covenants required to implement the maintenance
program shall be submitted (see Appendix 1). A maintenance
schedule shall be submitted in accordance with the Standardized
Maintenance Schedule in Appendix 1.49
A. The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater control
measures shall be evaluated:
49.Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 173-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:241
(1) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety and other property.
Such measures shall include, but not be limited to, such actions as
are required for the following:
(a) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no
greater after development than prior to development activities.
(b) To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which will not adversely impact
the health on, or value of, any affected properties.
(c) No discharge of toxic materials into any stormwater
management system will be permitted.
(d) Where applicable, stormwater management facilities shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management) of Title 25, Environmental Protection,
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act as authorized by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(e) Stormwater management facilities that involve a state highway
shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
(f) Stormwater runoff from a project site shall flow directly into a
natural watercourse or into an existing storm sewer system, or
onto adjacent properties in a manner similar to the runoff
characteristics of the predevelopment flow.
(g) Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed
to another unless the watersheds are subareas of a larger
watershed that are tributary to a common point of interest
within or near the perimeter of the property. Transfer of runoff
from one watershed to another under any other circumstances
shall only be approved at the discretion of the Township.
Documentation shall be provided that peak flow rates are not
increased following development and there will be no
detrimental impact in downstream areas.
(h) All stormwater runoff flowing over the project site shall be
considered in the design of the stormwater management
facilities.
(i) For any stormwater management facility requiring a permit to
be issued by PADEP, said permit, along with the supporting
report and plans used to secure the permit, shall also be
submitted.
§ 173-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-13
1:242
(2) Fees and expenses.
(a) The Township may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP
operations and maintenance plans to defray review costs
incurred by the Township. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
(b) The fees required by this Part may cover:
[1] Administrative/clerical costs of 5%.
[2] The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan
by the Township Engineer.
[3] The site inspections, including, but not limited to,
preconstruction meetings, inspections during construction
of stormwater BMPs, and final inspection upon completion
of the stormwater BMPs.
[4] Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any
provisions of this Part, correct violations, and assure
proper completion of stipulated remedial actions.
(3) Design storms.
(a) Design storms. Stormwater management facilities on all
development sites shall control the peak stormwater discharge
for the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and onehundred-
year design storms. For developments larger than
three acres, the SCS twenty-four-hour, Type II rainfall
distribution shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff in
pre- and post-development conditions, as well as for designing
runoff control facilities (except storm runoff collection and
conveyance facilities). For development sites less than three
acres, the Rational Method may be utilized to determine peak
flows and the Modified Rational Method used for design and
routing of runoff control facilities.
(b) All stormwater retention/detention facilities shall be designed
with emergency overflow facilities for the one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour duration storm, unless positive measures are
installed to control the inflow so as not to exceed the safe
capacity of the retention/detention facility.
(c) The stormwater volume required for all stormwater retention/
detention facilities shall be that volume necessary to handle
runoff of a one-hundred-year storm in any development, less
that volume discharged during the same storm period used to
calculate the volume of rainfall, at the approved release rate.
(d) The SCS Type II rainfall distribution shall be used for all
analyses. The design storm frequencies for the watershed are:
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:243
Design Storm
(years)
Rainfall Depth 24 Hours
(inches)
1 1.97
2 2.46
5 3.3
10 3.8
25 3.9
50 4.4
100 5.0
(For additional information or data on other return periods,
consult the "Rainfall Duration Frequency Tables for
Pennsylvania", produced by PADEP, Office of Resource
Management, Bureau of Dams and Waterways Management,
Division of Stormwater Management, Harrisburg.)
(4) The stormwater management plan shall consider all of the
stormwater runoff flowing over the project site. Runoff calculations
shall be made to ensure that runoff from the upstream watershed
area can be accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements and
watercourses, etc., on the site.
(5) Predevelopment conditions. The cover type for all sites will be
considered to be woods with light underbrush in good hydrologic
conditions at the time of proposed development. All hydrologic
parameters used to calculate peak flow rates shall use the
appropriate coefficients pertaining to these conditions, as
recommended in the hydrologic methodologies noted in
§ 173-13A(9).
(6) Post-development conditions. The hydrologic parameters used to
develop peak flow rates shall be reflective of anticipated soil runoff
characteristics following grading and development of the site.
(7) Normally dry, open-top storage BMPs should drain in 24 to 72
hours from the end of the storm.
(8) Joint development of control systems. Stormwater control systems
may be planned and constructed in coordination with two or more
developments, provided they are in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Part.
(9) Method of computation.
(a) All computations used in conjunction with the analysis and
design of stormwater management facilities shall be based on
one or more of the following methods:
§ 173-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-13
1:244
[1] TR-55, Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No.
55.
[2] TR-20, Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No.
20.
[3] Modified Rational Method.
[4] Penn State Runoff Model.
[5] Virginia Tech/Penn State Runoff Model.
(b) These methods for determining peak discharge shall be used
to:
[1] Determine predevelopment runoff conditions;
[2] Analyze the impact of development; and
[3] Perform calculations in the design of any detention/
retention facilities used in controlling runoff.
(c) These methods of runoff computation developed and used by
the NRCS and other authorities are hereby adopted by the
Township.
(d) The use of the Basic Rational Method in estimating runoff may
be employed in the design of the storm sewer system within
the development. The "storm sewer system" shall be
interpreted as the conduits, culverts, inlets and appurtenant
features for the conveying of stormwater to, through or from a
development site to the point of final discharge or control
facility. The Rational Method shall not be used in the analysis
of stormwater runoff from the development in its entirety or in
conjunction with the design of any retention/detention
facilities or other runoff control measures.
(10) Release of detained stormwater. The approved peak release rate of
stormwater from all retention/detention facilities for any storm
event shall be that which is experienced prior to development for
the same storm event up to and including the one-hundred-year
storm. Therefore, all retention/detention facilities shall provide
staged release of the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and
one-hundred-year storms.
(11) Stormwater management facilities. Design of stormwater
management facilities outlined in the plan requires that runoff
calculations be made for the site and areas which contribute
drainage to the site. These calculations should be based on land
use, time of concentration and other standard aspects of hydraulic
analysis.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:245
(a) Temporary control measures/facilities. Runoff calculations of
the site's condition during development will be used to size
temporary control measures.
(b) Permanent control measures/facilities. In most cases,
permanent control measures/facilities shall be designed to
assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no
greater after development than prior to development activities,
utilizing the one-hundred-year storm as a basis for
calculations. Storm sewer systems may be designed for the
twenty-five-year storm, provided that the runoff will naturally
drain to the detention facility; otherwise the storm sewer
system must be designed for the one-hundred-year storm
event. Runoff calculations must be made to ensure that runoff
from the upstream watershed area can be accommodated by
the pipes, drainage easements, watercourses, etc., on the site
as well as those downstream of the site to a point of permanent
discharge. Where downstream facilities are not adequate to
convey the flow, reduced release rates shall be considered to
ensure no detrimental impact to the downstream facilities shall
occur as a result of the development. A drainage easement
shall be provided to contain and convey the one-hundred-year
flood event throughout the project site, beginning at the
furthest upstream property line of the proposed development
in the watersheds.
(12) Runoff calculations shall also include complete hydrology and
hydraulic analysis of all downstream swales and pipe facilities to
the discharge point as well as erosion control facilities, including,
but not limited to:
(a) Velocities of flow, slopes, capacity and roughness coefficient of
conduits and grassed waterways.
(b) Capacity of sediment basins and permanent holding ponds.
(c) All drainage facilities shall be designed to contain the energy
grade line for the peak flow rate for the design storm within
the structures a minimum of two feet below the surface
elevation. The hydraulic grade line must be within the pipe.
Swales and channels shall provide at least one foot of
freeboard. Backwater effects of pipes discharging under
surcharge conditions shall be included.
(13) Single-family lots. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
(a) Retention/detention facilities shall be constructed for all
existing single-family lot developments or single-family lots
located in land developments which for terrain reasons cannot
utilize the development's retention/detention systems.
Retention facilities shall consist of gravel-filled sumps, ponds,
§ 173-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-13
1:246
tanks or other approved facilities, sized in accordance with
standard details in the Township Construction Standards.
Single-family lots qualifying as a small development may utilize
the small project stormwater management plan application as
outlined in § 173-10.
(b) Stormwater facilities for single-family lots proposing greater
than 5,000 square feet of impervious area shall be calculated
using the methods outlined in § 173-13.
(14) Easements.
(a) Easements for stormwater management facilities shall be
required to have a minimum width of 20 feet. Where a
subdivision or land development is, or will be, traversed by a
watercourse, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage
easement of a width sufficient for the purpose, but not less
than 20 feet. The stormwater detention facilities must be
provided within a drainage easement. An access easement
must be provided from the public right-of-way to the
stormwater detention facility with a minimum width of 20 feet.
[1] Stormwater management easements are required for all
areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver
is granted by the Township.
[2] Stormwater management easements shall be provided by
the property owner if necessary for access for inspections
and maintenance, or preservation of stormwater runoff
conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and other
BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The
purpose of the easement shall be specified in any
agreement under § 173-13.
[3] Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater
management BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent
real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the
land.
[4] Operation and management plans for stormwater
management approved pursuant to 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102 after the date of this Part shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
[5] If a conservation easement is provided, the long-term
ownership, access, maintenance, and use restrictions must
be identified on the recording plan.
(15) Flood-prone areas.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:247
(a) Land identified as flood-prone on maps issued by the Federal
Insurance Administration shall be subject to the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program and shall comply with
the provisions of the Township Floodplain Ordinance.50
(b) The one-hundred-year floodplain shall be delineated by one of
the following methods:
[1] The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
[2] A hydrologic report prepared by an individual registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such
duties. Calculations and channel hydraulic characteristics
used to determine floodplain limits shall be provided.
(c) Municipal liability disclaimer. Approval of a stormwater
management plan by the Township shall not be construed as an
indication that said plan complies with the requirements, laws,
or standards of any agency of the commonwealth, which may
or may not govern said activity.
(16) Stormwater detention facilities.
(a) If retention/detention facilities are utilized for the development
site, the facility shall be designed such that the postdevelopment
peak runoff rates from the development site are
controlled to those rates defined by the subarea release-rate
percentage or no-harm evaluation for the one-, two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year design storms;
except, however, where downstream flooding problems exist,
the Township may impose additional reduced release-rate
criteria.
(b) All retention/detention facilities shall be equipped with
multistage outlet structures to provide discharge control for
the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundredyear
storm frequencies. Provisions shall also be made for safely
passing the post-development one hundred-year storm runoff
flows without damaging (i.e., impairing the continued function
of) the facilities.
(c) Shared-storage facilities, which provide detention of runoff for
more than one development site, may be considered within a
single subarea. Such facilities shall meet the design criteria
contained in this section. In addition, runoff from the
development sites involved shall be conveyed to the facility in a
manner so as to avoid adverse impacts, such as flooding or
erosion, to channels and properties located between the
development site and the shared-storage facility.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Floodplain Management.
§ 173-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-13
1:248
(d) Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple-use
facilities, such as lakes, ballfields or similar recreation uses,
are encouraged wherever feasible.
(e) As a general rule, detention facilities will be designed as dry
basins, although wet facilities will be considered in specific
situations where they can be shown to represent a significant
amenity to the development and/or the Township. Facilities
should be designed to cause water depths as shallow as
possible.
(f) Except in approved wet basins, stormwater detention basins
will be designed to drain completely. A low-flow channel shall
be installed to facilitate the conveyance of storm sewer flows to
the basin outlet during frequent storm events. All interior
portions of the basin will slope toward the outlet or low flow
channel at a minimum slope of 1%. Refer to the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Standard Details, Detail
SW-04. All impoundment areas shall be adequately under
drained to prevent long-term ponding of water. [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
(g) Detention facility outfall pipes shall have a minimum of two
antiseepage collars installed along the profile of the pipe.
Antiseepage collars shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete. Refer to the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Standard Details, Detail SW-05. [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
(h) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the
design of the detention facilities include:
[1] Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and
installed to prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundmenttype
structures should be protected from soil erosion.
[2] Control and removal of debris, both in the storage
structure and in all inlet or outlet devices, shall be a design
consideration.
[3] Inflow and outflow structures and other structures shall be
protected and designed to minimize safety hazards.
[4] The water depth of a storage pond which is not fenced
shall be limited to two feet, unless approved by the
Township Engineer. Otherwise, appropriate landscaped
fencing at least four feet in height shall be required.
[5] Side slopes of storage ponds shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1
horizontal to vertical dimension. Design of facilities with
flatter slopes for aesthetics and as a maintenance
consideration are encouraged. Refer to the Township
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:249
Minimum Construction Standards and Standard Details,
Details SW-01 and SW-02. Crest of the embankment shall
have a minimum width of not less than 10 feet. [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
[6] The embankment shall be level along the crest and along
the longitudinal center line. In the event that the
embankment would be overtopped by stormwater runoff,
the flow over the crest and down the downstream slope
would be sheet flow rather than being concentrated and
eroding away the embankment. No trees shall be planted
on the embankment. Should any type of protective fence
placed be around the impoundment, the fence shall not be
placed on the embankment or across the primary or
emergency spillways.
[7] Landscaping shall be provided for the facility which
harmonizes with the surrounding area.
[8] All stormwater detention facilities shall be screened from
view of existing roads or streets located within the
Township, which is a minimum of six feet in height with
sufficient access for maintenance vehicles. The screening
material must be approved by the Township.
[9] The facility shall be located to facilitate maintenance,
considering the frequency and type of equipment that will
be required.
[10] The facility shall be equipped with an access road at least
10 feet wide and with a maximum of grade of 15%. An
access easement with a minimum width of 20 feet to all
stormwater detention facilities shall be provided by the
owner. The access easement shall include a statement on
the recorded plan from the owner/operator of the facility
granting access to the Township.
[11] All pond outlet structures shall have suitable gaskets to
prevent leakage and piping of water through the pond
embankment. All storm pipe installed through the pond
embankment must be constructed of reinforced concrete
pipe.
[12] Detention facilities that are designed as sedimentation
facilities during construction operations shall be desilted
and regraded to original design dimensions and have all
temporary sedimentation control devices removed prior to
their conversion to detention facilities. Low-flow channels
and underdrains should be installed with the conversion of
the facility.
§ 173-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-13
1:250
§ 173-14. Construction criteria for stormwater control facilities.
Stormwater management facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
the following minimum specifications:
[13] In subdivisions or projects that are constructed in phases
with individual detention facilities employed as
sedimentation basins, said facilities shall be converted to
their ultimate use as stormwater management facilities as
soon as their tributary areas are stabilized per BCCD
standards. This conversion may be requested by the
Township, with supportive corroboration from the BCCD,
and shall be implemented as outlined in the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
[14] Except where special erosion protection measures are
provided, all disturbed areas will be graded evenly, topped
with four inches of topsoil, fertilized, seeded and mulched
by methods consistent with PennDOT Publication 408.
[15] All outfalls to and from the facility shall be provided with
end walls and erosion control measures. Refer to the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Standard
Details, Details SS-03 and SS-05. [Amended 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 201]
[16] Outlet control structures shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete (cast-in-place or precast) and shall be
recessed into the embankment wherever practical. Trash
racks for low-flow control openings should be designed to
provide four to 10 times the area of the low-flow opening,
and facilitate debris removal and maintenance. Refer to
the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Standard Details, Detail SW-03. [Amended 4-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 201]
(i) A geotechnical investigation report for the construction of the
stormwater detention/retention and infiltration facilities must
be provided, including design recommendation for
embankment construction, interior and exterior slopes,
drainage swales and infiltration areas.
A. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Township
Construction Standards as provided in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.51 In addition, all workmanship and materials
shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-14
1:251
§ 173-15. Maintenance criteria for stormwater control facilities.
Maintenance is an essential part of the successful functioning of a
stormwater management system, and the following shall be required:
B. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for clean-out. No blind connections shall be permitted.
C. All pond outlet structure pipes shall have suitable gaskets to prevent
leakage and piping of water through the pond embankment.
D. All pipe outlets shall discharge onto a stone riprap blanket to prevent
erosion of soil. Riprap will be sized considering pipe exit velocities.
E. Controls shall be installed at initial stages of earthmoving and
otherwise as outlined in the staging of earthmoving activities section of
the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
F. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined
drainagecourse which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater runoff
cannot be discharged to a defined drainagecourse, documentation of
written permission from each downstream property owner shall be
provided for all properties between the source of discharge and the
defined drainagecourse.
A. Maintenance during development. Maintenance during development of
a project shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or landowner
and shall usually include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Removal of silt from all debris basins, traps or other structures or
measures when 40% of capacity is filled with silt.
(2) Disposal of collected silt in a manner which will not adversely affect
the environment.
(3) Periodic maintenance of temporary control facilities such as
replacement of straw bale dikes, straw filters or similar measures.
(4) Establishment or reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and
mulching or sodding of scoured areas where vegetation has not
been successfully established. A developer or landowner retains
this obligation as to property he or she has developed or improved
even if the proper season for "seeding" occurs initially sometime
after the project is otherwise completed in whole or as to a
particular phase.
(5) Installation of necessary controls sufficient to protect against
problems caused by storm events within design frequencies.
(6) Removal of all temporary measures upon completion of the project.
§ 173-14 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-15
1:252
B. After acceptance of the plan by the Township. In the event that the
Township accepts public improvements in the plan, except in cases
where an agreement between the developer and the Township has been
executed to the contrary, the maintenance shall be the responsibility of
the Township and shall include, where necessary:
(1) Mowing to maintain adequate stands of grass and to control weeds.
Chemical weed control may be used if state and Township
regulations are met. Selection of seed mixtures shall reflect the
type of maintenance desired by the Township.
(2) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment to keep this material from building up in grassed
waterways and other permanent structures, thereby reducing their
capacity.
(3) Removal of trees and shrubs from pond embankments.
(4) Repair of animal burrows and removal of animals causing same.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to inspect all permanent
facilities to see that corrective action is taken where necessary.
D. Stormwater facilities located on private property shall be maintained by
the owner or his agent; however, this does not relieve the owner or his
agent of the obligation to inspect his own facilities. The Township
reserves the right to enter upon private property to make periodic
reasonable inspections and to require the owner to take necessary
corrective actions. An easement shall be recorded granting access over
private property to the stormwater facilities.
E. The owner shall convey to the Township easements and/or rights-of-way
to assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and
maintenance if required.
F. The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address and
telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information will
be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the change.
G. The owner shall establish any special maintenance funds or other
financing sources, in accordance with the approved maintenance plan.
H. The owner shall pay the amount due to the Special Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Fund.
(1) Persons installing stormwater storage facilities will be required to
pay a specified amount to the Brighton Township Stormwater
Facility Maintenance Fund to help defray the costs of periodic
inspections and annual maintenance expenses. The amount of the
deposit shall be determined as follows:
§ 173-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-15
1:253
(a) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the Township for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the Township. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed by the Township and billed
directly to the owner.
(b) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual costs
for maintenance and inspections for 10 years, as estimated by
the Township.
(c) The amount of the deposit to the maintenance fund covering
annual inspection and maintenance costs shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The Township
Manager shall determine the present-worth equivalents, which
shall be subject to the final approval of the Township
Supervisors.
(2) If a storage facility is proposed which also serves as a recreation
facility, such as a lake or ballfield, the Township may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund based on the value of
the land for public recreation purposes.
(3) If, at some future time, any storage facility (whether publicly or
privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm
sewers or another storage facility (i.e., a distributed storage
facility), the unused portion of the maintenance fund will be applied
to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm
sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit remaining
after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to the
depositor.
I. If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities, following
due notice by the Township to correct the problems, the Township shall
perform the necessary maintenance or corrective work. The owner
shall reimburse the Township for all costs.
J. Additional items may be included in the maintenance agreement where
determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all
facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Township's Solicitor.
K. Post-construction stormwater record plan.
(1) Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or utilization of the
proposed improvements, the applicant must provide the Township
a copy of a recorded post-constructed stormwater management
plan and the proof of recording for any project containing
stormwater management facilities, including storm sewers and
BMPs.
§ 173-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-15
1:254
§ 173-16. Stormwater culverts.
Stormwater culverts, bridges and similar structures serving public streets,
access driveways or other vehicular rights-of-way shall be designed to
support HS-20 loading and any other imposed loadings necessary without
structurally damaging the drainage system. Stormwater culverts, bridges
or other structures which do not serve vehicular traffic shall be designed
to support the necessary loading without structurally damaging the pipe
or affecting its capacity for drainage. Said design shall be approved by the
Township Engineer and shall comply with the following requirements:
(2) The owner shall provide a digital file, on the state plane coordinate
system, of the location of all BMPs constructed on the property.
(3) An as-built drawing shall be required for each stormwater
detention facility constructed. The drawing shall represent
certification of the volume of the facility and the depth vs. storage
relationship, as well as the elevational relationships and
dimensions of flow controls, including emergency spillways, as
appropriate. These relationships shall be shown on the drawing in
table form or in report form. In the event that these relationships
vary from the computations provided in the approved plan, revised
storm routings may be required at the discretion of the Township.
The as-built drawing shall be stamped by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor and submitted to the Township within 60 days
of the completion of the facility. No facility will be approved until
this as-built drawing has been approved by the Township.
A. Conduit size of culverts and other enclosed components of a
stormwater drainage system shall be based on computed hydrologic
and hydraulic data, and computations shall be approved by the
Township. The minimum size of any enclosed structure to be
maintained by the Township shall be 15 inches in diameter. The
minimum size of any enclosed structure to be privately maintained shall
be 15 inches in diameter, unless the design calculations, approved by
the Township Engineer, justify a lesser size. In no case shall larger
pipes/culverts be connected to smaller pipes/culverts.
B. The design of any enclosed drainagecourse shall provide a minimum
cleaning velocity of two feet per second. When the design provides for a
maximum velocity greater than 10 feet per second, the enclosed
components shall be lined or protected to prevent scour.
C. The design of headwall and endwall structures for enclosed stormwater
facilities shall be approved by the Township and shall be in accordance
with the Township Construction Standards as provided in the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.52
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 173-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-16
1:255
§ 173-17. Open stormwater drainagecourses.
§ 173-18. Inspections of stormwater management controls during
construction.
D. Energy dissipaters shall be required at the outlet side of all enclosed
culverts or similar components and shall be designed in accordance
with the Township Construction Standards as provided in Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
E. The type of materials used for enclosed culverts and similar
components shall comply with the Township Construction Standards as
provided in Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. No
stormwater facility shall be enclosed or covered over until the Township
has field-reviewed the construction.
F. Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel to or
close to the top or bottom of major embankments to avoid the
possibility of embankment failure, with the exception of those facilities
specifically designed to prohibit stormwater runoff from eroding slopes
or prevent runoff from damaging downstream properties.
A. Open stormwater drainagecourses shall be designed for a maximum
velocity not to exceed 10 feet per second and a minimum velocity of five
feet per second. A minimum velocity of one foot per second may be
authorized by the Township Engineer where a greater slope cannot be
achieved to permit the standard required minimum velocity. An open
stormwater drainagecourse shall include a lining (riprap, concrete or
bituminous) to prevent erosion. The applicant shall obtain approval
from the BCCD service, if required.
B. Permissible velocities of various channel linings (vegetation, rock lined,
riprap, gabions) shall be in accordance with Chapter 4 of the Erosion
and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual published by the
PADEP. Storm sewer outfall channels shall be trapezoidal or triangular
shape with side slopes not to exceed two horizontal to one vertical
(ratio). Storm sewer outfall channels shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 13 of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Design Manual Part 2 - Publication 13, Section 13.3, titled "Watercourse
Erosion Protection." Where drainage swales or open channels are used,
they shall be suitably designed for ease of maintenance.
A. The Township or a designated representative shall field-review the
construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater management
facilities for the development site. The permittee shall notify the
Township 48 hours in advance of the completion of the following key
development phases:
(1) At the completion of the preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of
temporary stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
§ 173-16 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-18
1:256
§ 173-19. Requirements for erosion and sediment controls.
(2) At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvement and
ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Township.
(4) On completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
(5) On completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures or
other site restoration work done in accordance with the approved
plan and permit.
B. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding
one has been field-reviewed by the Township's Engineer and approved
by the Township in writing. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the
Township shall issue a written description of the required corrections
and stipulate the time by which the corrections must be made.
C. If, during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies any site
conditions, such as subsurface soil conditions or alterations in surface
or subsurface drainage, which could affect the feasibility of the
approved stormwater facilities, said person must notify the Township
within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition and request a field
review by the Township. The Township shall determine if the condition
requires a stormwater plan modification.
D. In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of
landslide-prone soils or where other special site conditions exist, the
Township may require special precautions, such as soil tests and core
borings, full-time resident project representative services and/or
similar measures. All costs of any such measures shall be borne by the
permittee.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities.
B. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has
regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan for any
earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for any earth disturbance of one acre of
more with a point-source discharge to surface waters or the Township's
storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned
runoff (hereinafter collectively referred to as "regulated earth
disturbance activities"). This includes earth disturbance on any portion
§ 173-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-19
1:257
§ 173-20. Post-construction runoff control requirements.
of, part of, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or BCCD must be
provided to the Township. The issuance of an NPDES construction
permit. [or permit coverage under the statewide general permit
(PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of Subsection A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available at the
project site at all times.
F. Measures shall be designed and used during construction as per
approved plans from the BCCD and in accordance with the details
presented in the PA DEP Chapter 102 Revised Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Program Manual. The following DEP
construction details shall be included and made a part of the
construction plans:
(1) Silt barrier fence.
(2) Rock construction entrance.
(3) Diversion swale.
(4) Sediment trap outlet.
(5) Rock filter.
(6) Sediment basin.
(7) Soil erosion matting.
G. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or Beaver County
Conservation District must be provided to the Township. The issuance
of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the
statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements
Subsection A.
H. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. Post-construction stormwater runoff controls for new development and
redevelopment, including operations and maintenance of stormwater
BMPs:
(1) No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a plan which
§ 173-19 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-20
1:258
§ 173-21. Sanctions.
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements
after construction is complete.
(2) The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses
(e.g., drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the
level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in "special protection"
streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93 (collectively referred to herein as "state water quality
requirements").
(3) To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated
earth disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can
be met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff
conditions, so that post-construction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (No. 392-0300-002, September 28,
2002), as amended, this may be achieved by the following:
(a) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
(b) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
filtering out of chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff; and
(c) Stream bank and stream bed protection: management of
volume and rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to
prevent physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from
scouring and erosion).
B. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
("BMPs") that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
(hereinafter "development") after regulated earth disturbance activities
are complete. These requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMPs with assurance of long-term operations
and maintenance of those BMPs.
C. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or Beaver County
Conservation District must be provided to the Township. The issuance
of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the
statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
Subsection A.
A. Public nuisance.
§ 173-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-21
1:259
(1) The violation of any provision of this Part 1 is hereby deemed a
public nuisance.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. Right of entry.
(1) BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf
of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this Part.
(2) Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Township such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
(3) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Township access to a BMP is a
violation of this Part.
C. Prohibited discharges.
(1) Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection D, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
D. Enforcement.
(1) Whenever the Township finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this Part, the
Township may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(b) The elimination of prohibited discharges;
(c) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs;
(f) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(g) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
§ 173-21 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-21
1:260
(2) Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this Part. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
(3) Inspections.
(a) DEP or its designees (e.g., BCCD) normally ensure compliance
with any permits issued, including those for stormwater
management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
Township or its designee may inspect all phases of the
construction, operations, maintenance and any other
implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(b) During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities,
if the Township or its designee determines that any BMPs are
not being implemented in accordance with this Part, the
Township may suspend or revoke any existing permits or other
approvals until the deficiencies are corrected.
(c) Inspect annually for the first five years following construction.
(d) Once a year thereafter.
(e) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm.
E. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
(1) Any building, land development or other permit or approval for
regulated earth disturbance activities issued by the Township may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Supervisors for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit;
(b) A violation of any provision of this Part; or
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others.
F. Penalties.
(1) Any person violating the provisions of this Part 1 shall be guilty of a
summary offence and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
(2) In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Part. Any
§ 173-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-21
1:261
court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions,
mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 173-21 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-21
1:262
ARTICLE II
Storm Sewers and Drainage Facilities
§ 173-22. Stormwater collection and conveyance.
A. Applicants are encouraged to design conveyance systems that
encourage infiltration and improve water quality wherever practicable.
B. Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscape banks designed to carry
the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff from
upstream contributory areas. If the runoff from stormwater collection
and conveyance facilities would drain over land to a stormwater
detention facility, the twenty-five-year frequency storm event may be
used. The Township Engineer, with the approval of the Township, may
increase the design storm as conditions require. All open channels shall
be designed with one foot of freeboard above the design water surface
elevation of the design runoff condition.
C. Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm such that a
positive discharge of this runoff is to a natural drainagecourse with a
defined bed and banks.
D. Manholes and/or inlets shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart for
pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than 450 feet apart
for larger pipe sizes.
E. Where drainage swales are used in lieu of or in addition to storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they cross.
Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 1% but shall not
exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for conveyance are
not the same as open vegetated channels.
F. On streets that must contain curbing, storm sewers shall be placed in
front of the curbing. To the greatest extent possible, storm sewers shall
not be placed directly under curbing. At curbed street intersections,
storm inlets shall be placed in the tangent section of the road.
G. Use of grassed swales or open vegetated swales in lieu of curbing to
convey, infiltrate and/or treat stormwater runoff from roadways is
encouraged. Inlets shall be placed at the center line of the shoulder
swale draining the street and shall be located no closer than four feet
from the edge of the cartway.
H. The developers shall obtain or grant a minimum twenty-foot-wide
drainage easement over all storm sewers, drainage swales, channels,
etc., that are a component of the stormwater management system when
located within undedicated land. All permanent detention basins and/or
other stormwater management facilities providing stormwater control
for other than a single residential lot shall be located within a defined
§ 173-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-22
1:263
drainage easement that allows proper legal access and maintenance
vehicle access.
I. No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or carrying
capacity of a stream, channel or drainage swale to the detriment of any
other property owner, whether upstream or downstream. All
subdivision and/or land development plans containing streams,
channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or other conveyance systems
that cross property boundaries, existing or proposed, or whose
discharge crosses such boundaries shall contain a note stating the
above.
J. Water quality inlets. Storm drainage systems that collect runoff from
parking areas and/or loading areas exceeding 5,000 square feet of
impervious coverage and discharge to stormwater management
systems, including surface or subsurface infiltration systems, shall have
a minimum of one water quality inlet per each acre of drainage area.
The purpose of water quality inlets is to remove oil, grease, and heavy
particulates or total suspended solids, hydrocarbons and other floating
substances from stormwater runoff. Methods other than water quality
inlets may be permitted if the applicant demonstrates to the Township's
satisfaction that any such alternative will be as effective and as easily
maintained. Periodic cleaning of these systems shall be addressed in
the operations and maintenance plan submitted to the Township.
K. Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, swales and
related installations shall be provided along roads to ensure removal of
stormwater from all gutters, at all low points and at intervals elsewhere
not exceeding 600 feet, such that the width of stormwater flow in any
gutter does not exceed 1/4 of the total cartway width.
L. No stormwater pipe (public or private) shall be less than 15 inches in
diameter that conveys surface runoff. The minimum pipe slope shall be
such that a minimum of two feet per second velocity is maintained.
Where a culvert or pipe is used to replace a stream, the cross-sectional
area shall be at least as large as the original stream channel. All
stormwater BMPs shall be constructed in accordance with the
Township's Standard Details.53 Minimum pipe cover shall conform to
the manufacturer's recommendations. Stormwater conveyance pipes
utilized in BMPs shall have a pipe size of four inches in diameter or
larger.
M. Where open watercourses for stormwater drainage are used, the
following standards shall apply:
(1) Artificial channels shall be of trapezoidal cross section, with the
channel width at the bottom at least 10 times the maximum water
depth which would be produced by the one-hundred-year design
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 173-22 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-22
1:264
storm and with rough, permeable and flexible sides and bottom. No
artificial channel shall be used to replace a natural stream.
(2) At all points in the drainage system, the velocity shall be less than
the erosion threshold of the conveyance material, including at the
outlet from the construction area or subdivision site.
N. All stormwater collection and conveyance facilities (pipes, swales, and
structures) shall be designed for a one-hundred-year design storm
event, unless the runoff would naturally drain overland to a stormwater
detention facility, in which case a twenty-five-year design storm event
may be used. All drainage facilities shall be designed to contain the
energy grade line for the peak flow rate for the design storm within the
structures a minimum of two feet below surface elevation. The
hydraulic grade line must be within the pipe. Swales and channels shall
provide at least one foot of freeboard above the energy grade line.
Backwater effects of pipes discharging under surcharge conditions
shall be included in the calculations.
O. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Township
Construction Standards as provided in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.54 In addition, all workmanship and materials
shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be
supplied by manufacturers of suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin 15.
P. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
Q. All pipe outlets shall discharge onto a stone riprap blanket to prevent
erosion of soil. Riprap shall be sized considering pipe exit velocities.
Concrete headwalls and splash aprons shall be constructed in
accordance with Details SS-02 and SS-03 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details, at the outfall of all storm sewers.
Where watercourses are piped and filled, concrete headwall and splash
aprons shall be constructed at both ends of the pipe. Riprap shall be
placed at end walls in accordance with Detail SS-05 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details. [Amended 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 201]
(1) Riprap. All riprap used for outlet protection, bank stabilization or
other means of protection shall be designed and installed in
accordance with specifications outlined in Penn DOT Publications
408 and 72 and Detail SS-05 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
R. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined
drainagecourse, which has a defined bed and banks. If stormwater
runoff cannot be discharged to a defined drainagecourse,
documentation of written permission from each downstream property
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 173-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-22
1:265
owner shall be provided for all properties between the source of
discharge and the defined drainagecourse.
S. Inlets of each type shown in the Township Construction Standards shall
be installed. Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on the tangent
and not on the curved portion of the intersection radii.
T. Manhole and inlet castings shall conform to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 and PennDOT Standards for
Roadway Construction. Inlet grates shall be bicycle-safe. Frames and
grates shall be cast iron or structural steel. Concrete frames shall not
be permitted.
U. Storm sewer trench. All storm sewer pipe shall be installed in
accordance with Detail SS-01 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details, Typical Storm Trench and Pipe Zones, where
located under all proposed pavements. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 201]
V. Cradles and reinforcements for sewers. All cradles and reinforcements
for sewers shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
W. Concrete encasement and anchors for sewers. All concrete encasement
and anchors for sewers shall be in accordance with Detail SS-17 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details and approved
by the Township Engineer. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
X. Connections for drop manholes. All connections for drop manholes shall
be approved by the Township Engineer.
Y. Springs. Any springs encountered during construction shall be piped
and connected to the storm sewer system or extended to a natural
watercourse as may be approved by the Township Engineer.
Z. All bridges and culverts shall be designed to support expected loads
and to carry expected flows and shall be designed to meet current
standards of PennDOT. All bridges and culverts shall be subject to all
permits required by PennDOT, Bureau of Dams and Waterways.
AA. Disposal of stormwater from roof and driveway drains.
(1) No roof, driveway or foundation drains shall be discharged onto the
right-of-way of any street or the pavement of any street. They may
be connected to an on-lot sump, the street stormwater collection
system of pipes or inlets. All residential dwellings not connected to
a private or public stormwater collection and management system
shall install a stormwater containment and disposal system at the
direction of the Township in accordance with Detail SW-07 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 201]
(2) Other acceptable methods of disposal include underground tanks,
infiltration devices, storm sewers, large-diameter pipe chamber
§ 173-22 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-22
1:266
§ 173-23. Unnatural drainage.
All points of concentrated flow discharge shall outlet directly to a welldefined
drainage channel, with a defined bed and banks. Whenever
construction stops or concentrates the natural flow of storm drainage in
such a way as to affect adjoining properties, approval of the owners shall be
obtained in writing. Approval of plans by the Township shall not authorize
or sanction drainage affecting adjoining properties.
§ 173-24. Watercourses.
Open watercourses shall not be permitted within the rights-of-way of
streets. The stopping, filling up, confining or other interference with, or
changing the course of, drains, ditches, streams and watercourses in the
Township shall not be permitted unless approval, in writing, is obtained
from the Board of Supervisors. A permit must be obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) of the Commonwealth of
systems and grassed or other ground surfaces, provided adequate
consideration is given to erosion protection, or any other method
approved by the Township. All pipes from roof drains shall be a
minimum four-inch Schedule 40 ABS, PVC or SDR 26 pipe. Fourinch
Schedule 40 PVC or ABS pipe is required for a distance of 10
feet from the foundation of the dwelling. No stormwater drainage
system shall be permitted to be constructed through any curbing
on any public street. Minimum pipe size for sump stormwater
piping is four inches.
(3) At no time will any roof, driveway or foundation drains be allowed
to be connected to the sanitary sewer line.
(4) The use of splash blocks is permitted. The location of the splash
block discharge must be a minimum of five feet from foundations
and five feet from the property line. Exceptions to this method may
be permitted in the instance of townhouses or similar structures
where common property lines exist. No stormwater runoff may be
directed in such a manner as to disturb or damage neighboring
properties.
(5) Houses located on the low side of the road can use a solid pipe or
corrugated pipe (minimum of four inches in diameter) to the rear of
the lot to a point of discharge onto a rock apron (size and
dimensions to be specified) not less than 10 feet from the adjacent
neighboring property line, provided said discharge has been
accounted for within the approved stormwater management plan
and the discharge does not impact downstream property owners.
(6) Lots shall be graded in such a manner as to divert stormwater
runoff away from adjacent property and structures consistent with
appropriate engineering standards.
§ 173-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-24
1:267
Pennsylvania for construction or changes in a watercourse subject to the
regulations of PADEP.
§ 173-25. Bridges and culverts.
All bridges and culverts shall be designed to support expected loads and
to carry expected flows and shall be designed to meet current standards
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. All bridges and culverts
shall be subject to all permits required by PADEP, Bureau of Dams and
Waterways.
§ 173-26. Intersections of private driveways and public streets.
Stormwater drainage facilities shall be placed where each private driveway
intersects with a public street. The design shall be approved by the
Township and shall meet the following requirements:
§ 173-27. References.
A. The facility shall be placed to maintain the flow line of the stormwater
drainage facility in the public street.
B. Where an apron gutter is to be utilized, said apron gutter shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Township
Construction Standards as provided in Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.55
C. Where reinforced concrete, metal or tile pipe is to be used beneath the
driveway, said pipe shall not be less than 15 inches in diameter and
shall extend across the full width of the driveway and beyond the
driveway for a distance determined by the Township. The pipe shall be
installed with flared end sections and shall be designed to support H-15
loading and any other imposed loadings necessary without structurally
damaging the system. The installation of the pipe shall be in accordance
with the Township Construction Standards as provided in Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 173-24 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-27
1:268
Part 2
MS4 Prohibited Discharges
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 173-28. Short title.
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Brighton Township MS4
Prohibited Discharge Ordinance."
§ 173-29. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Brighton Township finds that:
§ 173-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Township and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 173-29 of this Part, through provisions designed
to:
A. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion
and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood-control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water
resources.
B. Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal
separate storm sewer systems is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth,
their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated
small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s).
A. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
B. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
§ 173-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-30
1:269
§ 173-31. Statutory authority.
The Township also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.56
§ 173-32. Applicability.
All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved
stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to
regulation by this Part 2.
§ 173-33. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this Part 2 is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
§ 173-34. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this Part 2 invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this Part.
§ 173-35. Compatibility with other requirements.
Actions taken under this Part 2 do not affect any responsibility, permit or
approval for any activity regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or
ordinance.
§ 173-36. Definitions.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.
F. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all facilities and all
stormwater management best management practices (SWM BMPs) that
are implemented within the Township.
A. For the purposes of this Part 2, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
56.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 173-30 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-36
1:270
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this Part. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of
two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In
this Part, "nonstructural BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas "structural BMPs or
measures" are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)], that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials. Earth
disturbance activity is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
92, 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.57
MUNICIPALITY — Brighton Township, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(previously SCS).
57.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 173-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-36
1:271
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activities that may affect stormwater
runoff and any activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges
to a regulated small MS4.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
§ 173-36 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-36
1:272
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 173-37. General requirements.
A. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Part
2 and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code
and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards
are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended
and updated.58
B. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification to the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this Part.
C. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented, operated,
and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Part and
to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the
Clean Streams Law, and the Stormwater Management Act.59
D. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.60
58.Editor's Note: See the reference in § 173-48B.
59.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See the reference in § 173-48A.
§ 173-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-37
1:273

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 173-38. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 173-39. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
B. O&M plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 after the date of this Part shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
C. The Township may take enforcement actions against an owner for any
failure to satisfy the provisions of this Part.
A. Prior to completing construction of an SWM site plan, the property
owner shall sign and record an operations and maintenance (O&M)
agreement (see Appendix A) covering all stormwater control facilities
which are to be privately owned.61
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain all
facilities in accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Township conservation easements to
assure access for periodic inspections by the Township and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address,
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
operation and maintenance activities. In the event of a change, new
information shall be submitted by the owner to the Township within
10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Township may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 173-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-39
1:275

ARTICLE VI
Prohibitions
§ 173-40. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized, unless they are determined to
be significant contributors of pollution to a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(16) Rising groundwaters.
§ 173-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-40
1:277
§ 173-41. Roof drains and sump pumps.
The following applies to new construction commenced after the effective
date of this Part 2 and which results in the creation of over 5,000 square feet
of impervious surface area. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge
to infiltration or vegetative BMPs or to a drainage system ultimately
discharging into such BMPs.
D. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
Township or PADEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 173-40 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-41
1:278
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 173-42. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the Township to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this Part 2.
§ 173-43. Inspections.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 173-44. Enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any
approved SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures without the written
approval of DEP or a delegated county conservation district, and the
Township.
§ 173-45. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually for the first five years following construction.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of an
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this Part 2 or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to a regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers
the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
(1) The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
§ 173-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-45
1:279
§ 173-46. Violations and penalties.
§ 173-47. Appeals.
§ 173-48. References.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this Part.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this Part.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this Part 2 shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Township may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this Part 2. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this Part may appeal to the Township
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township relevant to the
provisions of this Part may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas
of Beaver County within 30 days of the Township's decision.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
§ 173-45 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-48
1:280
Part 3
Fees
ARTICLE VIII
Fees Established
[Added 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 217]
§ 173-49. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Brighton Township
Stormwater Management Fee Ordinance."
§ 173-50. Definitions.
Terms used in this Ordinance and not given a specific definition shall
be defined as set forth in applicable statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or ordinances of Brighton Township, if any, and shall
otherwise be given their ordinary and common meaning.
CUSTOMER — Any person, property owner, firm, corporation, individual,
partnership, company, association, society or group responsible for the
payment of services provided by the Brighton Township Storm Sewer
System.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU) — The measure of impervious
ground cover for a typical single-family residential property used in
assessing the fees for each parcel of property, and which has been
determined to be 4,700 square feet.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those hard surface areas that either prevent
or impede the entry of water into the soil under natural conditions, preexistent
to development, or which cause water to run off the surface in
greater quantities, or at an increased rate of flow than under natural
conditions, pre-existent to development, including, without limitation,
surfaces such as roof tops, asphalt, concrete, or any other material that has
been compacted, engineered and intended for vehicular traffic or parking,
including, but not limited to, driveways and parking lots, or other surfaces
which similarly affect the natural infiltration or runoff of natural drainage
patterns existing prior to development including, but not limited to,
walkways, patio areas and storage areas. Compacted gravel or crushed
stone surfaces are considered impervious surfaces for this analysis. In
addition, any surface designed to be constructed of permeable, pervious or
porous concrete, asphalt or pavers are also considered to be an impervious
surface for this analysis.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania,
a Second Class Township.
§ 173-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-50
1:281
OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND CAPITAL COSTS — The associated
costs for facilities, energy, manpower, materials, property acquisition,
transportation and all other services and equipment required to collect,
convey, detain, treat, pump and transport stormwater.
PROPERTY or PROPERTIES — Each lot, parcel, building or portion thereof
containing 600 or more square feet of impervious surface. Property types
identified as the basis of fee assessment are as follows:
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A property containing a single
two-family attached structure containing only two dwelling units, one
of which is constructed on top of the other and divided by a common
floor/ceiling structure with each dwelling unit having direct access
to the outside or a property containing a single two family attached
structure containing only two dwelling units, each of which are entirely
separated from the other by a continuous, common wall extending from
the basement to the roof, each unit having independent access to the
outside.
A.
NON-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Individual
Properties not used as a single-family detached property, single-family
attached property or duplex property. These may include manufactured
homes and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public
buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings or
multifamily dwellings containing three or more dwelling units, places
of worship, places of assembly, condominium units where individual
units are not townhouses, parking lots or garages, schools and other
educational facilities, storage buildings and storage areas covered with
impervious surfaces, research stations, hospitals, convalescent centers,
airports, agricultural, water reservoirs and water and wastewater
treatment plants, oil and gas well pads and communication tower site
pads.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — An
individual property containing one dwelling unit that is designed for
occupancy by one family located on one parcel of land that is attached
to another dwelling unit. This does not include individual units in a
two-family dwelling or in a multifamily dwelling containing three or
more units in which the individual dwelling units are located on a
single parcel. This definition includes individual units in a condominium
unit in which the subject lot includes only the extent of the individual
condominium unit, with adjacent driveways, access roads, and open
areas located on common ground only when condominium units are
designed as townhouses as defined herein. The inclusion of
condominium townhomes as single-family attached dwellings takes into
account impervious area located in common areas.
C.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — An
individual property containing one dwelling unit that is designed for
occupancy by one family located on one or more individual lots or
parcels of land that is not attached to another dwelling unit. This does
D.
§ 173-50 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-50
1:282
RENTAL, RATES AND CHARGES — Sums assessed, imposed and to be
collected for each property that uses, benefits from or is serviced by the
Brighton Township storm sewer system, or that discharges stormwater,
directly or indirectly, into the Brighton Township storm sewer system.
REPLACE or REPLACEMENT — The associated costs of purchasing and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are necessary to
maintain the requisite capacity and performance of the Brighton Township
storm sewer system.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM — The system of collection and conveyance,
including pipes, conduits, mains, inlets, culverts, catch basins, gutters,
ditches, channels, detention ponds, streets, curbs, drains and all devices,
appliances and facilities appurtenant thereto used for collecting,
conducting, pumping, conveying, detaining and/or treating stormwater.
STORMWATER — Runoff water from all precipitation events, snowmelt and
springs.
TOWNHOUSE — A building which contains at least three but no more
than eight single-family dwelling units, each of which are separated from
the adjoining unit or units by a continuous, common wall extending from
the basement to the roof, each unit having independent access directly
to the outside and having no units above or below. For the purpose of
this definition each dwelling unit is located on an independent tax parcel
containing no other dwelling units.
§ 173-51. Imposition of rental, rates and charges.
not include individual units in a condominium association or mobile
home community in which the subject lot includes only the extent of the
individual condominium unit or mobile home, with adjacent driveways,
access roads and open areas located on common ground.
A. That rental, rates and charges are hereby imposed upon each and every
property that is connected with, serviced by or benefits from Brighton
Township storm sewer system for the cost to operate, maintain, repair,
make replacements or improve the storm sewer system.
B. The ERU fee shall be $5.50 per month initially, effective January 1,
2019, and shall be set annually thereafter by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of the Municipality.
C. Each property that is a single-family detached residential property or
duplex residential property shall be charged for one ERU.
D. Each property that is a single-family attached residential property shall
be charged for 0.5 ERU.
E. The charge for a non-single-family residential property, or any property
not identified in Subsections C or D above, shall be assessed at a rate
based upon the number of square feet of impervious surface, as
determined by measurement through aerial photography and surface
feature evaluation, expressed in whole ERUs by rounding to the next
§ 173-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-51
1:283
§ 173-52. Uniform application of rental, rates and charges.
Rental, rates and charges shall be assessed, imposed, liened and collected
equally based upon the same calculations and procedures as to all
customer(s) for each property.
§ 173-53. Billing and collection of rental, rates and charges.
highest ERU. The charge shall be computed by multiplying the number
of ERUs for a given property by the unit rate established by Brighton
Township as set forth above in Subsection C above or as adopted by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
F. The minimum charge for every non-single-family residential property
shall be one ERU.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following properties shall be
exempt from rental, rates and charges under this Ordinance.
(a) Public street, as defined in Brighton Township's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (Township Code Chapter
180).
(b) Private street, as defined in Brighton Township's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (Township Code Chapter
180).
G. The charges as determined herein are fair and equitable and are based
upon the following:
(1) That a minimum fee per property is reasonable;
(2) That the basis for the equivalent residential unit being 4,700
square feet of impervious surface was an equally assessed
statistical sampling of properties in Brighton Township;
(3) That the requirement a property has at minimum 600 square feet of
impervious surface is reasonable based on the use of aerial
photography and surface feature evaluation to determine total
amounts of impervious surface existing in Brighton Township;
(4) That the use of aerial photography and surface feature evaluation
provides an accurate measurement for impervious surfaces;
(5) That the standard charge for an individual dwelling unit is based on
the fact that there is not a great deal of variation in size, nor any
substantial manner to control stormwater runoff.
A. Rental, rates and charges imposed by this Ordinance shall be assessed
and billed to property owners by Brighton Township on the first day of
every year beginning on January 1, 2019.
§ 173-51 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-53
1:284
§ 173-54. Rental, rates and charges constitute lien on property.
In accordance with the Municipal Claims Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq. (as
amended), all rental, rates and charges, penalties, interest, collection fees,
lien filing fees, satisfaction fees or any other charge imposed for failure to
make prompt payment shall constitute a lien upon and against the subject
property from the date of imposition and assessment.
§ 173-55. Exemptions and credits applicable to rental, rates and
charges.
Credits against rental, rates and charges are an appropriate means of
adjusting the assessment of fees owed to account for the implementation
of mitigating measures. Credits shall be applied as described in the
Stormwater Management Fee Study, prepared by Lennon, Smith Souleret
Engineering, Inc., dated December 2018. Applications for credit shall be
filed with the Township Manager.
§ 173-56. Appeal procedure.
Any property customer or owner who believes the provisions of this
Ordinance have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner
and sequence.
B. A discount of 2% shall be given for any payments made on or before
March 31. Payment at face will be required for payments made in April
and May. Thereafter, any payment will be subject to a 10% penalty.
C. The rental, rates and charges assessed and collected will not be subject
to proration or refund by Brighton Township in the event a property is
sold; provided, however, that this provision shall not bind a buyer and,
seller from making their own proration of any rental, rates and charges.
D. All costs for collection procedures, including but not limited to fees for
filing, perpetuation and satisfaction of liens, collection fees, attorney
fees, court costs, litigation expenses and charges for the service of
documents shall, upon being incurred by Brighton Township, be
imposed as a charge for nonpayment and added to the balance due on
the property customer's account.
A. The appeal of a rental, rate and charge must be delivered or mailed to
the Township Manager or his designee within 30 days of the charge
being mailed to the property customer. The appeal must be in writing
and state all reasons for the appeal. Using the information provided by
the appellant, and also any other investigation that is needed in the
Township Manager's opinion, the Township Manager, or his designee,
shall review the written submission and respond to the appeal in
writing within 30 days. The Township Manager has the authority to
adjust the rental, rate and charge if deemed appropriate.
§ 173-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-56
1:285
§ 173-57. Policies and procedures authorized.
The Brighton Township Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt such
policies and procedures as it deems appropriate and necessary to ensure
collection of storm sewer rental, rates and charges assessed and imposed
pursuant to this Ordinance. Without limitation, collection procedures may
include referral of delinquent accounts to a collection agency; filing of liens;
scire facias sur municipal lien proceedings to collect filed liens; and any and
all other measures or combination thereof that the Board of Supervisors of
the municipality may deem appropriate.
§ 173-58. Storm sewer revenue fund.
The funds received from the collection of the rental, rates and charges
authorized by this Ordinance shall be deposited into a Storm Sewer
Revenue Fund, a fund and account hereby created and dedicated to the
operation, administration, maintenance, repair and improvement of the
storm sewer system.
§ 173-59. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance or its application to any person, property or circumstances is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court, such holding shall
not be construed to affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions
of this Ordinance or its application, for such portion shall be deemed
as a separated, distinct and independent provision from the remaining
provisions that shall be and remain in full force and effect. It is hereby
declared the legislative intent that this Ordinance would have been adopted
had such invalid or unconstitutional provision of its application not been
included therein.
§ 173-60. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately.
B. A decision of the Township Manager that is adverse to the appellant
may be further appealed to the Brighton Township Board of Supervisors
within 30 days of the adverse decision being issued. The appellant shall
state in writing the grounds for further appeal and shall mail or deliver
the appeal to the Township Manager or his designee. The appellant
shall be permitted to present his appeal to the Board of Supervisors at
the next scheduled meeting that is at least seven days after receipt of
the appeal by the Township Manager. The Board of Supervisors shall
issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days of its presentation.
The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be final.
§ 173-56 BRIGHTON CODE § 173-60
1:286
Chapter 175
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 79.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 96.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 171.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 173-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-60
1:287

ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 175-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
ENERGY SOURCE OPERATIONS — Those operations that involve the
transmittal of seismic waves to model the geophysical properties of the
earth's crust.
OCCUPANT — A person who is in physical possession of a property, or a
person who has responsibility for, and control over, the activities conducted
on that property, and the persons allowed to enter that property.
OWNER — A person having a present interest in real estate abutting on a
street within the Township. In the cases of joint interests, the term shall
mean either or all persons holding a joint interest.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
STREET — A paved thoroughfare, as distinguished from an alley or a lane,
but including county and state highways.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The Township Engineer of the Township of
Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Township of Brighton,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-1
1:289

ARTICLE II
Drainage Facilities
§ 175-2. Drainage facilities required.
From and after the adoption of this article, no private road, driveway or
alley or road intended for public use joining any Township road shall be
constructed without first providing for the installation of drainage facilities
at the intersection of said road, driveway or alley with the Township road
in accordance with the specifications adopted by the Supervisors, as more
fully set forth in the Public and Private Improvement Standards, Brighton
Township Code Chapter 180.
§ 175-3. Application; fees.
Before construction of such road, driveway or alley, the person for whose
benefit said road, driveway or alley is being constructed shall file with
the Supervisors of Brighton Township an application in form prescribed by
said Supervisors setting forth the name of the applicant, the name of the
contractor, the place of construction and the type of construction. Such
application shall be accompanied by payment in the amount set forth in
the fee resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the Board
of Supervisors to cover the costs of the permit processing and inspections
hereinafter set forth.
§ 175-4. Inspection.
Upon receipt of such application, the Supervisors shall direct the Township
Engineer or other authorized representative to make an inspection of the
place of the proposed construction and ascertain the proper drainage
facilities to be provided at such intersection.
§ 175-5. Issuance of permit.
Upon receipt by the Supervisors of the report of the inspecting officer of the
Township, the Supervisors shall issue a permit to the applicant approving
such construction and directing the type of drainage facilities which must
be provided.
§ 175-6. Specifications.
A. The type of drainage facilities to be provided shall be determined in the
sole discretion of the Supervisors. Driveways shall be constructed so
they do not impair drainage within the right-of-way, alter the stability of
the improved area, or change the drainage of adjacent areas.
B. Where a drainage ditch or swale exists, the applicant shall provide for
drainage as follows:
(1) A twelve-inch minimum corrugated metal, concrete or plastic; or
(2) An apron of prescribed slope and depth.
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-7
1:291
§ 175-7. Installation.
The installation of the type of drainage facilities approved in each particular
case shall be in accordance with the specifications adopted by the
Supervisors.
§ 175-8. Inspection and report.
Upon completion of the installation of the drainage facility, the inspecting
officer of the Township shall make an inspection of the installation to
determine that the same has been completed in accordance with the
specifications of the Township and shall make a report of his findings to the
Supervisors.
§ 175-9. Responsibility for maintenance.
It shall be the obligation of the person for whose benefit said road, driveway
or alley was constructed, or his successors and assigns, to maintain and
keep open such drainage facility.
§ 175-10. Street acceptance.
No road hereafter presented to the Supervisors for acceptance as part of
the Township road system shall be accepted by the Supervisors unless each
intersecting private or public road, driveway or alley shall be equipped with
drainage facilities meeting the specifications adopted by the Supervisors,
as more fully set forth in the Public and Private Improvement Standards,
Brighton Township Code Chapter 180.
§ 175-11. Alterations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enlarge, alter or reconstruct any
existing private road, driveway, alley or road intended for public use at its
intersection with any Township road without first complying with the terms
of this article.
§ 175-12. Duty of property owner.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Supervisors, an existing drainage facility
under any private road, driveway or alley creates a drainage problem
along the adjoining Township road, the Supervisors shall notify the property
owner of such condition, which condition shall be remedied by the property
owner by the installation of proper drainage facilities within the terms of
this article within 60 days of receipt of such notice.
§ 175-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any terms of this article or who shall fail to
maintain and keep open such drainage facility or who shall stop, fill up or
damage any such drain or shall divert or change the course thereof without
the authority of the Supervisors shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
§ 175-7 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-13
1:292
proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $500 for each such offense, together
with the cost of restoring such drainage facilities, and in default of the
payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not
more than 10 days. All fines and costs so recovered shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer.
§ 175-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-13
1:293

ARTICLE III
Street Excavations
§ 175-14. Underground utility installation.
A. General conditions.
(1) All street excavations within a Township right-of-way or easement
shall require a road opening permit.
(2) No street opening shall extend across more than half of the cartway
at a time. No street shall be closed at any time without prior
approval from Brighton Township.
(3) Two-way traffic should be maintained whenever possible.
(4) Access to driveways and/or buildings located within the work zone
shall be maintained at all times.
(5) No more than 250 linear feet of excavation shall be opened at any
one time.
(6) Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 213. The permittee shall
furnish and maintain such signs, barricades, lights and flag persons
as may be necessary to provide a safe and compliant work zone.
The Township may require a separate traffic control plan under
special circumstances.
(7) Provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater runoff at all
times. The work shall not be permitted to interfere with the normal
flow of surface or subsurface water.
(8) Future maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permittee
during the first two years after completion.
B. Pavement cuts. Open cutting of any street surface is not permitted
unless authorized by the Township Engineer.
(1) Cuts in the bituminous surface shall be a neat straight line the
entire length and width of the trench using a concrete saw. Cuts
through cement concrete shall be made to a sufficient depth to
enable the removal of the concrete in a clear straight break.
(2) All excavated material should be stored in such a manner as to not
interrupt pedestrian or automobile traffic. Pedestrian crosswalks
and sidewalks shall be kept clear at all times. Loose material shall
be promptly cleaned from the streets and sidewalks using
appropriate measures.
(3) Special backfill requirements may be set by the Township Engineer.
Backfill requirements will be determined at the time of application.
(4) Restoration of asphalt pavement.
§ 175-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-14
1:295
§ 175-15. Application; fees.
Before the opening of any roads, berms, yard areas or pavement cuts,
the permittee shall file with the Supervisors of Brighton Township an
application in form prescribed by said Supervisors setting forth the name
of the applicant, the name of the contractor, the place of construction, the
type of construction and all information set forth in § 175-14 above. Such
application shall be accompanied by payment in the amount set forth in
the fee resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the Board
of Supervisors to cover the costs of the permit processing and inspections
hereinafter set forth.
§ 175-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any terms of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $500 for
each such offense, together with the cost of restoring such excavation, and
in default of the payment of such fine and costs, shall be sentenced to
imprisonment of not more than 10 days. All fines and costs so recovered
shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
(a) Temporary pavement shall consist of the appropriate
compacted backfill material and be topped with not less than
six inches of cold patch. The temporary pavement shall be
replaced with the permanent repair immediately upon suitable
weather conditions or when the work is completed.
(b) Permanent repair shall be in accordance with Drawing No.
7.2.10 (Detail RD-13).
C. Opening of berm or yard areas.
(1) All work performed in areas other than the improved surface
(asphalt or concrete) shall be performed in compliance with
Drawing No. 8.8 (Detail SS-01).
(2) All disturbed yard areas shall be graded, seeded, mulched and
restored to their original condition.
§ 175-14 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-16
1:296
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curbing Construction, Maintenance and Repair
§ 175-17. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Brighton Township Sidewalk and Curbing
Ordinance."
§ 175-18. Purpose.
The construction, maintenance, and repair of all sidewalks and curbs within
the Township of Brighton, whether new or existing, shall be done in
conformity with the following specifications, regulations and other
provisions.
§ 175-19. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or such other person as may
be from time to time designated by resolution of the Township Supervisors
to administer and enforce this article, and he is hereby authorized and
directed to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce this
article and carry out its provisions and purposes. In this responsibility, the
Township Secretary shall be assisted by the Township Engineer. The above
officials shall be the administrative authority charged with the responsibility
of carrying out the provisions of this article.
§ 175-20. Inspection.
All work done hereunder shall be inspected by the Township Engineer, or
authorized representative, representing the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
§ 175-21. Responsibility of property owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property to keep
the sidewalk immediately in front of his property in good order and repair
and at all times free and clear of all obstruction to safe and convenient
passage. This shall include keeping and maintaining such sidewalks free
and clear of all dirt, trash and similar debris, including the removal of snow
and ice, and shall also include keeping and maintaining the sidewalk free of
any merchandise, sign or other unauthorized structure or appurtenance.
§ 175-22. Notice of violation.
The Township Secretary is hereby empowered to notify property owners
when sidewalks and curbs are in need of repair or renewal, and the repair
or renewal thereof shall be made by the property owners within 30 days
after said written notice is given to said property owners. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to place the responsibility of determining
when sidewalks may become dangerous to the welfare and safety of the
§ 175-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-22
1:297
traveling public upon the Township. At all times such responsibility shall be
solely upon the property owner whose land abuts the curb or sidewalk.
§ 175-23. Municipality may do work and collect costs.
Upon the failure of any property owner to construct, pave, repave or
maintain any sidewalk, curb or gutter in compliance with notice to do so,
Brighton Township may do the same or cause the same to be done and may
levy the cost of its work on such owner as a property lien to be collected in
the manner provided by law.
§ 175-24. Removal of snow and ice.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property to allow or
permit snow or ice to lay upon, remain upon or be piled or accumulated
upon a sidewalk upon which such property abuts within the Township for
more than 24 hours.
§ 175-25. Pathways to be cleared.
It shall be the duty of the property owner or the occupant of the property,
not later than 24 hours after snow has ceased to fall, to clear or cause to
be cleared a pathway in the sidewalk upon which said property abuts. Such
pathway shall not be less than 30 inches in width and shall be thoroughly
cleaned to the extent of snow and ice or other obstruction.
§ 175-26. Placement of snow; fire hydrants.
§ 175-27. Certain trees prohibited.
It shall hereafter be unlawful to plant and maintain any trees between the
curb and corresponding sidewalk. This shall not apply to any trees presently
so growing. All new trees shall be planted on the residence side of the
sidewalk at a distance which will not interfere with the sidewalk at any time
in the future.
A. Snow or ice removed from the sidewalk area shall be placed on the
property of the owner, adjacent to the removal area. Excessive amounts
of snow or ice may be placed in the area between the sidewalk and the
curbline, but not in the street. If the snow and ice is frozen so hard that
it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement or damaging the
base of the footpath, the owner of the property shall cause the sidewalk
abutting or adjacent to such property to be strewn with ashes, sand,
sawdust or any suitable abrasive material and shall, as soon thereafter
as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean such sidewalks.
B. Fire hydrants shall not be covered with snow or ice.
C. It shall be unlawful to throw, shovel or plow snow into or upon any roads
and streets within the Township with the intent of allowing such snow
to remain on such roads and streets.
§ 175-22 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-28
1:298
§ 175-28. Open gutters as rain conductors.
No open gutters for conducting rainwater or drainage of any kind will be
permitted to run over the top of the sidewalk or curbs. All underground rain
conductors shall be of approved plastic pipe material constructed under the
sidewalk and through the curb to the gutter.
§ 175-29. Permits; fees.
§ 175-30. Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act
standards.
Any and all terms, conditions, specifications or requirements of this article
shall be consistent with the terms, conditions, standards and specifications
as may be established by or in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act or any codes, regulations, standards, specifications,
administrative requirements, etc., as may be adopted by the appropriate
and authorized agencies to implement the terms and conditions of said Act
or any amendments thereto as may be hereinafter adopted or implemented
by any federal, state or county regulatory agency as if said standards,
conditions, regulations, codes or requirements were incorporated herein at
length.
A. No persons or person, firm or corporation shall construct or repair any
sidewalk, curb or gutter without first applying for and obtaining from
the Township Secretary a permit for the same use. The application for
such permit shall set forth:
(1) The full name and address of the owners of the land affected;
(2) The name and address of the contractor, or the person to perform
the work;
(3) The precise location of the property upon which the work is to be
done;
(4) The length of the proposed project;
(5) Contractor's compliance with the Workers' Compensation Act of
1990, as amended, if applicable; and
(6) Such other pertinent information as may be considered necessary.
B. No permit will be required for new curbing, gutters or sidewalk to be
constructed in an approved subdivision which is to be installed by the
developer.
C. Such application shall be accompanied by payment in the amount set
forth in the fee resolution adopted and amended from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors to cover the costs of the permit processing and
inspections.
§ 175-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-31
1:299
§ 175-31. Curb specifications.
Curbing shall be constructed in conformity with the specifications of
§ 180-31 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. See also
Detailed Drawing SD-12.
§ 175-32. Sidewalk specifications.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in conformity with the specifications of
§ 180-34 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. See also
Detailed Drawing RD-09.
§ 175-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation constructing or repairing
sidewalks, curbs or gutters or planting trees in violation of any of the
provisions of this article or failing to keep his sidewalk clear of debris
(§ 175-21), ice and snow (§§ 175-24 and 175-25), or improperly disposing
of snow or ice around fire hydrants and in the streets of the Township
(§ 175-26) shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge,
be subject to a penalty of $25 for the first offense and $50 for each
subsequent offense, and costs of prosecution.
§ 175-31 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-33
1:300
ARTICLE V
Driveway Design
§ 175-34. Driveways; access onto Township streets.
§ 175-35. Application; fees.
Before the construction of any driveways, the permittee shall file with
the Supervisors of Brighton Township an application in form prescribed
by said Supervisors, setting forth the name of the applicant, the name
of the contractor, the place of construction, the type of construction and
all information set forth in § 175-34 above. Such application shall be
accompanied by payment in the amount set forth in the fee resolution
adopted and amended from time to time by the Board of Supervisors to
cover the costs of the permit processing and inspections hereinafter set
forth.
§ 175-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any terms of this article or who shall fail
to design, construct, or maintain as provided in this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, pay a fine of not more than
A. General requirements. All driveways shall be located, designed,
constructed, and maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or be
inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street.
B. General location restrictions. All driveways shall be permitted at
locations in which:
(1) Sight distance is adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the access driveway;
(2) The free movement of normal highway traffic is not impaired;
(3) The driveway will not create a hazard; and
(4) The driveway will not create an area of undue traffic congestion on
the highway.
(5) Adequate sight distance at all driveways shall conform to PennDOT
latest Publication 282 (Highway Occupancy Permit Handbook) and
Pennsylvania Code Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441 (Access to
and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads).
C. Residential Driveway Drawing No. 11.2.5 (SD-01). Within the right-ofway
of Township streets, residential driveways shall be constructed in
accordance with Drawing No. 11.2.5, Residential Driveway Detail.
D. Grade. Driveways shall be constructed to conform to the grade of the
finished shoulders. All descending or ascending grades of driveways
greater than 4% shall begin at the street right-of-way. No stormwater
shall be permitted to drain onto Township streets.
§ 175-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-36
1:301
$500 for each such offense, together with the cost of restoring such
driveway, and in default of the payment of such fine and costs shall be
sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 10 days. All fines and costs so
recovered shall be paid to the Township Treasurer.
§ 175-36 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-36
1:302
ARTICLE VI
Geophysical and Seismic Testing
§ 175-37. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, entity, business or corporation to
conduct any surveying/exploration activities within the Township public
street rights-of-way by the use of energy source operations, including,
without limitation, vibrating machines, vibroseis equipment, thumper
trucks or any other vehicles or equipment that cause vibrations, without
first obtaining a road occupancy permit therefor from the Township. To the
extent an applicant, pursuant to this article, seeks to conduct energy source
operations on Township property, including but not limited to Township
roads, highways, and real estate, the Board of Supervisors has the express
right to grant or deny any application under this article.
§ 175-38. Permit application; fee; procedure.
§ 175-39. Term of permit.
The term of a permit issued under this article shall be for one year
beginning on the date of approval of the permit, and all energy source
operations shall be completed within said term. The applicant shall notify
A. Application for a geophysical and seismic testing permit shall be made
with Brighton Township and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Address of the applicant;
(3) Type of geophysical methods to be used and the purposes therefor;
(4) A map designating a testing area and showing the roadways to be
occupied and location of all points of use and the energy source to
be used at each point;
(5) A traffic control plan for any operations or testing that will impede
or redirect traffic on a public right-of-way; and
(6) A certificate of insurance covering its proposed operations. The
certificate shall include the name and telephone number of an
individual to contact in case of a claim for personal injury or
property damage.
B. A nonrefundable permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors for processing the application, preparing the permit and
monitoring the work under the permit shall accompany each
application. On receipt of such application, the Zoning Officer and/or
Township Engineer shall prepare a report showing all Township
facilities or infrastructure that may be negatively affected by the
proposed activity located in the testing area shown in such application.
§ 175-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-39
1:303
the Township a minimum of three business days in advance of the actual
commencement of energy source operations. Once operations have
commenced, in the event the applicant is rendered unable, wholly or in part,
by circumstances beyond the applicant's control, to complete operations
within the remaining term of the permit, then the time for completion may
be extended, at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors, for a period
of time not to exceed six months, upon written request by the applicant
setting forth full particulars of the circumstances causing the delay.
§ 175-40. Operations in general.
§ 175-41. Energy level restrictions.
A. All geophysical operations within Township public street rights-of-way
shall be limited to the areas approved by the Township.
B. The applicant shall employ a competent person, who shall be on the job
site during the entire period of testing, to mitigate any potential
damage to public or private property. The applicant shall also designate
a point of contact who will respond within 24 hours to any request from
the Zoning Officer for information regarding the applicant's testing
operations.
C. The Township permit provides no approval or authorization to the
applicant to enter upon or cross private property.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for and shall settle all reasonable and
legitimate claims, demands, and causes of action relating to property or
persons arising out of or as a result of the applicant's operations under
this permit and shall handle all such claims in a fair, reasonable and
expedient manner.
A. The applicant shall engineer all source locations so that no structure
subject to limitations contained in § 175-44B herein shall be subject to
any peak particle velocity greater than 0.50 inch per second.
B. Using industry standard equipment and techniques, the applicant shall
monitor and record, during operations, all pertinent locations to ensure
compliance with the maximum peak particle velocity established by
Subsection A. If peak particle velocity for any test exceeds said
maximum, the engineer shall notify the Township Manager and cease
all operations until corrections are made. The applicant shall maintain
all documentation of monitoring activities during the term of the
permit, and 30 days thereafter, and make said documentation available
upon request for inspection by the Township.
C. The applicant shall obtain location maps, if available, for public water,
sewage and stormwater pipelines located in the testing area. A
pretesting drive-through inspection of the testing areas shall be
conducted with a Township representative to identify Township
infrastructure locations. The applicant shall conduct all energy source
§ 175-39 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-41
1:304
§ 175-42. Hours of operation and safety.
§ 175-43. Lands, streets, rights-of-way, and easements.
operations in a manner so as to not damage, interrupt, or otherwise
interfere with said infrastructure. Where possible, testing will not be
conducted over any infrastructure; and where documentation can be
provided by the Township of at-risk infrastructure, no testing in the
area shall be conducted. The applicant shall use this information to
ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
A. Energy source operations shall be prohibited between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Mondays through Saturdays, and all day Sundays
and on holidays.
B. The applicant shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the safety
of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent to
roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school
transportation). Where there is anticipated heavy or frequent vehicular
traffic associated with energy source operations, the applicant will
provide flagmen to ensure the safety of children and other persons at or
near schools, school bus stops, public buildings, and parks and include
adequate signs and/or other warning measures for truck traffic and
vehicular traffic.
A. The applicant shall restore, at its own cost, Township roadways or
rights-of-way used in its operations to the original condition prior to its
testing operations, free of damage, including ruts or any injury to
landscaping.
B. The applicant shall ensure that its operations will not interfere with the
free and safe flow of traffic. When operations are immediately adjacent
to the pavement, all equipment shall be parked and/or operated in one
lane of traffic.
C. The applicant shall notify the Township of any equipment to be operated
on Township streets that will exceed the maximum posted weight limit
and obtain any special permitting required. An excess maintenance
agreement may, at the sole discretion of the Township, be required for
any such testing operations where a posted weight restriction will be
exceeded by the applicant.
D. Cables placed on the pavement within rights-of-way must be arranged
so they do not create a hazardous condition or rumble-strip effect. All
cables which cross roadways must be securely anchored in the roadway
with materials that will not damage and/or puncture the pavement.
Nails, spikes, and similar materials used for anchors shall not be placed
inside the pavement edge. Cables shall be placed outside of cartway so
as to not hinder snow removal efforts from November 1 through March
31. Cables shall not remain in place longer than 60 days from the date
of installation.
§ 175-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-43
1:305
§ 175-44. Testing.
§ 175-45. Bond, insurance, and indemnity.
E. Operations under the permit shall be barred when the Township
determines that the ground conditions are such that the operations
would cause ruts deeper than five inches in the rights-of-way or
easements. In addition, when ground conditions would cause the
tracking of mud, gravel, rock, or debris onto the roadway surface or any
right-of-way or other Township improvements in a way that creates a
safety hazard or potential for damage to vehicles, operations shall
include measures to prevent such hazardous tracking. In the event that
hazardous tracking occurs, the applicant shall immediately clean the
roadway of all mud, gravel, rock or debris and cease operations until
such time as appropriate preventive measures are implemented to
ensure that hazardous tracking does not occur.
F. Each testing crew performing work that impedes the flow of traffic,
such as testing on Township streets or rights-of-way, shall provide
appropriate traffic control. The applicant shall furnish at its cost
adequate signs, barricades, flares, flagmen, etc., as necessary, to
protect the traveling public.
A. The applicant shall furnish to the Township Manager, or designee, a
schedule of each week's test plans. When thumper trucks are utilized
on Township roads, the Township Engineer shall inspect the road before
and after testing. The applicant shall pay any and all costs incurred by
the Township as a result of these inspections.
B. No energy source operation shall subject any building intended for
human habitation, utility line, water well, or underground hazardous
waste storage/disposal site to a peak particle velocity greater than 0.6
inch per second.
C. The applicant shall notify the Township Manager, or designee, within 24
hours after the occurrence of any violation of these permit
requirements. The Township is hereby authorized to issue stop-work
orders for any violation of the provisions contained in this article.
A. The applicant shall submit to the Township a performance bond in the
amount of $250,000 from a surety authorized to do business in the
commonwealth. The performance bond shall be valid from the date that
the permit is issued for a period of six months after the work under the
permit has been completed. The bond shall provide, but not be limited
to, the following condition: there shall be recoverable by the Township,
jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages,
loss or costs suffered by the Township in connection with the applicant's
geophysical operations within the Township. The bond shall contain the
following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this
bond may not be canceled by the surety company until 60 days after
§ 175-43 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-45
1:306
§ 175-46. Violations and penalties.
A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined
in an amount not to exceed $500. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
receipt by the Township, by registered mail or written notice, of such
intent to cancel or not to renew."
B. Prior to conducting any operations hereunder, the applicant and/or its
contractors shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the Township
showing the Township as an additional insured with respect to
operations conducted within the Township and showing liability
insurance coverage covering commercial, personal injury, and general
liability in amounts not less than $1,000,000 per person, $1,000,000
per occurrence, and $1,000,000 property damage.
C. The applicant shall protect, indemnify, defend and hold the Township,
its officers, employees, agents, and representatives harmless from and
against all claims, demands, and causes of action of every kind and
character for injury to, or death of, any person or persons, damages,
liabilities, losses, and/or expenses, occurring or in any way incident to,
arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents' or
representatives' operations under this permit, including attorneys' fees,
and any other costs and expenses incurred by the Township in
defending against any such claims, demands, and causes of action.
Within 30 days of receipt of same, the applicant shall notify the
Township, in writing, of each claim for injuries to, or death of, persons
or damages or losses to property occurring or in any way incident to,
arising out of, or in connection with its or its contractors', agents', or
representatives' operations conducted under this permit.
D. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked upon breach of any term
or condition contained herein.
E. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any permit
granted hereunder shall not be effective unless and until a copy of the
permit, signed by an authorized officer of the applicant, the
performance bond, and the certificate of insurance have been filed with
the Township Manager.
§ 175-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-46
1:307
Chapter 180
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 5.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 47.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 175-46 BRIGHTON CODE § 175-46
1:308
Part 1
Subdi[vAidsioopnt eAdn6d- L1a4n-1d9 D93evBeyloOpmrde. nNto S. t8a6n]dards
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 180-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article
V, Section 501, of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,
as amended by Act 170 of December 21, 1988, and all subsequent
amendments.62
§ 180-2. Adoption and effectiveness.
This chapter shall become effective upon adoption by the Township of
Brighton Board of Supervisors pursuant to procedures outlined in Sections
504, 505 and 506 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.63
§ 180-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of Brighton."
§ 180-4. Applicability.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected, no
street, sanitary sewer, stormwater sewer, water main or other facilities in
connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for public use or travel, no grading of the property shall be commenced or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting said improvements,
except in strict accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
§ 180-5. Exclusions and waiver.
A. Land development that involves the conversion of an existing detached
or semidetached single-family dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless intended as a condominium, are hereby
excluded from regulations contained herein, as are additions of
accessory buildings, including farm buildings, on lots upon which a
principal structure exists, and additions or conversions of buildings or
rides within the confines of an amusement park. Newly acquired land to
be included within the confines of an amusement park, as defined, is not
excluded from the application of regulations contained herein.
B. If land development is proposed on a lot of record, verification of which
shall be supplied by the applicant, the required procedure for the
recording of plats is hereby waived.
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
63.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-6
1:309
§ 180-6. Compliance required.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect alter or repair
any structure or building upon land in a subdivision shall be issued and
no building shall be erected in a subdivision or grading of the property
commenced unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved and
recorded where required, and until the improvements therewith have either
been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter provided.
§ 180-7. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To guide the orderly and efficient development of the Township.
B. To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
residents of the Township.
C. To provide for the equitable processing of subdivision and land
development plans by establishing uniform procedures and standards.
§ 180-6 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-7
1:310
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 180-8. Interpretation.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 180-9. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or phrases shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated and
shall be literally applied by the Township of Brighton staff, members of the
Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, consultants and by the Board
of Supervisors.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A tract of land or an area used principally as the
location for permanent amusement structure or rides.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Plans, profiles, cross sections and construction details
showing the exact final location, elevation, grade, size and material used in
the construction of all facilities installed, to the same scale as the approved
construction drawings.
AVAILABLE SEWER — A municipal sewer is considered available if:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual or an
association of individuals.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive when approved as a variance.
Connection is recommended and/or required by the regulations of the
Township of Brighton or any Authority incorporated by the Township;
A.
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:311
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated earth disturbance activities, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this chapter.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton, Beaver
County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER YARD — Open space which includes landscaped areas, fences,
walls, berms, or a combination thereof used to physically separate or screen
one use or property from another.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
or permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to mobile or modular
homes, signs, billboards, barns, silos, stables and sheds.[Amended
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps or patios.
BUILDING LINE — A line located on the lot at a fixed distance from the
street right-of-way line and interpreted as being the nearest point that a
building may be constructed to the street right-of-way line. The building
line shall limit the location of porches, decks and similar construction, steps
excepted, to the face of the building.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
120]
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way surfaced for vehicular
use. Width is determined from face of curb to face of curb or from one edge
of driving surface to the other edge of driving surface.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — The triangular area formed by two intersecting
street center lines and a line interconnecting points established on each
center line, 75 feet from their point of intersection. This entire area is to
remain clear of obstructions to sight above a plane established 3 1/2 feet in
elevation from grade level at the intersection of the street center line.
CLUSTER DESIGN OR DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision in which individual
lots are designated in somewhat tighter arrangements than a conventional
subdivision with a significant percentage of the total plot or parcel being
dedicated and held as common open space.
Connection is recommended and/or required by the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act64 ; or
B.
An existing municipal sewer line, with sufficient capacity, is located
within 1,000 feet of the nearest point of a subdivision.
C.
64.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:312
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site, designed
and intended for the common use of the residents of a planned residential
development or mobile or modular home park. Common open space may be
of two types:[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Beaver County Conservation
District.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
CONTOUR — A line which joins all points of equal elevation on the ground.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which all or most of a
plot or parcel is divided into lots and streets with little or no area reserved
as common open space. (See "cluster design or development.")
CORNER LOT — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets or other public spaces, the angle of intersection
being not more than 135°.
COVENANT — An obligation defined by law or agreement, the violation of
which can be restrained by court action. These are usually stated in the
deed.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A street or road with one end open to traffic
and pedestrian access and permanently terminated at the other end by a
vehicular turnaround.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.[Added
3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the Township.[Added 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 134]
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT — Any land
development that, because of its character, magnitude or location, will have
substantial effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of citizens in more than
one municipality.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of land, including
a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
IMPROVED — Land area of a site containing recreational structures
and facilities, as long as the total impervious surfaces in the area (paved
bike paths, tennis or basketball courts, roofs, etc.) constitute no more
than 5% of the improved common open space.
A.
UNIMPROVED — Land area of a site void of buildings, structures,
parking areas and street rights-of-way.
B.
CUL-DE-SAC — The vehicular turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac
street
A.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:313
public utilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan," when used
in this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in
this definition.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
DISTRICT OR ZONING DISTRICT — An area constituted by or pursuant to
Chapter 195 of the Brighton Township Code of Ordinances, and delineated
by text and map as to location, extent, nature and contents.[Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
DRIVEWAY, COMMON — An improved vehicular access facility serving a
maximum of two parcels or lots which may be under separate or common
ownership which connects the parcels and provides access to a public
street. All subdivisions proposing to create a common driveway shall submit
a common driveway maintenance agreement for approval prior to plan
approval. Said maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the plat.
DRIVEWAY, MULTI — An improved vehicular access facility serving three or
more parcels or lots shall be considered a private street and shall comply
with the design and construction requirements for a private street. (See
"street, private.") All subdivisions proposing to create a multi driveway
shall submit a multi driveway maintenance agreement for approval prior to
plan approval and comply with the requirements of § 180-65, Performance
requirements, § 180-66, Performance guaranties, and § 180-67, Procedure
for release from improvement bond; fees.
DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE — An improved vehicular access facility serving only
one parcel or lot which connects and provides access to a public street but
which does not provide access to any other lot or parcel under separate
ownership.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
EASEMENT — A grant or dedication to the general public, a corporation
or a certain person, by a property owner or developer of a right-of-way or
parcel of land for a specific purpose or use.
ELEVATION — A point or series of points (see contours) which are a known
vertical distance above or below a predetermined elevation datum. All
elevations used shall be based on United State Geological Survey Datum.
ENGINEER — See "Township Engineer."
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
FEES-IN-LIEU-OF-DEDICATION — Fees authorized by the Municipalities
Planning Code for recreation land and facilities in lieu of the provision of
public open space.[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 146]
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:314
FLOODPLAIN; FLOOD HAZARD AREA; FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A land
area adjoining a river, stream, water body or watercourse which may
periodically flood as established by the United States Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FORM 408 — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, latest
publications and bulletins.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets as
officially approved by the Township.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating
thereto.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An organization of property owners of
lots in individual residential developments responsible for the maintenance
of common open space in each plan and the payment of taxes on that land
classified as commonly owned open space.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical changes to the land necessary to
produce usable and desirable lots from raw acreage, including but not
limited to grading, paving, curb, gutter, stormwater sewers, individual
sanitary sewage system, improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street signs, monuments, water supply and water distribution
systems and facilities, sanitary sewers, sanitary sewerage collection
systems and sanitary sewage treatment plant facilities.
INSPECTOR — An authorized representative of the Township Board of
Supervisors assigned to make any or all on-site inspection of work
performed and materials furnished by the developer or his agents.
INTERIOR DRIVE — Includes all drives located within the boundary lines
of any mobile home park development which are designed for access to
any mobile home lots, service buildings or facilities which are considered a
part of the mobile home park, but not dedicated to public use nor accepted
as part of the Township highway system.[Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
100]
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a block or across a block to another street. Such right-of-way
shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 128]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
A.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:315
LEVEL OF SERVICE — The minimum standard for developed and
undeveloped recreation land established by an analysis of existing
conditions relative to recreational land use.[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 146]
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with
such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this part, having
not less than the minimum area and width required by this part for a lot in
the district in which such land is situated and having its principal frontage
on a public street or on such other approved means of access.[Amended
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and bounded
by the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, FLAG — A tract, parcel or area of land abutting and located to the
rear or behind another tract, parcel or area of land and is connected to a
public or private street by a contiguous area of land that is a part of said
lot that has a minimum width of 25 feet for its total length and is for the
express purpose of providing vehicular egress, ingress and utility access to
said tract, parcel or area of land. The area of the flag portion of the lot shall
not be used in computing the minimum lot area required by the Brighton
Township Zoning Ordinance. Lot width at the building line shall comply with
the requirements of the Brighton Township Zoning Ordinance.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance across the lot between the side lot
lines, measured at the building line.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
120]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
C. Development in accordance with § 180-5.
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:316
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.[Added 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 100]
MOBILE OR MODULAR HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land which have been so designated and improved that they contain two
or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile or modular
homes.[Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100; amended 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 120]
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of the mobile home lot which has
been improved and reserved for the placement of the mobile home.[Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100]
MODIFICATION — When the subdivider can show that a provision of this
part would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where,
because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site and in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, a modification may be made without
destroying the intent of such provision, the Planning Commission may
recommend and the Board of Supervisors may authorize relief from the
strict application of this provision. Any relief thus authorized shall be
entered in the minutes of the Board of Supervisors along with the reasons
which justify the modification.
MODULAR OR MANUFACTURED HOME — Two portable modular or
sectional units designed and built to be towed on their own separate chassis
and permanently combined on site to form a single immobile dwelling unit
and having a minimum of 900 square feet of habitable floor area. It shall
be regarded as a single-family detached dwelling, but may be located in
a mobile or modular home park at the discretion of the owner.[Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100; amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
MONUMENT — A permanent marker constructed of concrete or metal and
placed in the ground by survey, to establish the legal right-of-way line of
streets. Each monument shall be constructed and placed as specified herein
this part.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
134]
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system
approved by the Township in which sewage is carried from individual lots
or dwelling units by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal
plant which may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A potable water distribution system
approved by the Township in which water is carried to individual lots or
dwelling units by a system of pipes from a central water source, located
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:317
beyond the limits of the lot being serviced, which may be publicly or
privately owned and operated. Applicants for subdivision and land
development approval shall be required to connect to a public water
distribution system unless lots are to be served by private wells.
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities approved by the Township serving only a single lot and disposing
of sewage in whole or in part into the soil.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving only a single lot and obtaining the water either in whole
or in part from a primary source located within the limits of the lot being
served.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building or structure.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
PARKING SPACE — Each parking space shall consist of not less than
an average of 270 square feet of useable area for each motor vehicle,
including the interior driveways and driveways connecting the garage or
parking space with a street or alley. Parking spaces must comply with the
requirements of Figure SD-15 in Chapter 180. Notwithstanding the above,
all parking spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicles' intended use.
Parking spaces shall not be less than 10 feet wide and 20 feet long. Exterior
parking spaces and the approaches thereto for residential uses of more than
four spaces per lot shall be paved. For all other uses, the required parking
spaces shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or a material approved by the
Township Engineer.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120; 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 134]
PATIO — An outside surfaced area having no roof and no more than three
sides walled or fenced.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The duly constituted Planning Commission of
the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout of a subdivision indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plat, prepared for official
recording as required by statute, to define property rights and proposed
streets and other improvements.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plat, in lesser detail than a
final plat, showing approximate locations of proposed streets and lot layouts
on a topographic map as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a
final plat.
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:318
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa., Code § 92.1.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
PORCH (COVERED DECK) — A roofed-over structure projecting from the
front, side or rear wall of a building. For the purpose of this part, a porch
or covered deck is considered a part of the principal building and is not
permitted to extend into any required yards.[Amended 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 120]
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building constructed
thereon.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
Township Solicitor, certified public accountants, engineers, Township
Engineers, geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects or
planners.[Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 184]
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting open to the general public held
pursuant to property public notice by the governing body or planning
agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking
action in accordance with this part.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."65
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days or fewer than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC RECREATION LAND — Any parcel or area of land set aside,
dedicated, designated, or reserved for public use as required by § 180-64.1.
This land shall meet the minimum standards set forth in
§ 180-64.1C.[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 146]
RECREATION PLAN — The Brighton Township Public Recreation Land and
Facilities Plan adopted July 11, 2005.[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No.
146]
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
134]
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface water or
65.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:319
the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more regardless of
the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part,
or during any stage of, a larger common plan of development. This only
includes road maintenance activities involving 25 acres or more of earth
disturbance.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a major traffic street and a local street and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to control
access to the street from an adjacent property.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, interior walk or
other public purpose.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A set of two parallel lines which denote an area
of land between them used for public access.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 120]
SAFE STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum extent of
unobstructed vision (on a horizontal or vertical curve) along a street from a
vehicle located at any given point along the street. The safe stopping sight
distance for the vertical curves on roadway pavement shall be calculated
with an eye height of 3.5 feet and a height of object 2.0 feet.[Added
3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.[Added
3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
SERVICE OR RECREATION BUILDING — A structure housing operational
offices, park maintenance facilities, recreational facilities, rest rooms and
laundry facilities or any other structure or facility necessary for the health,
safety and convenience of the residents of the mobile home park built to
conform with the requirements of this part and all other laws governing
their construction and operation.[Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100]
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96), including:[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as
cold water fishery or potable water supply, which are listed in Chapter
93. These uses must be protected and maintained under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
B.
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:320
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
STREET — A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting
properties.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — The following street classifications shall
apply to all existing streets located in the Township of Brighton and shall be
applied as defined in the Comprehensive Plan for the Township of Brighton,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania, 1999.[Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord. No.
128]
STREET, PRIVATE — A street, including the entire private right-of-way,
which is privately owned and maintained through private agreement and
which is intended for private use. A private street which provides access
to three or more lots or parcels which do not have access to a public
street shall be considered as access to a public street. (See also "driveway,
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes in
habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of
changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface water must be managed to protect
the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway to
prevent these impacts.
C.
EXPRESSWAY — This class of highway facility is devoted entirely to
the task of moving large volumes of traffic and performs little or no
land services function. It is generally characterized by some degree
of access control. Normally, this classification should be reserved for
multilane, divided roadways with few, if any, grade intersection.
A.
ARTERIAL — Arterials accommodate intercommunity traffic flow and
afford connections to other communities or secondary regional traffic
generators with direct access to adjoining property being a secondary
function. The average length of trip of such highway normally exceeds
three miles.
B.
COLLECTOR — These roads serve to funnel traffic onto arterials and
to provide linkage on an intercommunity basis. Providing access to
properties abutting a collector street is likewise a secondary function.
The primary function of a collector street is to accept the traffic
generated on local streets with which they may be interlinked.
C.
LOCAL — Such roadways are intended primarily to serve properties
fronting on their right-of-way. These roads generally do not carry major
traffic volumes since their function is to serve that traffic generated
from the residential properties.
D.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:321
private," "driveway, common" and "driveway, multi.") Design standards for
private streets shall comply with the requirements of Article V herein
and improvements shall comply with the standards of Article VI herein.
Performance standards in § 180-65, performance guaranties in § 180-66
and the release from improvement bond in § 180-67 shall apply to all
developments proposing to install a private street.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street, including the entire public right-of-way, which
has been dedicated to and accepted by the Township or which has been
devoted to public use by legal mapping, use or other means.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVIDER — See "developer."
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development, provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement
of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended
2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 128]
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — When, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to § 180-66 of this part)
of those improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE WATER OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, stream,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.[Added 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 134]
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour lines
and the location of important, natural and man-made features.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Township of Brighton or its Planning Commission.
WATERCOURSE — Includes all existing channels, creeks, ditches, drains,
dry runs, springs and streams, also all proposed channels, ditches, drains
and drainage facilities.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
§ 180-9 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-9
1:322
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions as defined and
regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (COE) and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure. No portion of any principal or accessory structure,
as defined, shall project into any required yard except as otherwise
provided.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front
line of the building and the street right-of-way line.[Added 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 120]
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear
line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of
the lot.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line
shall be deemed a side line.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
ZONING — A legal and administrative process whereby a municipality
divides its territory into districts and applies to each district a number of
regulations to control the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings and
the area of ground built upon.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual authorized by the Township of Brighton
to be the administrator of the daily application of the provisions contained
in the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Officer shall hold no elective office
and shall have a working knowledge of zoning and meet the qualifications
established for the position by the Board of Supervisors.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of
Brighton Township and all subsequent amendments thereto.66
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-9
1:323

ARTICLE III
Application and Plat Requirements for Subdivision and Land
Development
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 120]
§ 180-10. Procedure.
The plat requirements and application procedures shall be followed by
developers as set forth herein and shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for review prior to consideration by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-11. Preapplication.
Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of a preliminary
plat, the applicant shall submit the following plans and data to the Planning
Commission:
A. General information. Describe existing covenants, land characteristics,
community facilities and utilities, the number of lots and sizes, business
areas, playgrounds, utilities and street improvements.
B. Location map. Map shall show relationship of the proposed subdivision
to existing community facilities which serve or influence it and existing
facilities, title, scale and North arrow.
C. Sketch plan. Sketch plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger
shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and
other features in relation to existing conditions and shall include the
following:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name of the applicant.
(3) Name of the registered owner.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Name of the engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or other
qualified person responsible for the map.
(6) Tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
(7) Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses, rock outcrops,
existing buildings and actual location of sanitary sewers, storm
sewers and inlets, water mains, easements, fire hydrants, railroads,
existing or confirmed streets and their established grades.
(8) Adjacent street.
(9) Zoning district in which property is located and required front, side
and rear yard lines.
§ 180-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-11
1:325
§ 180-12. Preliminary plat.
D. Review. After review and discussion with the applicant, the Planning
Commission shall indicate the suitability of the plan for development
into preliminary plats.
A. Preliminary plat application. The applicant shall prepare and submit to
the Planning Commission Secretary at least 15 days prior to the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Commission 15 copies of the
preliminary plats of the total land to be ultimately developed for review
by the Planning Commission according to the requirements and
standards contained herein. Upon receipt of the plat, the Planning
Commission shall forward a copy to the Beaver County Planning
Commission for review and recommendation, comments to be
submitted back to the Township of Brighton within 30 days of submittal.
B. Application fee. At the time of filing an application for preliminary plat
approval, the applicant shall pay to the Board of Supervisors, for use by
the Township, a fee set by resolution to defray the cost of processing of
such plat approval applications and for payment to consultants hired by
the Township of Brighton to conduct reviews of said applications.
C. The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch or
greater and shall show or be accompanied by the following information.
All information required shall be supplied to the extent and in the
manner required by the Township of Brighton Standard Drawings and
Specifications for construction guidelines:
(1) Material required in § 180-11.
(2) Names and addresses of the owner or owners of the property.
(3) Name of the subdivision or land development to be recorded.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Name of professional engineer or the professional land surveyor
who surveyed the property and prepared the plat.
(6) Tract boundaries with bearings, distance, total area in acres and
area in square feet of each proposed lot.
(7) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet or, in the case of relatively
level tracts, at such lesser interval as may be necessary for
satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
(8) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to known, established elevations.
(9) Show all existing watercourses, wetlands, banks, tree masses and
other significant natural features.
§ 180-11 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-12
1:326
(10) Identify any floodplain, flood hazard area, flood-prone area as
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(11) Show location and size of all existing buildings, location and size of
all existing structures located on abutting property if within 50 feet
of the property line, location, size and invert elevation of all
sanitary and stormwater sewers, and location of all manholes,
inlets, culverts and bridges; water mains, gas mains, fire hydrants,
telephone conduit lines, electric power transmission line,
petroleum or petroleum products lines and other significant manmade
features.
(12) All existing streets located on or adjacent to the tract, including
name, right-of-way widths and cartway width and type of
improvement materials used on the cartway.
(13) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
(14) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements, entrances, parking facilities, loading spaces, signs,
lighting facilities, fences or walls, proposed lot lines with
approximate dimensions, proposed minimum setback on public
buildings, public areas and parcels of land proposed to be
dedicated or reserved for public use.
(15) The preliminary plat shall show the names of owners of all abutting
unplotted land and the names of all abutting subdivisions and land
development.
(16) Where the preliminary plat covers only a part of the applicant's
entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective street
and lot layout of the remainder of the land.
(17) A plan of the proposed public water distribution system for review
and approval by the appropriate authority or a plan showing the
location of individual wells in accordance with the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as amended.67
(18) A plan of the proposed sanitary sewer collection system or
treatment facilities when proposed will be required for review and
approval of the appropriate authority.
(19) Where on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed, the applicant
or owner shall submit a completed Department of Environmental
Protection Sewage Facilities Planning Module in accordance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
537), as amended.68
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:327
(20) Preliminary plat shall identify the zoning district in which the
property is located and show the zoning boundaries, if any, that
traverse or are within 300 feet of the area covered by the plan.
(21) Preliminary plat shall show such street extensions or spurs as are
reasonably necessary to provide adequate street connections and
facilities to adjoining or contiguous developed or undeveloped
areas.
(22) Subsurface condition (whether undermined, etc.) of the tract to be
subdivided or developed.
(23) Profiles showing existing ground and proposed street center-line
grades.
(24) Typical cross section of roadways showing cartways, water,
sanitary and stormwater sewers, gas, electric and telephone
utilities and sidewalks.
(25) The applicant shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors,
Township Engineer, Zoning Officer or Sewage Enforcement Officer
in order to more fully evaluate the proposed subdivision or land
development and its effect on adjacent property or the Township as
a whole.
(26) A utility plan showing the location and size of the proposed gas,
electric, telephone and cable television systems with written
approval from the appropriate utility company.
(27) A grading plan as per § 180-44 of this part.
(28) A plan, calculations and narrative for the collection, management
and discharge of all stormwater. The applicant shall further provide
all information and plans necessary to indicate that the existing offlot
watercourse and drainage system is adequate to accommodate
the stormwater resulting from the proposed subdivision or land
development or a plan for improving the off-lot drainage system to
meet the demand. Plans and reports shall be prepared in
accordance with Township policy, guidelines and the Pennsylvania
Storm Water Management Act.69
(29) The preliminary plan shall identify location of all proposed
recreational facilities.
D. Supplementary data required. The preliminary plan shall be
accompanied by the following supplementary data:
(1) A plan revision module for land development as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
69.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 180-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-12
1:328
(2) Plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation for review by the
County Conservation District Office, as required by the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law70 or Chapter 102, Erosion
Control, of the Rules and Regulation of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Typical street cross-section drawings for all proposed streets.
(4) Profile sheets of all proposed streets and improvements with the
following information:
(a) Existing and finished profile along center line of proposed
street.
(b) Finished grade at fifty-foot stations located along the center
line of the proposed street, all vertical curve elevations
information, length, including beginning-ending elevations,
high and low points located along said vertical curve.
(c) Finished profile for all sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers and
water lines with stations, identification numbers, invert and
top elevations, size and type of materials and percent of slope
of each utility proposed.
(d) The sight distance for all vertical curves shall be identified on
the street profiles.
(5) A written report from the municipal water and sewer authority on
the availability of public water and sewer service to proposed
development.
(6) If connection to a public water or sewage system is not proposed, a
report shall be submitted, prepared in accordance with the
requirement and procedures of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, as to how these utilities are proposed to
be furnished.
E. The Planning Commission shall not recommend for approval a land
development application unless the following site design guidelines are
met, as demonstrated through renderings of the proposed building
structure(s) from each side: [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 153]
(1) Structure design and orientation.
(a) Purpose: In the evaluation of an application for land
development approval, basic structural design components
shall be considered in conjunction with other characteristics of
the use. Monotony of design in single or multiple building
projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, positioning
and landscaping shall be used to provide visual interest and to:
70.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:329
[1] Create a comfortably scaled commercial or nonresidential
environment.
[2] Establish an organized variety of building heights and
mass.
[3] Encourage buildings that are similar in scale to adjacent
buildings.
[4] Foster a coherent architectural aesthetic design.
[5] Construct all additions, alterations, and accessory
buildings compatible in design and materials with the
principal structure.
(b) Building scale. The apparent mass, bulk and scale of large
buildings on the elevations visible from the public right-of-way
and pedestrian routes and entries shall be reduced through the
use of such methods as facade modulation and articulation,
architectural detailing, roof treatment, colors, materials and
other special features.
[1] Integration. Commercial buildings should integrate
features along their facades visible from the public rightof-
way and pedestrian routes and entries to reduce the
apparent building mass and achieve an architectural scale
consistent with other nearby structures.
[2] Facade modulation. Building facades visible from public
streets and public spaces should be stepped back or
projected forward at intervals to provide a minimum
facade modulation of 40%. The minimum depth of
modulation shall be one foot and the minimum width shall
be five feet. See Figure 1: Building Scale Criteria,
Modulation. Modulation is the stepping back or projecting
forward of the facade in intervals. Facade modulation and
pitched roofs help reduce the apparent bulk of the
building.
Modulation
Figure 1: Building Scale Criteria, Modulation
Modulation is the stepping back or projecting
forward of the facade in intervals.
[3] Articulation. To break up building mass, buildings shall be
articulated to reduce the apparent scale of buildings and
§ 180-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-12
1:330
to convey visual interest. Building mass should be varied
both horizontally and vertically by varying articulation
dimensions such as height, depth and width. Architectural
details that are used to articulate the structure may
include reveals, patterns, and other three-dimensional
details that create shadow lines and break up the flat
surfaces of the facade. See Figure 2: Building Scale
Criteria, Articulation. Articulation can be achieved with
other building elements such as the roofline, windows and
entries.
Articulation
Figure 2: Building Scale Criteria, Articulation
Articulation can be achieved with other building
elements such as the roofline, windows and entries.
[4] Architectural elements. The mass of long or large-scale
buildings can be made more visually interesting by
incorporating architectural elements such as arcades,
balconies, bay windows, dormers, and/or columns.
[5] Rooflines. A distinctive roofline can reduce perceived
building height and mass, increase compatibility with
smaller scale development, and add interest to the overall
design of a building. Change the roofline by alternating
dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to
reinforce the modulation or articulation interval. Roofs
that incorporate a variety of vertical dimensions such as
multilanes and intersecting rooflines are encouraged. Flatroofed
designs shall include architectural details such a
cornices, and decorative facings to provide interest to the
roofline.
(c) Exterior facade colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors. For exterior walls with a main
entry, street frontage or fronting a parking area for public use
two or more materials shall be used. Exterior walls shall be
constructed of the following materials. (NOTE: Comparable
materials may be accepted by the Planning Commission and
approved by the Board of Supervisors.)
[1] Brick, stone, cast stone, rock, marble, granite, glass block,
tile;
[2] Stucco or plaster;
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:331
[3] Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS);
[4] Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornaments);
[5] Glass with reflectance of less than 20% (however, only a
maximum of 50% of the total area of the building may be
constructed in glass);
[6] Split face concrete block, poured-in-place concrete, and
tilt-wall concrete. Any use of concrete products shall have
integrated color and be textured or patterned. Tilt-wall
concrete structures shall have reveals, punch-outs, or
similar surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at
least 10% of each facade; or
[7] Sheet metal or vinyl siding shall not extend to grade and is
recommended only above the ground floor.
(d) Mechanical equipment attached to the exterior or roof of a
building should be kept low and placed where they are not
visible from the front facade.
(e) Ground-mounted mechanical equipment should be screened
with a fence or plant materials or housed in a structure
compatible in design and materials with the principal
structure.
(2) Screening. A buffer yard or landscape screen as outlined in
§ 195-137.1 of the Township Zoning Ordinance shall be provided
and maintained on any property in a commercial or industrial
district which is contiguous to any residential district or residential
land use, except where natural or physical barriers exist which are
deemed adequate by the Planning Commission, and except where
such contiguity has resulted from an amendment to the zoning
district boundaries after the passage of this section. This buffer
yard screen shall be composed of plants and evergreen trees
arranged to form both as low-level and a high-level screen
consistent with the provisions of § 195-137.1 of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Landscaping and beautification. Any part or portion of the site
which is not used for building, other structures, loading or parking
spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be
planted and maintained with an all-season ground cover and shall
be landscaped with trees and shrubs in accordance with an overall
landscape plan as per the provisions of § 195-137.1 of the Township
Zoning Ordinance, and shall be in keeping with natural
surroundings. Any off-street parking area with five or more spaces
located between the front building line and the right-of-way line
shall include at least 50% of all required planting or landscaping in
addition to the planting required within one of the buffer yards as
outlined in § 195-137.1 of the Township Zoning Ordinance. The
§ 180-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-12
1:332
parking area shall be graded for proper drainage and paved, and
at least one deciduous shade tree, of at least two-inch caliper, shall
be provided per five parking spaces, planted to a height of six feet
or more at intervals of no greater than 10 feet, or portions thereof
located adjacent to the parking area, which shall be landscaped, to
include a low-level screen consisting of shrubs or hedges planted
at an initial height of not less than two feet in alternating rows. A
maximum of 70% of the total area of a parcel may be covered with
an impervious surface.
(4) Storage. Any article or material stored outside an enclosed building
as an incidental part of the primary commercial or industrial
operation shall be so screened by opaque ornamental fencing, walls
or a mix of deciduous and evergreen planting, in addition to the
planting, required in buffer yards as outlined in § 195-137.1 of the
Township Zoning Ordinance, that it cannot be seen when viewed by
a person standing on the berm of all abutting streets during any
season of the year. All organic rubbish or storage shall be contained
in airtight, vermin-proof containers which shall also be screened
from public view.
(5) Lighting. All parking areas, driveways and loading areas shall be
provided with a lighting system in accordance with an approved
lighting plan. All lighting fixtures used shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Commission and shall not exceed 35 feet
in height. All lighting shall be completely shielded from traffic on
any public right-of-way and from any residential district or
residential land use.
(6) Interior circulation. The interior circulation of traffic and
commercial and industrial areas shall be designated so that no
driveway or access lane providing parking spaces shall be used as a
through street.
(7) Loading areas. Areas provided for loading and unloading of
delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of
businesses by refuse collections, fuel and other service vehicles
shall be located at the side or rear of all buildings, shall not face a
street, shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they
may be used without blockage or interference with the use of
accessway or automobile parking facilities.
(8) Emergency access.
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission that all buildings shown on a land
development plan can be adequately accessed by emergency
fire-fighting vehicles and other emergency equipment.
Emergency access shall be required for the purpose of
positioning fire-fighting equipment or other emergency
vehicles in relation to the building so that the equipment can
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:333
be effectively used. Emergency access may be provided by
means of a fire lane, a public or private street a driveway or
aisle in a parking area or an unobstructed landscaped area.
(b) Emergency access shall be provided on at least one side of
each building. The Planning Commission may require
emergency access to be provided on more than one side of a
building, if warranted by site conditions, public safety and the
layout of the land development plan.
(c) In the event that any applicant disagrees with the
determination of the Planning Commission regarding the
provision of emergency access, the applicant may appeal that
determination to the Board of Supervisors for consideration
prior to final action.
(9) Access driveways and streets.
(a) Neither any driveway nor any junction or intersection of any
streets shall be located within:
[1] Two hundred fifty feet of the end of any interstate highway
ramp;
[2] One hundred fifty feet of the intersection of the right-ofway
center lines of any state or local highway and any road
intersection therewith.
(b) All street rights-of-way and pavement designs shall conform to
the requirements adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(10) Traffic control. No proposed street or roadway configuration shall
be approved which is likely to create substantial traffic hazards
endangering the public safety, nor which is inconsistent with the
recommendations and findings of any officially adopted Township
traffic study. Traffic control devices may include traffic signals,
overhead flashing lights and delineators, such as medial barriers,
and not be limited to acceleration and deceleration lanes, turning
lanes, one-way traffic flow, traffic and lane markings and signs. The
plan for traffic signals shall include a traffic impact analysis. Said
analysis shall document expected impacts on adjacent intersections
as per the provisions of new § 195-137.2 of the Township's Zoning
Ordinance. The developer shall be responsible for the construction
of any such traffic control device.
(11) Stormwater management. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities
shall be installed in conformance with a stormwater management
plan, based on adopted Township guidelines and regulations, to
ensure that stormwater does not flow onto abutting property,
sidewalks or streets in such quantities as to cause detrimental
effect. The stormwater management plan shall ensure to the
satisfaction of the Township that rates of runoff after development
§ 180-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-12
1:334
shall not be greater than the runoff which would occur on the site
in its natural state.
(12) The Planning Commission may recommend land development
approval for a single-family dwelling unit in the HC-1, C-1, or C-2
District on a lot which meets all of the requirements of municipal
ordinances in effect at the time of recording of the plat and which is
now so bounded or limited by other developed lots that it has no
utility as a commercial or other permitted use in those designated
districts and which development approval would not conflict with
the purpose of those districts. The Township Supervisors shall issue
final approval for such land development.
(13) Signs. Every existing nonconforming sign shall be removed prior to
the initial occupancy of any or all buildings proposed.
F. Planning Commission review and action; preliminary applications.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plats and
prepare a written report for the Board of Supervisors. The report
shall contain recommendations for approval, conditional approval
or disapproval with specific reasons for the recommended action.
No report or recommendation shall be prepared prior to receipt of
the County Planning Commission's recommendation or expiration
of the thirty-day time period granted for county reviews.
(2) Prior to preparation of the written report, the Planning Commission
may schedule a special conference mutually convenient to the
applicant and the Planning Commission for consideration of the
preliminary plat. If within 30 days of receipt of the preliminary plat
a mutually convenient date for such meeting cannot be established
with the applicant, consideration of the preliminary plat shall be
conducted at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(3) The applicant and all Planning Commission members shall be given
at least seven days' written notice of such meeting, the notice to
contain time, place, date and agenda schedule.
(4) At the Planning Commission meeting when considering the
preliminary plats, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to
discuss any matters in the preliminary plat which might assist the
Planning Commission in making its recommendation to the Board
of Supervisors.
(5) Unless withdrawn by the applicant at the meeting, the Planning
Commission shall, within five days after the meeting, issue its
written report to the Board of Supervisors.
G. Action of Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall render
its decision on the preliminary plat and communicate such decision to
the applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
Planning Commission meeting next following the date the application is
§ 180-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:335
§ 180-13. Final plat.
Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall submit an
application for approval of a final plat. The application shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission Secretary 15 days prior to a regular meeting of
the Planning Commission and shall include 15 copies of the final plat.
filed, provided that, should said next regular meeting occur more than
30 days following the date of filing, the ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application was
originally filed.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him
at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
(2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein after receipt of all information necessary to render
such opinion as required under § 180-12 shall be deemed an
approval of the application in terms as presented unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change
in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like
effect.
(4) Failure on the part of the applicant to supply all data necessary for
review and recommendation as required under § 180-12 shall
constitute an incomplete application and as such shall not delay or
circumvent time constraints imposed elsewhere in this section.
H. Nature of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of a final plat, unless said preliminary plat consists of a
maximum of three new parcels or lots intended for development as
residential uses, in which case preliminary plat approval may act as
final plat approval where the Board of Supervisors and the Township
Engineer find that further review is not required. The provisions of
§ 180-14 shall apply to any applications herein described. In all other
cases, preliminary plat approval shall be an expression of approval of
the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat. Granting of preliminary approval shall not
qualify a plat for recording nor authorize development or the issuing of
any building permit, except as herein specified.
§ 180-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-13
1:336
A. Specification for final plan. For any subdivision requiring final approval,
the plats submitted must meet the following specifications:
(1) Attestation by the applicant stating that the applicant is the owner
of the tract or land proposed to be subdivided or developed.
(2) Shall be drawn and submitted on new linen tracing cloth or
submitted on a linen duplication reproducible tracing cloth.
(3) Shall be drawn and submitted with all information presented in the
manner and to the extent required in the Township of Brighton
Standard Drawings and Specifications for Construction.
(4) Shall be on sheets not larger than 34 inches by 44 inches overall. It
is recommended that as far as practicable final plat sheets be held
to the following overall sizes: 17 inches high by 22 inches wide; 22
inches high by 34 inches wide; 34 inches high by 44 inches wide.
There shall be a border of 1/2 inch on all sides except the binding
end which shall be 1 1/2 inches. Where necessary to avoid sheets
larger than the maximum size prescribed above, final plats shall be
drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the section.
(5) Shall be drawn with waterproof ink and all records, data entries,
statements, etc., thereon shall also be made with the same type of
ink or reproducible typing.
(6) Shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch or larger; more
than one sheet may be used for larger tracts and must be indexed.
(7) Shall contain a title block in the lower right-hand corner with the
following information:
(a) Name under which the subdivision plat is to be recorded.
(b) North point, scale and date.
(c) Name of the recorded owner and applicant.
(d) Municipality in which the subdivision is located.
(e) Name, address and seal of the registered professional land
surveyor preparing the plat.
(f) Certificate of ownership, including name of owner of record,
deed book volume, date of instrument and date of recording.
(8) Beyond the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision or land
development, all final plats submitted shall be drawn according to
the following:
(a) Streets and other ways of medium solid lines.
§ 180-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-13
1:337
(b) Property lines of adjacent subdivision or land development by
medium dashed and two dotted lines.
(c) Lot line by light dotted lines.
(d) Restriction lines, easements, etc., by light dashed lines.
(9) Within the subdivision or land development boundary lines, all final
plats shall be drawn according to the following:
(a) Streets or ways of heavy solid lines.
(b) Perimeter property lines of subdivision or land development by
heavy dashed and two dotted lines.
(c) Lot lines of medium solid lines.
(d) Restriction of building lines by medium dashed lines.
(e) Easements of other reserved areas by light dotted lines.
B. Application fee. At the time of filing of the application for approval of
final plats, the applicant shall pay to the Board of Supervisors, for use
by the Township, a fee set by resolution to defray the cost of processing
such plat approval applications and drafting the same on the Official
Map of the Township and for payment to consultants hired by the
Township of Brighton to conduct reviews of said applications.
C. All final plats submitted shall show the following information:
(1) Primary control points or permanent monuments or description
and ties to such control points or monuments, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data shall be referred.
(2) Accurate description shown by bearings and dimension in feet and
hundredths of a foot shall be shown on all tract boundary lines,
center lines of streets, easements and right-of-way lines, property
lines of lots, tangent bearings, deflection angles, radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves and tangent distances between curves.
The error of closure for all descriptions subject to approval shall
not exceed one foot in 10,000 feet.
(3) Name and right-of-way width of each street or right-of-way.
(4) Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements in or across the
subdivision plat.
(5) Number to identify each lot, site or parcel of land.
(6) Purpose for which sites other than residential are to be dedicated.
(7) Building setback line on all lots and sites.
(8) Location and description of survey monuments.
§ 180-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-13
1:338
(9) Names of recorded owner of adjoining plotted or unplotted land.
(10) Certification of professional land surveyor who prepared the plat
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
(11) Attestation by the applicant stating that the applicant is owner of
the tract or land proposed to be subdivided.
(12) Statement by the owner dedicating the streets, the right-of-way
easements and any sites proposed for public use.
(13) Such other certificates, bonds, affidavits, endorsements or
dedication as may be required in the enforcement of this part.
(14) All plats which will require access to a highway under jurisdiction
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall contain a
notice that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to
Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), known
as the "State Highway Law," before driveway access to a stateowned
right-of-way is permitted.
D. Planning Commission review and action; final subdivision applications.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the final plats and prepare a
written report for the Board of Supervisors. The report shall
contain recommendations for approval, conditional approval or
disapproval with specific reasons for the recommended action.
(2) Prior to finalization of the written report, the Planning Commission
may schedule a special meeting mutually convenient to the
applicant and the Planning Commission for consideration of the
final plat. If within 30 days of receipt of the final plat a mutually
convenient date for such meeting cannot be established with the
applicant, consideration of the final plat shall be conducted at a
regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(3) Mediation may be offered as an option in order to expedite the
approval process; said mediation shall be conducted as per the
provisions of § 195-156G of the Township of Brighton Zoning
Ordinance.
(4) The applicant and all Planning Commission members shall be given
seven days' written notice of such meeting, the notice to contain
time, place, date and agenda schedule.
(5) At the Planning Commission meeting when considering the final
plat, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to discuss any
matter in the final plat which might assist the Planning Commission
in making its recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
(6) Unless withdrawn by the applicant at the meeting, the Planning
Commission shall, within five days after the meeting, issue its
written report to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-13
1:339
E. Action of the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall
render its decision on the final plat and communicate its decision to the
applicant not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
Planning Commission meeting next following the date the application is
filed, provided that, should the next regular meeting occur more than
30 days following the date of filing, the ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application was
originally filed.
(1) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him
at his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision within the ninety-day review period.
(2) When the application is not approved as filed, the decision shall
specify the defect found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended communication shall have like effect.
(4) From the time an application for approval of a final plat is duly filed
as provided in this part and while such application is pending
approval or disapproval, no change or amendment of the zoning,
subdivision or other governing ordinance or plan shall affect the
decision on such application adversely to the applicant, and the
applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the
time the application was duly filed. However, if an application is
properly and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be
subject to the intervening change in governing regulations. When
an application for approval of a final plat has been approved or
approved subject to conditions acceptable to the applicant, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or
land development or other governing ordinance or plan shall be
applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from
such approval. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary
approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of the
preliminary approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a
preliminary approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of
the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood at
the time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
§ 180-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-13
1:340
§ 180-14. Subdivisions of three or fewer residentially zoned lots.
Plans and data involving subdivisions of three or fewer residentially zoned
lots shall include but not be limited to the following:
(5) Before acting on any subdivision or land development plat, the
governing body or the planning agency, as the case may be, may
hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
A. The provisions of §§ 180-11 through 180-13 may be waived for
subdivisions of fewer than three residentially zoned lots if no new street
construction or openings are required, no wetlands are disturbed and
no unusual physiographic or topographic conditions exist. The following
requirements are applicable:
(1) The proposed plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch.
(2) The proposed plat shall be legibly drawn on new linen or
comparable permanent duplicate Mylar materials of the sizes and
quantity specified in § 180-13, Final plat, Subsection A.
(3) The plat shall show or be accompanied by the following:
(a) Description of covenants.
(b) Title, to include:
[1] Location by municipality, county and state.
[2] Names and addresses of the owner or owners.
[3] Name of professional land surveyor who surveyed the
property and/or prepared the plat.
[4] North point, date and graphic scale.
(c) Proposed use of the land.
(d) Lot line, dimensions and land area of proposed lot; also, the
area remaining in the original parcel.
(e) Existing and proposed streets, alleys and/or easements on or
adjacent to the tract.
(f) Available utilities (if public sewer and water source and
sewage disposal system should be indicated).
(g) Statement by the owner dedicating streets, easements and
rights-of-way for public use.
(h) Names of abutting property owners.
(i) The following additional data shall be submitted upon request
by the Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors:
§ 180-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-14
1:341
§ 180-14.1. Neighborhood scaled land developments.
[1] Subsurface and drainage condition of the tract.
[2] Any other data pertinent to the plan.
(j) Zoning district in which property is located.
B. The Planning Commission shall have a period of 45 days within which to
determine if a duly filed application for plat approval may be considered
for final approval under this section and make recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors. Action by the Board of Supervisors shall be in
accordance with § 180-13E.
A. For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing land
development design and development costs, an informal preapplication
conference, where the developer submits a concept plan in accordance
with the following requirements, shall take place during a regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
(1) Advisory meetings. A developer shall appear before the Planning
Commission to discuss his proposal. The purpose of this step is to
afford the developer advice and assistance in order to save time
and money, suggest professional assistance if needed, and to
answer any questions the developer may have in regard to filing an
application or other items required.
(2) General information. The developer shall be prepared to discuss
the details of the proposed site including a description of existing
covenants, land characteristics, community facilities and utilities,
commercially developed areas, residential areas, industrial areas,
playgrounds and proposed protective covenants, utilities and street
improvements.
(3) Location map. This map shall show the relationship of the proposed
development to existing community facilities which serve or
influence it and shall include the development name, location,
existing facilities, title, scale, North arrow and date.
(4) Topographic map. The location of the proposed development shall
be shown on the U. S. Geological Survey Map or a comparable
substitute for purposes of relating the development to the existing
topography, slopes, gradient and other physical features.
(5) Hazards. Land subject to hazards of life, health and safety shall not
be developed until such hazards have been removed. These hazards
shall be interpreted to mean land subject to flooding, slides due to
excessive slope or excavation, land of excessive or improper fill
material, or land improperly drained.
(6) After review and discussion with the developer, the Planning
Commission shall indicate the suitability of the plan for further
§ 180-14 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-14.1
1:342
§ 180-15. Resubdivision or replatting.
The amendment, alteration or revision of a previously approved plat or
the combination or recombination of lots or portions of previously plotted
lots, where the resultant lots are increased in street frontage and total
area size, which meets or exceeds the standards of this part and the
previously approved final plats shall subject the replotted subdivision or
land development to the procedures and regulations heretofore described,
except as they may be modified on application at the sole discretion of the
Township of Brighton Planning Commission and approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
consideration and submission of an application for land
development approval.
(7) If the developer's concept plan shows that he intends to subdivide
in several phases, a master concept plan showing the master land
development plan of the entire proposed development including all
proposed phases shall be submitted with the application for land
development approval.
B. On recorded parcels of two acres or less in area, where the proposed
development involves less than 2,000 square feet of new construction,
with the exception of fast-food restaurants and convenience retail uses
developed with or without automotive fueling facilities, and no new
public utilities or extension of public roadways or streets, the Planning
Commission may recommend waiver of certain land development
submission requirements, including the submission of a stormwater
management plan, as deemed appropriate.
C. Where the proposed land development application also involves action
on a subdivision, the Planning Commission shall make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors in compliance with
(current) § 180-13 of this part prior to recommendation of the land
development application.
D. All applications for approval of neighborhood scaled land developments
shall be reviewed for compliance with (current) § 180-14, except as
otherwise specified.
§ 180-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-15
1:343

ARTICLE IV
Modifications
§ 180-16. Purpose.
Where the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors find that
extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this part,
they may vary the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured, provided that such modification will not have
the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this part.
§ 180-17. Granting.
In granting modifications, the Planning Commission may recommend and
the Board of Supervisors may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standard or
requirements so varied or modified. The granting of administrative relief
and modifications by the Planning Commission shall be conditional and
subject to the final approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-18. Procedure.
All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall be a part of the
application for final approval or development. The request shall state the
facts of unreasonableness or hardship, the provision or provision involved
and the minimum modification necessary. The Board of Supervisors may
refer the request to the Planning Commission for advisory comments prior
to action and shall keep a written record of action taken.
§ 180-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-18
1:345

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
[Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 180-19. Applicability of standards.
The following minimum subdivision principles, standards and requirements
will be applied by the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors,
Township staff and consultants hired to provide comment in evaluating
applications for preliminary and final plat approval.
§ 180-20. Land requirements.
§ 180-21. Street requirements.
A. Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
B. Land subject to hazards of life, health and safety such as strip- or
surface-mined land, quarry land, open ditched and land subject to
flooding or subsidence shall not be subdivided for residential purposes
until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless guarantee is given
that adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the
subdivision plat.
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to Township, county and
state road and highway plans which have been prepared and officially
adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
B. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
useable lots and reasonable grades.
C. Local streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through traffic, but
provisions for street connections into and from adjacent areas will be
generally required.
D. Where a subdivision plat abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors may
require local access streets, reverse frontage lots or such other
treatment which will provide protection for abutting properties,
reduction in the number of intersections with arterial streets and
separation of local and through traffic.
E. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of this part and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street
can be secured.
F. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
§ 180-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-21
1:347
G. Cul-de-sac streets may be permitted where it is established that
through traffic at such streets is not essential to the Township street
system in that district or to the development of the adjacent properties
in the area or that the topography of the land prohibits the future
extension of the streets.
(1) A cul-de-sac with a right-of-way radius with a pavement radius shall
be installed as specified in the Public and Private Improvement
Code,71 based on the type of street.
(2) Unless future extension is clearly impracticable or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the property
line and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be
carried to the property line in such a way as to permit future
extension of the street into an adjoining street.
H. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, adequate
street right-of-way to permit further resubdivision shall be provided as
necessary.
I. Reserve strips restricting or controlling access to adjacent streets or
properties shall be prohibited.
J. Maximum allowable grades.
(1) Centerline of streets. The maximum and minimum allowable
centerline grade of all streets shall be as specified in Table 7.3.172
shown in the Public and Private Improvement Code for each type of
street proposed.
(2) Cul-de-sac. The maximum and minimum allowable grade of all culde-
sacs shall be as specified in Table 7.3.173 shown in the Public
and Private Improvement Code for each type of cul-de-sac
proposed.
K. Minimum grades. The minimum grades on all streets shall be as
specified in the chart shown in Table 7.3.174 shown in the Public and
Private Improvement Code for each type of street proposed.
L. Vertical curves. Vertical curves of proper and adequate length shall be
installed as specified in Table 7.3.175 shown in the Public and Private
Improvement Code.
M. Alignment.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Part 2, Public and Private Improvement Standards.
72.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
73.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-21 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-21
1:348
(1) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 2°, connection
shall be made by horizontal curves.
(2) To ensure adequate sight distances, minimum centerline radii for
horizontal curves shall be as specified in Table 7.3.176 shown in the
Public and Private Improvement Code.
N. Widths.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way widths and cartway (roadway) widths
shall be as specified in Table 7.3.177 shown in the Public and Private
Improvement Code
(2) Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Board of Supervisors for the following purposes:
(a) To promote public safety and convenience.
(b) To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas
of high-density residential development.
(c) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width in
conformation with the above standards may be required.
(d) Where anticipated traffic flows and vehicle size warrants
additional widths, increases in base material and cartway
widths will be established by the Planning Commission and the
Township Engineer.
O. Street intersection.
(1) Curbs, where required, shall be installed by the subdivider along
the streets or where deemed necessary for public safety as
determined by the Board of Supervisors. The curbs shall be of the
type and material as specified and approved by the Board of
Supervisors. All curbs at intersections shall be rounded by a
minimum radius of 25 feet for local streets, 30 feet for collector
streets and 40 feet for arterial streets.
(2) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 5%, a leveling area shall be provided with a transitional
grade not to exceed 2% for a distance of 25 feet from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersection.
(3) Multiple intersections of more than four roads shall be prohibited.
P. Street offsets. Street offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
76.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-21
1:349
§ 180-22. Lots.
Q. Reverse curves. Reverse curves shall have a minimum transient
between them as specified in Table 7.3.178 shown in the Public and
Private Improvement Code.
R. Alleys.
(1) Alleys are not permitted in residential areas.
(2) Alleys are permitted in commercial and industrial areas subject to
design approval of the Planning Commission and the Board of
Supervisors.
S. Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be located to provide the best visibility possible
within the limits of the property that each driveway serves and
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Township.
(2) Private driveways which function as local streets providing access
to individual residential lots shall be designed in accordance with
this article and in compliance with the minimum standards for
public streets.
A. Residential lots shall be subdivided in accordance with the terms of the
Township of Brighton Zoning Ordinance79 and the provisions contained
herein.
B. The frontage width of lots fronting a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of
50 feet at the right-of-way line. The side yard setback requirements will
be calculated from the front of the structure and extended from both
sides of the structure to the side property lines.
C. All lot lines shall be set perpendicular or radial to the center line of the
street whenever possible. All nonradial lines shall be denoted as such
on the plat.
D. Lots abutting local streets shall front upon the streets that parallel the
long dimension of the block, if possible.
E. Where a flag lot is proposed, it shall be connected to a public street.
Said connection shall be a part of said flag lot and have a minimum
width of 25 feet. Said connection area shall not be used in calculating
the required lot area.
F. Where two such flag lot connections abut one another, each connection
shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
78.Editor's Note: 7.3.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 180-21 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-22
1:350
§ 180-23. Building lines.
The building lines shall be in accordance with the terms of the Township of
Brighton Zoning Ordinance.80
§ 180-24. Blocks.
§ 180-25. Easements.
§ 180-26. Reserved areas.
Reserve strips surrounding the property or areas reserved for any purpose
which shall make any area unprofitable for regular or special assessment or
which may revert to untended nuisance areas will not be approved by the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors.
G. Flag lots will not be approved by the Township Board of Supervisors
unless the developer can demonstrate that a Modification to the
Township Code is warranted.
A. Block length shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 500 feet.
B. Blocks shall be at least two lots in depth except for reverse frontage
lots.
C. Exceptionally long blocks shall be provided with crosswalks with a
minimum right-of-way reservation of 12 feet and a four-foot paved walk.
D. The depth-to-width ratio of usable lot length shall be at a maximum of
2 1/2 to 1.
A. Easements for sanitary sewer and stormwater sewer shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet and be placed at the side or rear of lots
whenever possible. When the Board of Supervisors determines that
easements are required to extend proposed or future utilities, the
required easements shall be provided.
B. Anchor easements shall be approximately four feet by 30 feet and
placed on a lot line.
C. Aerial easements shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
D. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate
to preserve the natural flow of water and to provide sufficient width for
maintenance, but not less than 20 feet.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 180-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-27
1:351
§ 180-27. Street names.
The subdivider may choose his street names subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors. No street, other than
an extension, may be given the name of an existing street in the Township
or Beaver postal service area of which the Township of Brighton is a part.
§ 180-28. Access to streets.
In subdividing land, it shall be done in a manner that will not have the effect
of barring adjacent property owners from access to the streets and ways of
the allotment.
§ 180-27 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-28
1:352
ARTICLE VI
Improvements
[Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 180-29. Grading.
§ 180-30. Underdrainage.
A. Streets shall be graded to street profile grades and cross sections as
established on and presented with the preliminary plats and as
approved by the Township Board of Supervisors. Street cross-sections
shall be in accordance with standards and specifications established by
the Township.
B. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the street right-of-way and
slopes of a minimum of two feet to one foot shall be constructed
commencing at the street right-of-way and extending on to the lots of
properties adjoining the street right-of-way; this applies to both cut and
fill sections.
C. Subgrade of streets shall be brought to the proper grade and contour
and shall be rolled and cross-rolled using compaction equipment
meeting the requirements of Form 408. Compaction of the subgrade
shall meet the density requirements of Form 408. Where subgrades
displaying pronounced elasticity or deformation under rolling
equipment are found and stability cannot be obtained, the unsuitable
material shall be removed and replaced until the subgrade is suitability
stabilized.
D. No base course shall be placed until the street subgrade has been
inspected and approved by the Township Engineer. Said inspections
shall be paid for as specified in Article IX of this part.
E. All of the required improvements specified in this article shall be
installed by the developer in accordance with Township standard
details,81 specifications or guidelines as established and adopted by the
Township Board of Supervisors and the appropriate sections of Form
408.
A. In areas where springs, poor soil drainage conditions, wet weather
springs or where conditions exist that underground drainage is
necessary to properly protect the proposed street pavement, there shall
be constructed pipe underdrain, stone underdrain or subgrade drains
according to current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications, subject to approval of drawings by the Township
Engineer.
B. If during construction unknown poor drainage conditions are
encountered by the owner, he shall notify the Township Engineer and
81.Editor's Note: Said standard details are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-30
1:353
§ 180-31. Curbing.
The type of curbing installed materials used and the locations required will
be determined by the Township Board of Supervisors and is subject to their
approval before installation of the same. Curbing shall be in accordance
with the standards and specifications established by the Township in the
Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2.
§ 180-32. Base course.
§ 180-33. Pavement wearing course.
§ 180-34. Sidewalks.
correct such conditions encountered at the direction of the Township
Engineer to his complete satisfaction.
C. Permanent pipe underdrain of a size, depth, width and slope as
determined by the Township Engineer shall be installed on the upper or
high side and all cut areas where they are required or necessary to
prevent the infiltration of water under the paved roadway.
A. An aggregate base, bituminous concrete base course and a bituminous
seal course shall be installed to lines, grades and cross sections in
accordance with the Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2, with all
materials used and all construction methods performed in conformity
with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408.
B. The base course shall be installed and constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications established by the Township in the
Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2.
A. The pavement bituminous wearing course shall not be installed until
90% of the dwellings are completed and construction equipment is not
using roadway. All damaged base course shall be replaced using same
depth and materials specified herein in § 180-32. Any uneven base
course shall be leveled with a bituminous leveling course. All repairs
shall be completed and approved by the Township Engineer prior to the
placement of the final wearing course.
B. The final bituminous pavement wearing course shall be constructed to
lines, grades and cross sections as approved with all material used and
all construction requirements performed in conformity with the latest
editions of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Subsection 420.
A. Sidewalks shall be provided when considered necessary by the
Planning Commission and approved by the Board of Supervisors for
protection of the public or wherever it is determined that the potential
volume of pedestrian traffic requires that sidewalks be installed.
§ 180-30 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-34
1:354
§ 180-35. Street signs.
§ 180-36. Sanitary sewers.
B. Sidewalks shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the
standards and specifications established by the Township in the
Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2.
C. Sidewalks shall be provided where streets of a proposed subdivision are
extensions of existing streets, having sidewalks on one or both sides.
D. Sidewalks, where not located on or within a public street legal right-ofway,
shall be provided with a legal access easement of not less than the
width of the sidewalk.
A. Street name signs shall be installed at each street intersection in
accordance to type of materials, design and standards established by
the Board of Supervisors prior to the occupancy of any dwellings.
B. A traffic control signage plan and supporting documentation shall be
submitted for approval and shall be installed prior to occupancy of any
dwellings.
C. All traffic control, no-parking and speed limit signs shall meet PennDOT
standards, and locations for such signs shall be determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. Installation of sanitary sewers, including house lines, laterals, trunk
lines, manholes and other appurtenances, shall comply with the rules
and regulations of the Township of Brighton Sewage Authority and
subject to inspection by the same.
B. In areas where a municipal sewer is not available (over 1,000 feet from
the nearest point of the subdivision), is not planned, is not
topographically feasible or where an easement cannot be obtained
through adjoining property, individual septic tanks, individual on-lot
septic disposal systems or private sanitary sewage treatment systems
may be permitted, subject to approval of drawings and design by the
Board of Supervisors and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. In areas where a municipal sewer is available, all properties within the
subdivision shall be connected thereto.
D. In areas where a municipal sewer is planned to be available, but not yet
built, laterals shall be extended to the center of the street or into rightof-
way and trunk lines provided to the edge of the subdivision closest to
the municipal trunk location and capped. Until such times as the
municipal sewer becomes available, individual septic tanks or a private
sanitary sewage treatment system must be installed. In the case of a
private treatment system, a trunkline sewer shall be provided to
connect into the municipal system.
§ 180-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-36
1:355
§ 180-37. Sanitary sewage treatment plant.
§ 180-38. Stormwater management. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 199]
See Chapter 173 for stormwater management and MS4 prohibited
discharge provisions.
§ 180-39. Water supply.
§ 180-40. Monuments.
Permanent monuments of reinforced concrete or metal shall be installed
after all grading and improvements have been installed to identify all street
rights-of-way and be set in locations as determined by the Township
Engineer. The developer shall furnish a certification from a professional
land surveyor that monuments have been set in the locations as shown on
E. All individual properties now using sanitary sewage facilities and all
future properties requiring sanitary sewage facilities shall be
connected to the municipal sewage system if it is available.
A. Installation of sanitary sewage treatment plants and other
appurtenances shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the Board of Supervisors.
B. No building permit will be issued for any construction or development
until either an individual sanitary sewage disposal system or a sanitary
sewage treatment plant installation has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors upon receipt of written approval of said system by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as
amended.82
A. If public water supply is available or definitely planned for the area by
the Township of Brighton Municipal Water Authority, then provisions
shall be made for its immediate and eventual use.
B. Community wells or project wells for water supply shall be approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Board of Supervisors.
C. All water supply systems shall be constructed as per the Township of
Brighton municipal authorities' specifications and approved by the
same, and copies of such agreements for supply of water service shall
be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for approval.
D. Fire hydrants shall be installed as per the Township's specifications for
locations and must meet minimum static pressure levels as specified by
the Municipal Water Authority.
82.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 180-36 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-40
1:356
the recorded subdivision plan. The monuments shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with the standards and specifications established by
the Township in the Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2.
§ 180-41. Street trees.
Trees, their proposed locations, spacing and species must be submitted for
approval by the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors, and comply
with § 195-137.1G. On narrow rights-of-way and planting strips between
sidewalk and the curb, trees will not be permitted, but are to be placed
inside the property lines.
§ 180-42. Space for special purposes.
§ 180-43. Existing natural conditions.
In wooded areas or where other natural conditions exist in such a manner
that their presence adds to the desirability of a subdivision, the Board
of Supervisors shall require that the subdivider preserve as much of the
original trees and natural conditions as is economically feasible and require
that a minimum of grading be done other than the grading and excavating
which is required for the construction of the improvements in accordance
with the improvement standards included herein and approved by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 180-44. Grading plan.
A. Easements, adequate for all utilities: see § 180-25.
B. Buffer yards or landscaping shall be provided as per the provisions of
§ 195-137.1 of the Township's Zoning Ordinance.
C. When adequate public play space does not exist, in the opinion of the
Board of Supervisors, within 1/2 mile of the site, the Board will request
the developer to provide recreational space on a pro rata schedule
based on minimum recreation needs as defined by the Township of
Brighton Board of Supervisors. A fee in lieu of dedication of open space
may be accepted by the Board at its sole discretion and based upon a
formula developed to assess minimum Township recreation land or
facility needs in relation to the size and location of the development
being considered for approval. Procedures for collection of fees in lieu
of dedication shall conform to Section 503, Subsection 11, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.83
A. At the time of submission of a subdivision plan or development plan for
preliminary approval, a grading plan shall be presented for review. The
grading plan shall identify the existing and proposed grade contours at
two-foot intervals with sufficient elevations to show proposed grading
of streets, lots, drainageways, stormwater detention ponds and any
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10503(11).
§ 180-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-44
1:357
§ 180-45. As-built plans.
After completion of all required improvements, the developer shall have
his engineer or surveyor prepare and submit for Township approval plans
and profiles showing the exact location, elevation, grade, size, stormwater
detention pond volumes and material used to install all facilities. All as-built
plans shall be prepared in accordance with standards and specifications
established by the Township in the Township Public and Private
Improvement Code, Chapter 180, Part 2. Said plans shall be dated, signed
and sealed by the person preparing the plan and be submitted on
reproducible linen or Mylar.
other proposed grading activity. The grading plan shall be prepared
in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the
Township Code, Chapter 180, Part 2.
B. Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of construction and
stored in accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan as required under § 180-12D(2) of this part. Upon
completion of the construction, the topsoil must be redistributed on the
site uniformly. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or
planted in accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan as required under § 180-12D(2) of this part.
§ 180-44 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-45
1:358
ARTICLE VII
Mobile Home Park Developments
[Added 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 100]
§ 180-46. Purpose.
The purpose of this mobile home park designation is to establish standards,
conditions, regulations and procedures governing land uses, including
densities, open spaces and design criteria and provide for the
administration and enforcement of this alternative land use. This article is
enacted pursuant to the Township of Brighton General Development Plan
for the purpose of:
§ 180-47. Coordination.
A. Encouraging innovation in residential development in accordance with
the changing technology of land development.
B. Promoting flexibility in design and permitting planned diversification in
the location of residential structures.
C. Promoting the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic
arrangement of buildings, mobile homes, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation systems and utilities.
D. Preserving to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape
features and amenities and to utilize such features in a harmonious
fashion.
E. Providing for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and
other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided
under conventional land development or subdivision procedures.
F. Combining and coordinating building relationships within the mobile
home park.
G. Ensuring a quality of construction commensurate with other
developments within the Township.
A. This article is based upon and shall be interpreted in relation to the
Township of Brighton General Development Plan, providing for the
development, continuing development and future development of the
Township of Brighton. Every application for approval of a mobile home
park development shall be based upon and interpreted in relationship
to the Township of Brighton General Development Plan.
B. It is the intent of this part that land development review under this part,
or as the same may be hereafter amended, of the Township of Brighton
be carried out simultaneously with the review of the mobile home park
application.
§ 180-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-47
1:359
§ 180-48. Interpretation.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be and shall be
construed as the minimum requirements governing the evaluation and
approval of proposals for mobile home park developments.
§ 180-49. Definitions.
For the purposes of administering the provisions of this article, the
definition of terms outlined in Article II84 of this part shall be applicable.
§ 180-50. Eligibility requirements.
No application for approval of a mobile home park development shall be
considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
§ 180-51. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in a mobile home park development where
such uses are permitted or conditional in a given zoning district:
C. The development plans required under this article shall be in a form
which will satisfy the requirements for final plats.
A. Tract size. The tract proposed for a mobile home park development
shall be a contiguous area of land containing a minimum of 20 acres.
B. Ownership requirements. An application for approval of a mobile home
park development may be filed by a person having an interest in the
property to be included in the mobile home park. The application shall
be filed in the name or names of the recorded owner or owners of
property included in the development. However, the applications may
be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. In any
event, the applicant shall evidence a full ownership interest in the land
(legal title or the execution of a binding sales agreement) before final
approval of his plan.
A. Principal uses: Single-family mobile or modular homes.
B. Supplemental uses: Nonresidential uses, such as mobile home park
office, service building, educational and noncommercial recreation
facilities, provided that such uses primarily are for the service and
convenience of the residents of the mobile home park development.
C. Accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and parking areas.
(2) Signs as provided in Article XIV of the Brighton Township Zoning
Ordinance.
84.Editor's Note: See § 180-9, Definitions.
§ 180-47 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-51
1:360
§ 180-52. Design standards.
Residential density. The maximum allowable gross residential density shall
not exceed four units per acre of land included in the tract to be laid out for
mobile or modular home use.
§ 180-53. Common open space.
§ 180-54. Environmental considerations.
(3) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
use.
A. Common open space shall comprise at least 20% of the total gross land
area of the mobile home park development.
B. Of the minimum required 20% of the gross land area to be established
as common open space, no wetlands or areas of 25% slope or greater
shall be included in the calculated open space area.
C. Landscaped areas devoted to recreational activities, freely accessible to
residents, may be counted toward the total common open space
required at a value of 60% of the actual area devoted to this use.
D. Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses located in
common open space areas shall be considered improved open space as
long as the total impervious surfaces (paving, roofs, etc.) constitute no
more than 5% of the total common open space.
E. Location. Common open spaces shall be distributed more or less
equitably throughout the mobile home park development in relation to
the dwelling units of the people they are intended to serve and
consistent with good design principles. Common open spaces shall not
be isolated in one corner of the mobile home park, but shall be
accessible to all dwelling units in the plan.
F. Ownership. There shall be provisions which ensure that the common
open space land shall continue as such and be properly maintained. The
developer shall either:
(1) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another public
agency has indicated it will accept such dedication; or
(2) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such open
space land.
A. The developer shall take every precaution to preserve the natural site
amenities and to minimize the disturbance to the natural environment.
B. The development will be designed and programmed so as to minimize
earthmoving activity, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction of
natural amenities.
§ 180-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-54
1:361
§ 180-55. Site considerations.
C. Existing trees shall be preserved where possible. The location of trees
must be considered when planning the common open space, location of
buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds,
parking areas and finished grade levels.
D. Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize topsoil.
E. Erosion control measures such as minimizing the area of exposed soil,
mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting temporary
ground cover shall be instituted as necessary.
F. In order to ensure the preservation of the natural characteristics of the
land, trees and ground cover, natural bodies of water and other
significant natural features, a detailed landscaping plan and an erosion
control and sedimentation plan will be required at the time of initial
plan submission.
A. No structure shall be permitted within 25 feet of the right-of-way of an
access road, interior road or within 20 feet of common parking areas.
B. No structure shall be permitted within 50 feet from the property lines at
the perimeter of the development. A planting strip of at least 20 feet in
width shall be provided along all property lines at the perimeter of the
mobile home park development where necessary to protect the privacy
of neighboring residents. This determination shall be made by the
Board of Supervisors.
C. Perimeter buffer strips. All mobile home lots shall be located at least
100 feet from any mobile home park development perimeter property
boundary line which abuts on a public street or highway and at least 50
feet from any mobile home perimeter property boundary line which
abuts on any other adjacent property; all interior drives and common
parking areas located within the mobile home park development shall
be located at least 65 feet from any mobile home park development
perimeter property boundary line which abuts on any other adjacent
property.
D. The perimeter buffer strips shall be used for lawn and screening
purposes only, such as ornamental fencing or natural growth, and no
part of any required buffer strip shall be used for any other required
area for a mobile home lot, service building, interior drives or water and
sewage facilities which are located above ground. Planted buffer strips
shall be a planted visual barrier or landscape screen shall be composed
of plants and evergreen trees arranged to form both a low-level and a
high-level screen. The high-level screen shall consist of evergreen trees
planted to a height of six or more feet and planted at intervals no
greater than 10 feet. The low-level screen shall consist of shrubs or
hedges planted at an initial height of not less than two feet. A low-level
§ 180-54 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-55
1:362
§ 180-56. Traffic circulation.
§ 180-57. Parking facilities.
screen shall be placed in alternating rows to produce a more effective
barrier.
A. Primary vehicular access points shall be designed to permit smooth
traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Local streets within mobile home park
developments shall not be connected to streets outside the
development in such a way as to encourage their use by through traffic.
B. Mobile home park developments shall be so located with regard to
major thoroughfares and uses outside the tract being developed that
traffic congestion shall not be created. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 134]
C. Pedestrian circulation systems and related walkways shall be insulated
completely and as reasonably as possible from the vehicular street
system in order to provide separation of pedestrian and vehicular
movement. This shall include, when deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission, pedestrian underpass or overpass in the vicinity of
schools, playgrounds, commercial areas and other uses which generate
a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic.
A. For each dwelling unit, there shall be two off-street parking spaces as
per the provisions of the Brighton Township Zoning Ordinance, Article
XIII, § 195-104.
B. Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other
parking areas.
C. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, roads and
traffic arteries with hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in
grade or walls.
D. No more than 10 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row
without being interrupted by a landscaping island.
E. All off-street loading areas shall be paved as specified in § 180-59. All
areas shall be marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading,
parking and storage.
F. All parking areas and off-street loading areas shall be graded, drained
and paved so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding
and other inconvenience.
G. Each service building shall be provided with a minimum of at least five
common parking spaces for a mobile home park development of 40 or
fewer mobile home lots, plus one additional parking space for each 10
mobile home lots or fraction thereof over 40. The area required for
§ 180-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-57
1:363
§ 180-58. Procedure for approval.
common parking spaces for service buildings shall not be located on
the right-of-way of any interior drive nor shall they reduce the required
square foot area required for service buildings.
H. Every mobile home park development shall be designed to provide
common parking for guests, delivery and service vehicles. A minimum
of 10 common parking spaces shall be provided for mobile home park
developments of 10 or fewer mobile home lots, plus one additional
common parking space for each five mobile home lots located in the
mobile home park. These common parking spaces shall be provided in
an area or areas acceptable to the Planning Commission and shall not
be a part of any other required parking area.
I. No required common parking space shall be a part of any required area
for interior drives, recreational areas, service areas, perimeter buffer
strips or mobile home lots as required herein.
J. All required common parking spaces and their connecting drives shall
be paved in accordance with § 180-59.
A. Existing ordinances and resolutions. Whenever this part refers to or
requires compliance with any other Township ordinances, resolutions
or specifications, those ordinances, resolutions or specifications or
sections of the same referred to shall be considered a part of this part
as though the same were incorporated herein relative to the
development, operation and maintenance of a mobile home park.
B. Preapplication procedure.
(1) The mobile home park developer shall meet with the Planning
Commission prior to formal application to discuss his plans and
shall prepare a suitable sketch and plans sufficient to give a
general understanding of his purposes. The Planning Commission
shall inform the developer as to the general suitability of his plans
and any other modifications required by this article or other
Township ordinances if it deems it to be in the best interest of the
Township.
(2) The preapplication shall include the general information, location
map, sketch plan and review as required by Article III, § 180-11, of
this part.
C. Preliminary development plan.
(1) On reaching conclusions as recommended above regarding the
general program and objectives, the developer shall prepare and
submit the preliminary plans in accordance with the requirements
of Article III of this part.
(2) Each application shall also provide the following information:
§ 180-57 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-58
1:364
§ 180-59. Design standards.
(a) Size and location of mobile home stands.
(b) Distances between stands and structures.
(c) Accessory structures.
(d) Off-street parking.
(e) Service and recreational buildings.
(f) Density of land use to be developed for residential,
recreational, service and other residential uses.
(g) The location and area of open space not a part of each mobile
home lot to be provided and maintained for the active and
passive recreational use and benefit of the occupants of the
mobile home park.
(h) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors to
determine compliance with the provisions of this part and all
other Township ordinances.
D. Tentative approval of development plan. Should tentative approval of
the proposed development plan be granted, the developer shall obtain
conditional approval from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the
development plan fully complies with the Rules and Regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection governing mobile home park
developments.
E. Final development plan. Upon approval of the preliminary development
plan, the developer shall prepare and submit the final development plan
in accordance with the requirements of Article III, § 180-13, of this part.
F. Final approval. Following review of the final development plan, the
Board of Supervisors shall either deny or issue a permit to construct the
mobile home park development in accordance with approved plans. In
issuing a construction permit, the Board of Supervisors may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as may appear necessary to
implement the purposes of this part. Such required conditions and
safeguards may include, without limitation, the continuing right to
require or impose additional reasonable restrictions and limitations, as
the circumstances may require, governing the operation and
maintenance of the mobile home park.
A. Storm drains and facilities:
(1) All stormwater drains and facilities shall be designed and installed
as per the requirements of Article VI, § 180-38, of this part.
§ 180-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-59
1:365
(2) Stormwater drains, inlets, manholes, culverts, ditches and all
necessary appurtenances shall be designed to have adequate
capacity to control the removal of stormwater in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual,
Part (2), Highway Design, Chapter (12), Drainage Design, and all
amendments thereto.
B. Entrance and exit drives.
(1) The location of entrance and exit drives shall provide a safe and
convenient vehicular access from the mobile home park
development to abutting public streets or highways.
(2) Not more than two such drives will be permitted for each mobile
home park, except as follows:
(a) When the size of the mobile home park development indicates
the necessity of additional drives to accommodate additional
volumes of traffic, the Planning Commission or the Board of
Supervisors may approve or also required additional drives.
(b) The number, location and arrangement of all exit or entrance
drives shall be subject to any specifications or requirements
that the Planning Commission or the Board of Supervisors
determines is necessary to provide safe access to and from any
mobile home park development or to protect the traffic
traveling on all public highways.
(3) The entrance or exit drive connecting the park with a public street
or highway right-of-way shall be constructed according to the
following requirements and specifications:
(a) The developer shall obtain and submit for approval a highway
occupancy permit for all entrance and exit drives.
(b) They shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Rules and
Regulations, Chapter 1, Driveway Regulations, effective
January 2, 1969, or as any such rules and regulations may be
amended.
(c) They shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of Article VI, §§ 180-32, Base course, and 180-33, Pavement
wearing course, of this part.
(d) When located within a public street or highway right-of-way,
curbs shall be constructed with an approved eight-inch-bytwenty-
four-inch straight cement concrete curb.
(e) They shall not be more than 8% in grade and have an adequate
leveling area at the edge of the public road to assure a safe
entrance or exit for all traffic.
§ 180-59 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-59
1:366
C. Interior drives.
(1) All interior drives shall be designed to accommodate anticipated
traffic and in any case shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(a) The maximum allowable center-line grade shall not be more
than 12% and the minimum center-line grade shall not be less
than 1%.
(b) In order to assure adequate and safe site distances, all interior
drives shall have a minimum center-line radii of not less than
100 feet and vertical curves that provide a minimum sight
distance of not less than 150 feet.
(c) All interior drives shall have a right-of-way width of not less
than 50 feet and be constructed as follows:
[1] Shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the
requirements of Article VI, §§ 180-32, Base course, and
180-33, Pavement wearing course, of this part.
[2] Shall have a minimum bituminous paved cartway or
roadway width of not less than 24 feet.
(2) Culs-de-sac shall be provided at the end of all dead-end interior
drives. The cul-de-sac shall have a right-of-way diameter of 100 feet
and shall have a turnaround constructed thereon with a cartway
diameter of 80 feet.
D. Common parking spaces. Common parking spaces:
(1) Shall not exceed 5% in grade.
(2) Shall be line painted with parking spaces 10 feet wide by 20 feet
long.
(3) Handicap spaces shall be provided and clearly marked.
(4) Shall have access isles having a width of not less than 25 feet.
E. Mobile home lots.
(1) A lot shall be provided for each mobile home with the boundaries
indicated by corner markers. Each lot shall have a minimum lot
area of 7,500 square feet, with a minimum width of 75 feet.
(2) Every mobile home shall be located on the lot so that the following
minimum setbacks are complied with:
(a) Twenty-five feet from the right-of-way of an access road,
interior road.
(b) Ten feet from side mobile home lot line.
§ 180-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-59
1:367
(c) Forty feet from rear mobile home lot line.
(d) Twenty feet from common parking areas.
(3) All mobile home lots shall abut on an interior drive.
(4) On each mobile home lot there shall be constructed a concrete pad
with a minimum width of 12 feet or equal to the width of the mobile
home to be placed thereon, if greater, and a length equal to the
length of proposed mobile home to be placed thereon and a
concrete patio adjacent thereto, with a minimum size of eight feet
wide by 10 feet long, all concrete to have a minimum thickness of
not less than four inches.
(5) Each mobile home lot shall be assigned a lot number, which shall be
recorded on all plans submitted and used on all registration papers.
(6) The square foot floor area of the mobile home and any accessory
building located on a mobile home lot shall not exceed 18% of the
total mobile home lot area.
(7) Modular or sectional home lots. Lots designed or proposed to be
used for the placement or erection of any modular or sectional
home which requires the construction of a permanent foundation
with footers shall be in compliance with and meet the requirements
for a mobile home lot, plus the following additional requirements:
F. Service buildings.
(1) Each mobile home park development shall have at least one service
building adequate in size to provide management offices, storage
area, laundry facilities and rest room facilities, sufficient in number
and size to properly serve the mobile home park and be provided in
accordance with recommended standard as set forth by the U. S.
Department of Health, Education and Welfare and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) Each service building shall be located on an interior lot having a
minimum area of 12,000 square feet in area.
(3) Each service building shall be located on the lot so that there shall
be at least 25 feet clearance between any service building and any
mobile home lot line or any interior drive right-of-way line.
G. Water supply.
(1) An adequate supply of water shall be provided for the mobile home
park, mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities
as follows:
(a) Where available and feasible, connections shall be made to a
public water supply system in accordance with the rules,
regulations and required agreements of the Municipal
§ 180-59 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-59
1:368
Authority serving the mobile home park development. The
water supply system shall meet the standards for adequate
fire protection as established by the National Fire Protection
Association Standard NFPA No. 501A, as amended. Evidence
of approved agreement indicating that the mobile home park
development will be serviced with water supply by the
Municipal Authority shall be submitted with the preliminary
plans.
(b) Where no public water supply system is available, the
developer shall construct and operate a private water supply
system in accordance with the current requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, plus the following additional
requirements:
[1] The developer shall submit with his preliminary plans of
the mobile home park development a log on a test well or
wells which are proposed to be used as a source of water
supply containing the following information:
[a] Length of proposed casing.
[b] Depth of wall.
[c] Elevation of water in well before pumping test.
[d] Twenty-four-hour pumping log on well, showing
pumping rate in gallons per minute for each hour
pumped, draw down rate in feet per hour for each
hour pumped, total gallons pumped, gallons per
minute that can be pumped from well over an
extended period of time that would be available for
use and total gallons that would be available during
any one hour required for peak demand.
[2] The developer shall submit preliminary design plans
showing the location, depths and materials proposed for
the entire water supply system. The water supply system
shall be designed with on-site storage facilities capable of
supplying the mobile home park development with water
for a period of not less than 24 hours.
(2) All plumbing installations in mobile home park developments shall
be installed and completed in accordance with the American
Standard National Plumbing Code, as amended.
H. Electrical distribution system.
(1) Every mobile home park development shall contain an electrical
wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and
appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in
§ 180-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-59
1:369
accordance with local electric power company's specifications
regulating such systems and the latest edition of the National
Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(2) Individual electrical connections shall be provided on each mobile
home lot with an approved disconnecting device and overcurrent
protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be
120/240 volts AC, 100 amperes.
(3) Grounding shall be provided on all exposed non-current-carrying
metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment by means of
an approved grounding conductor, run with branch circuit
conductors or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring.
The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground
for mobile homes or other equipment.
(4) Exterior lighting shall be provided on all interior drives with a
minimum of one one-hundred-seventy-five-watt sharp cutoff
luminaire for each 400 linear feet of interior drives proposed as
measured along the center line of said drives. Areas adjacent to
service buildings and parking areas shall be adequately lighted.
I. On-lot parking spaces. Every mobile home park development shall be
designed to provide the following required parking spaces as follows:
(1) Two parking spaces shall be provided and constructed on each
mobile home lot and shall be located on the mobile home lot and
abut the required right-of-way for the interior drives of the mobile
home park.
(2) On-lot parking spaces shall be constructed and improved with a
four-inch depth crushed aggregate base course, a one-and-one-halfinch
ID-2 bituminous binder course and a one-inch ID-2 Bituminous
wearing course as specified herein.
(3) There shall be constructed a four-foot-wide concrete walk from the
parking space to the concrete patio on each mobile home lot.
J. Sewage disposal system.
(1) An adequate sewage collection and treatment facility shall be
provided for the mobile home park, mobile homes, service
buildings and other accessory facilities as follows:
(a) Where available and feasible, connection shall be made to a
public sewage system in accordance with the rules, regulations
and required agreements of the Sewage Authority serving the
mobile home park. Evidence of approved agreements
indicating that the mobile home park development will be
serviced with sewage facilities by the Sewage Authority shall
be submitted with the preliminary plans.
§ 180-59 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-59
1:370
(b) Where no public sewage system is available, the developer
shall construct and operate a private sewage collection and
treatment system in accordance with the then-prevailing
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) All main line sewers shall be designed to adequately carry the
anticipated flow; manholes shall be constructed on main line
sewers at all changes in horizontal alignment or vertical grade,
with a maximum distance of not more than 400 feet between
manholes. Wye branches shall be installed in main line for all
mobile home lots. The system shall be constructed with approved
materials and installed properly to prevent infiltration of surface
water and underground water from entering the system.
(3) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a four-inch diameter
sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be located on each
stand so that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet
will approximate a vertical position.
(4) From the sewer riser pipe to the main interceptor sewer line there
shall be constructed a sewer lateral, four inches in diameter with
watertight joints; the minimum grade of any lateral shall not be less
than 1/4 of an inch per foot.
(5) When the mobile home lot is not occupied and the sewer
connection is not in use, it shall be capped with an airtight cap or
screw plug.
(6) Sewage treatment plant shall not be located closer than 250 feet to
any mobile home lot, recreational area, interior drive or service
building, nor shall they be located closer than 250 feet to any
adjacent property line, unless otherwise approved. The location of
all sewage treatment plants shall be approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(7) Traps when required shall be installed on laterals to mobile home
lots to prevent sewer gases from escaping.
(8) There shall be at least six feet separation between all sewer and
water lines located in parallel ditches.
K. Erosion control.
(1) All development, construction and earthmoving activities proposed
or necessary to complete the mobile home park development shall
be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Title 25,
Rules and Regulations, Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
(2) The developer shall submit with his final plans an Erosion Control
Plan and Permit (or verification that no permit is required) from the
§ 180-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-59
1:371
§ 180-60. Completion of improvements or guaranty thereof.
Before finally approving any mobile home park development plan, the Board
of Supervisors shall require that all improvements provided therein shall be
completed or a guaranty thereof shall be provided as required by Section
509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.85
§ 180-61. Operation of mobile home parks.
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to Section
102.41 and 102.42 relating to permit requirements of Chapter 102,
Erosion Control Rules and Regulations.
L. Placement, anchorage and enclosures. Every mobile home park
development shall be designed to provide spaces on the mobile home
lots as follows:
(1) Placement. Any lot developed as a site for a mobile home park
development which has a ground grade in excess of 5% shall have
the mobile home unit set parallel to the contour and on a level
graded area no smaller in size than the overall dimensions of the
mobile home.
(2) Anchorage. Each mobile home shall be installed upon and securely
fastened to the concrete pad specified in § 180-59E(4) or to a
frostfree foundation and footer. Anchorage shall consist of one tiedown
bracket, cable or chain with turn buckles, located at each
corner thereof and affixed to the mobile home to securely hold and
anchor the mobile home to the ground. No mobile home shall be
erected on jacks, loose blocks or other temporary support
materials.
(3) Enclosures. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall
be erected around the entire base of each mobile home. Such
enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and
deterioration of the structure.
A. Supervision. Any person applying for a permit to operate a mobile home
park shall agree in the application that a responsible attendant shall be
in charge of the management of the mobile home park at all times. At
the time of application the names of the management attendants to be
in active charge of the proposed mobile home park and their hours of
duty shall be set forth. Any changes after the permit is granted shall be
filed with the authority issuing the permit within five days from the date
of change. Such attendants shall supervise conduct on and in all
common areas and be responsible for any violation of the provisions of
this part or any other laws, ordinances or rules which govern the
operation of such mobile home park.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-59 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-61
1:372
B. Maintenance. All stormwater drainage facilities, driveways, sidewalks,
parking areas, service buildings, water supply, sewage collection and
treatment plant facilities, lawns, buffer strips, recreational facilities or
areas, exterior lighting or any other facilities installed or required by
this part shall be maintained in a workable, safe and sanitary condition
at all times by the person to whom permit is issued.
C. Refuse handling.
(1) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home
park development shall be conducted so as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, air pollution or
fire hazards. The mobile home park shall be kept free of all litter,
rubbish and flammable material at all times. All organic rubbish or
storage shall be contained in airtight, vermin-proof of containers
which shall also be screened from public view.
(2) The developer or person applying for a permit to operate a mobile
home park development shall submit with his application the
following general information in regards to refuse handling, which
shall be subject to approval by the Township and subject to
additional requirements at any time if the Township deems it
advisable in order to assure safe health standards:
(a) The location, capacity, number and type of containers used for
storage of refuse.
(b) The location, number and size of container racks used for
holding containers.
(c) Frequency of collection and type of vehicles used for collection
and transportation of all refuse.
(d) Location used for disposal of refuse.
D. Fuel supply and storage. The storage, supply, distribution and use of all
liquefied petroleum gas, fuel oil or other necessary combustible
material within a mobile home park, which is used to supply mobile
homes, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the District
Fire Marshal or any other authority which has jurisdiction regarding
the use, storage, safety devices, shutoff valves, piping, location and size
of storage containers of all necessary combustible material.
E. Building permit. No mobile home, modular or sectional home, service
building, accessory use building or recreation building shall be placed,
erected, reconstructed, moved or altered in any mobile home park until
a building permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning Officer. Every
application for a building permit shall contain all information as
required by the Brighton Township Zoning Ordinance.
F. Registration of mobile or modular homes and occupants.
§ 180-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-61
1:373
(1) Every mobile home park developer shall maintain and keep a
register of all mobile or modular homes placed in the mobile home
park site and such register shall contain the following information:
(a) Building and occupancy permit number.
(b) The make and date of manufacture, serial number and capital
value.
(c) Lot number in mobile home park on which mobile or modular
home has been placed.
(d) Recorded owner of mobile or modular home.
(e) The names, ages and last prior residence address of all
occupants.
(f) A removal or departure date of any mobile home or modular
home from the mobile home park.
(2) The mobile home park register shall be made available upon
request by the Zoning Officer and shall be kept on file by the
developer for a period of one year following the date of departure
of any mobile or modular home or its occupants.
§ 180-61 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-61
1:374
ARTICLE VIII
Open Space, Recreation Land and Facilities
§ 180-62. Location of common open space.
The common open space shall be located so as to be consistent with good
design principles for land use. Where possible, it shall be designed as a
contiguous area easily accessible to the residents and preserving natural
features.
§ 180-63. Ownership of common open space.
§ 180-64. Homeowners' association.
Where commonly owned open space is proposed and the Township of
Brighton has indicated that it will not accept such land, a homeowners'
association or open space trust shall be formed and be governed according
to the following regulations:
A. There shall be provisions which ensure that the common open space
land shall continue as such and be properly maintained. The developer
shall either:
(1) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another public
agency has indicated it will accept such dedication;
(2) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such open
space land; or
(3) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
B. In the case of Subsection A(3) above, each organization shall be a
nonprofit homeowner corporation, unless the developer demonstrates
that a community open space trust is a more appropriate form of
organization.
A. The organization is organized by the developer and operated with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary before the sale of
any lots within the development. At such time that 25% of the parcels in
the development have been built upon and occupied, the organization
shall become active through the election of a Board of Directors.
B. Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors.
C. The organization shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance and
taxes on common open space.
D. The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance with
procedures established by them.
§ 180-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-64
1:375
§ 180-64.1. Public recreation land and facilities. [Added 12-12-2005
by Ord. No. 146]
E. The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space.
F. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain a
common open space or any successor organization shall at any time
after establishment of the homeowners' association fail to maintain the
common open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance
with the development plan, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners of the development
setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the common open space in reasonable condition, and said
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
cured within 30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the original notice
as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be cured.
A. Purpose. The Brighton Township Recreation Land and Facilities
Program is established to provide all Township residents with land and
recreation facilities based on the Recreation Plan and the Township
Comprehensive Plan. The required dedication of public recreation land
or the payment of fees-in-lieu-of-dedication of public recreation land is
based on the standards set forth in the Recreation Plan, Part V.
B. A minimum of 2,533 square feet of public recreation land shall be
dedicated for each dwelling unit proposed in a residential subdivision
or land development and shall be identified on the final plat.
C. Land to be dedicated for public recreation land shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(1) Land shall provide recreation opportunities to all residents of the
Township, with reasonable access to the proposed public
recreation area;
(2) Land shall be centrally located within the development site, on one
tract of land and with no intervening land;
(3) Land shall be accessible to each dwelling unit proposed, whether
singly or in combination with other units in a residential
subdivision or land, via pedestrian easements or dedicated rightsof-
way within which sidewalks can be designed and built, and to all
other dwelling units off site with reasonable access to the
development via public rights-of-way.
(4) Land shall be graded to a maximum of 3% slope;
§ 180-64 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-64.1
1:376
(5) Land shall have public utilities, including water, sanitary sewer and
electric service, when such development includes the provisions of
such utilities;
(6) Land shall be free from any encumbrances or liens which would
prevent, limit or restrict its use in any way for recreational
purposes.
(7) Land shall not include areas defined as wetlands by either the Army
Corps of Engineers or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection;
(8) Land shall be seeded and otherwise ready to be used for
recreational purposes in full compliance with all other provisions of
this section within six months of occupancy of the first dwelling
unit in a residential development;
(9) Land shall be a minimum size of three acres (Recreation Plan, Part
V). Where the aggregate area of land to be dedicated on a perdwelling-
unit (or per-household) basis would result in less than
three acres because of the number of lots being created, the
developer or applicant has the following options:
(a) Supplement the minimum per-dwelling-unit ratio dedication in
order to meet the three-acre minimum; or
(b) Pay the per-dwelling-unit fee-in-lieu-of-dedication.
(10) Land shall be capable of achieving the Township's recreation and
open space objectives as set forth in the Brighton Township
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the Brighton Township
Supervisors in 1999.
(11) Land shall be suitable for recreational uses, as described in the
Recreation Plan.
D. In-lieu-of-dedication of public recreation land, the developer or
applicant shall pay a fee of $612.46, as calculated per Exhibit #V-9 in
the Recreation Plan, or such other amount as the Supervisors may
hereafter declare by resolution, for each dwelling unit proposed at the
time of final approval. This fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
building and zoning permit for the construction of any dwelling unit,
and such fees shall comply with the provisions of § 180-78.
E. Subdivisions of three or fewer lots and land developments of three or
fewer units shall not be required to dedicate public recreation land.
§ 180-64.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-64.1
1:377

ARTICLE IX
Condition of Acceptance
§ 180-65. Performance requirements.
§ 180-66. Performance guaranties. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
184]
The Board of Supervisors shall ensure, through receipt of certificates of
compliance submitted and attested by the Township Engineer, that required
improvements have been installed according to the specifications of the
final plat or alternately require the posting of adequate surety to cover
the cost for such improvements. The Board of Supervisors shall approve
one of the following alternatives for guaranteeing compliance with the
requirements of this section for the subdivider requesting final approval
of a plat. Final approval of a plat shall not be granted until the surety
required is fully provided. The amount of financial security to be posted for
the completion of the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled
for completion by the subdivider. The amount estimated shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer for submittal to the Township by the
applicant or subdivider. If the amount of the estimated financial security
is contested by the Township of Brighton Engineer, a third licensed
professional engineer chosen mutually by the applicant or subdivider and
the Township shall estimate the amount of financial security necessary,
which estimate shall be presumed fair and reasonable. Fees for the services
of the third engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant
or subdivider.
A. Before approving any subdivision plan, the Board of Supervisors shall
require a written agreement that necessary grading, paving and street
improvements, sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains and
sanitary sewers, as may be required by the Township, shall be installed
by the subdivider in strict accordance with the design standards and
specifications of the Township, within a specified time period. Such
agreement shall be prepared by the Township Solicitor at the expense
of the developer.
B. When requested by the developer in order to facilitate financing, the
Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining satisfactory financial security. The final plat shall
not be signed nor recorded until the financial improvements agreement
is executed. If within 90 days, unless written extension is granted by the
Board of Supervisors, the financial improvement agreement is not
executed, then the resolution or letter of contingent approval shall
expire.
A. Completion of improvements prior to final approval. Prior to final plat
approval, the subdivider shall complete, in a manner satisfactory to the
§ 180-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-66
1:379
Board of Supervisors and the Township Engineer, all improvements
required in these regulations specified in the final subdivision plat and
as approved by the Board of Supervisors and shall dedicate the same to
the Township in accordance with these regulations. Final plat approval
shall not be granted until the dedication of said improvements has been
accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Guaranty of future performance. In lieu of requiring the completion of
all improvements prior to final plat approval, the Township may, at its
discretion, enter into a contract with the subdivider whereby the
subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by
this part or otherwise specified by the Board of Supervisors in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors. To secure this contract, the
subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, one of the following guaranties:
(1) Surety bond. The subdivider shall obtain a surety bond from a
surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of
Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable to the Township and shall
be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost, as estimated by
the Township Engineer, as herein provided, for the installation of
all improvements, plus 10%. The duration of the bond shall be until
such time as the improvements are accepted by the Township in
accordance with the requirements of this part.
(2) Escrow account. The subdivider shall deposit cash or other
instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either with
the Township or in escrow with a bank. The form of any instruments
other than cash and, in the case of an escrow account, the bank
with which the funds are to be deposited shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Solicitor. The amount of the deposit shall
be at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the Township
Engineer, of installing all required improvements, plus 10%. In case
of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the Board of
Supervisors an agreement between the financial bank and himself
guaranteeing the following:
(a) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust
until released by the Board of Supervisors and may not be used
or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter
during the period; and
(b) That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete said improvements, the bank shall immediately make
the funds in said account available to the Township for use in
the completion of those improvements.
(3) Irrevocable letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount equal to the cost of all required improvements, as
estimated by the Township Engineer, plus 10%, shall be posted
naming the Township Board of Supervisors as beneficiaries. The
§ 180-66 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-66
1:380
§ 180-67. Procedure for release from improvement bond; fees.
financial institution which provides the irrevocable letter of credit
shall be first approved by the Township Board of Supervisors.
Failure on the part of the subdivider to complete said
improvements shall cause the funds posted as an irrevocable letter
of credit to be more available to the Township upon written notice
of a claim against said funds.
A. When the developer has completed all of the required improvements,
the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the completion of the required
improvements and shall send a copy to the Township Engineer.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the
aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a
report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board of
Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, in writing by
certified or registered mail, within 15 days of receipt of the engineer's
report of the action of said Board of Supervisors with relation thereto.
D. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond.
E. If any portion of the required improvements shall not be approved or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
F. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
subdivider's or developer's right to contest or question, by legal
proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board of
Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
G. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred in connection with the inspection of
improvements. The applicant shall not be required to reimburse the
Board of Supervisors for any inspection which is duplicative of
inspections conducted by other governmental agencies or public
§ 180-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-67
1:381
utilities. The burden of proving that any inspection is duplicative shall
be upon the objecting applicant. Such reimbursement shall be based
upon a schedule established by resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the Township's professional consultant for work performed
for similar services in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the professional consultant to the
Township for comparable services when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No.
184]
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall submit to the applicant an itemized
bill showing the work performed in connection with the inspection
of improvements performed, identifying the person performing the
services and the time and date spent for each task. In the event the
applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in connection
with the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall, no later
than 100 days after the date of transmittal of a bill for inspection
services, notify the Township and the Township's professional
consultant that such inspection expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary and shall explain the basis of their
objections to the fees charged. The Township shall not delay or
disapprove a request for release of financial security, a subdivision
or land development application or any approval or permit related
to development due to the applicant's dispute of inspection
expenses. Failure of the applicant to dispute a bill within 100 days
shall be a waiver of the applicant's right to arbitration of that bill
under this section.
(2) Subsequent to the final release of financial security for completion
of improvements for a subdivision or land development or any
phase thereof, the professional consultant shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors a bill for inspection services, specifically designated
as a final bill, which the Board of Supervisors shall submit to the
applicant. The final bill shall include inspection fees incurred
through the release of financial security.
(3) If the professional consultant and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the
applicant shall have the right, within 100 days of the transmittal of
the final bill or supplement to the final bill to the applicant, to
request the appointment of another professional consultant to
serve as an arbitrator. The applicant and the professional
consultant whose fees are being challenged shall, by mutual
agreement, appoint another professional consultant to review any
bills the applicant has disputed and which remain unsolved and
make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary. The arbitrator shall be of the same profession as the
professional consultant whose fees are being challenged.
§ 180-67 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-67
1:382
(4) The arbitrator so appointed shall hear such evidence and review
such documentation as the arbitrator in his or her sole opinion
deems necessary and shall render a decision no later than 50 days
after the date of appointment. Based on the decision of the
arbitrator, the applicant or the professional consultant whose fees
were challenged shall be required to pay any amounts necessary to
implement the decision within 60 days. In the event the Township
has paid the professional consultant an amount in excess of the
amount determined to be reasonable and necessary, the
professional consultant shall within 60 days reimburse the excess
payment.
(5) In the event the Township's professional consultant and the
applicant cannot agree upon the arbitrator to be appointed within
20 days of the request for appointment of an arbitrator, then, upon
application of either party, the President Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the Township is
located (or if at the time there be no President Judge, then the
senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such arbitrator, who,
in that case, shall be neither the Township's professional consultant
nor any professional consultant who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(6) The fee of the arbitrator shall be paid by the applicant if the
disputed fee is upheld by the arbitrator. The fee of the arbitrator
shall be paid by the charging party if the disputed fee is $2,500 or
greater than the payment decided by the arbitrator. The fee of the
arbitrator shall be paid in an equal amount by the applicant and the
charging party if the disputed fee is less than $2,500 of the
payment decided by the arbitrator.
(7) In the event that the disputed fees have been paid and the
arbitrator finds that the disputed fees are unreasonable or
excessive by more than $10,000, the arbitrator shall:
(a) Award the amount of the fees found to be unreasonable or
excessive to the party that paid the disputed fee; and
(b) Impose a surcharge of 4% of the amount found as
unreasonable or excessive to be paid to the party that paid the
disputed fee.
(8) The Township or an applicant shall have 100 days after paying a fee
to dispute any fee charged as being unreasonable or excessive.
H. At the time of final approval and prior to the issuance of any required
Township permit, a ten-percent deposit shall be made by the applicant
with the Township for the costs of review and inspection where public
utilities and facilities are proposed. Said 10% shall be calculated as
10% of the total costs of installation of said public utilities and facilities.
§ 180-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-67
1:383
§ 180-68. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
§ 180-69. Maintenance bond.
Any funds unexpended at the time of acceptance of the aforementioned
public utilities and facilities shall be returned to the applicant.
A. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not
been constructed and installed as provided for in the written
agreement, this part and the requirements of the Board of Supervisors
or in accord with the approved final plan, the Board of Supervisors shall
enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies.
B. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the
cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may,
at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the
subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or
equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete the
remainder of the improvements.
C. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other municipal purpose.
A. Before the Township Engineer shall issue to the Board of Supervisors a
written certification that all improvements specified and required have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the agreement and
requirements relative to the land development and in compliance with
the specifications, standards, ordinances and requirements of the
Township, the subdivider or developer shall be required to deposit with
the Township a corporate maintenance bond, in such amount, under
such conditions, in such form and with approved surety as shall be
required by the Board of Supervisors. The maintenance bond shall
guarantee the repairs and maintenance by the subdivider or developer
of the streets, roads, pavement, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, stormwater
drains and facilities, sanitary sewer and facilities and any other
improvements constructed and installed in the subdivision or
development, for a period of 18 months from the date of final and
official acceptance of the above said improvements and facilities by the
Board of Supervisors. The amount of the maintenance bond shall not
exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
B. The repairs and maintenance required to be performed by the
subdivider or developer shall extend only to making good any inherent
defects which become manifested in the materials and workmanship
under ordinary conditions and shall not be held to cover any breakage
or damage caused by improper use or by accident resulting from
circumstances over which the subdivider or developer has no control.
§ 180-67 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-70
1:384
§ 180-70. Acceptance of public improvements.
Upon completion of the inspection and approval of the public
improvements, the developer shall submit a request to the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, to accept the dedication of the public
improvements. The request for acceptance shall include deeds of dedication
and all other legal descriptive documents necessary to prepare a resolution
or ordinance and shall be submitted at least 20 days prior to the regular
meeting of the Board of Supervisors. At the regular meeting, the Board
of Supervisors shall enact a resolution or ordinance accepting the public
improvements as part of the Township's public facilities, subject to the
posting of the maintenance bond required by this part.
§ 180-71. Final inspection of public improvements.
Prior to the end of the eighteen-month period when the maintenance bond
expires and before the maintenance bond is released, the Township
Engineer shall make a final inspection and certify in writing to the Board
of Supervisors that all the public improvements are in good order. If any
repairs are required or maintenance needed, the subdivider shall be notified
in writing and such repairs or maintenance shall be done and approved
prior to certification by the Township Engineer.
§ 180-72. Snowplowing.
The applicant shall be responsible from the time there is at least one
occupant in the proposed development to plow snow on development roads
as may be necessary to provide ingress and egress to the occupants at the
applicant's cost, prior to the acceptance of dedicated streets. The applicant
shall post with the Township the sum of $2,500 as an escrow to provide for
snow removal prior to acceptance of dedication of the streets. The applicant
simultaneously shall present a contract with a snow removal firm indicating
that the firm has been contracted to remove snow from the development
streets within four hours after snow has stopped falling. All payments for
said snow removal shall be made from the escrow fund. In the event that the
escrow should become depleted, the applicant shall post an additional sum
of $2,500 and such further amounts as may be necessary until such time as
the dedication of the streets is accepted by the Township. In the event that
the applicant or the snow removal firm does not perform in accordance with
the contract presented, the Township may hire contractors to perform the
necessary work and pay those contractors from the escrow fund.
§ 180-73. Higher standards.
A. No road, street, land, way or related improvement shall be accepted as
a part of the highway system of the Township or for maintenance unless
opened, laid out, graded and improved in strict accordance with the
standards and regulations of the Township. The requirements,
specifications and standards of construction, material and
appurtenances as designated herein are considered as minimum and
§ 180-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-73
1:385
§ 180-74. Recording plat; fee.
the Board of Supervisors may as it deems advisable revise said
specifications and requirements to secure a higher standard of
improvements and community development.
B. No stormwater drainage facilities, sanitary sewer and sewage
treatment facilities, water supply and water distribution system and
facilities or any other facilities or improvements will be accepted as a
part of the Township's facilities for operation and maintenance unless
designed and constructed in strict compliance with all the standards,
specifications, rules, regulations, ordinances and requirements of the
Township.
A. Upon approval of this final plat, the subdivider or developer shall within
60 days of such final approval deliver to the Township offices the
following plats and documents for Township signatures:
(1) One original linen or Mylar and two duplicate Mylars and six prints.
(2) Four sets of prints of the preliminary construction drawings and
supporting documents.
(3) Executed homeowners' association document meeting the
requirements of §§ 180-65, Performance requirements, and of
180-64, Homeowners' association, of this part.
(4) Executed developers' agreement meeting the requirements of
§§ 180-65, Performance requirements, and of 180-66, Performance
guaranties, of this part.
B. At the time of submittal of the plans and documents as specified in this
section, the developer shall pay to the Township a fee equal to the
prevailing fee of the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds for recording the
original plat and any homeowners' association documents required to
be recorded in such office, plus a fee for all municipal services rendered
as set forth and the appropriate fee ordinances.
C. Upon recording of plats and homeowners' association documents, the
Township shall apprise the subdivider or developer of the official filing
date as well as the appropriate recording reference data and make
available one duplicate Mylar plat and one set of approved construction
drawings plus a copy of the homeowners' association documents.
D. After an approved subdivision plan shall have been officially recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be considered to be a part of the official plan of the Township.
E. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision
plan to be recorded may be offered for dedication to the Township by
formal notation thereof on the plan or the owner may note on such plan
§ 180-73 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-74
1:386
§ 180-75. Reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of
the Township of Brighton Planning Commission or the Township Board
of Supervisors may present additional relevant information and request
reconsideration of the original findings, decision or recommendation upon
written request within 30 days of notification of the Planning Commission or
Board of Supervisors decision on either preliminary or final plat application.
§ 180-76. Approval refused by Supervisors. [Amended 11-13-2001
by Ord. No. 120]
In any case where the Board of Supervisors shall refuse to approve any
plats or land developments submitted to it in accordance with this part,
any person aggrieved by the action of the Board of Supervisors may appeal
as provided by law to the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 180-77. Unapproved plans; responsibility of Township.
If any road or any drainage facilities in connection therewith shall be
opened, constructed or dedicated for public use or travel, except in strict
accordance with plats approved and recorded as herein provided, neither
the Board of Supervisors nor any public authorities shall place, construct or
operate any sewer, drain, water pipe or other facilities or do any work of any
kind in or upon such road; and neither the Township Board of Supervisors
nor any other public authorities shall have responsibility of any kind with
respect to any such road or drainage facilities, notwithstanding any use of
the same by the public; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall prevent the laying of trunk sewers, drains, water or gas mains, if
required by engineering necessity for the accommodating of other territory.
that any improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Township.
F. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan
shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such
time as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Township
and accepted by ordinance or resolution or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
G. Any single nonresidential land development, whether occurring on one
lot or on a combination of parcels under single ownership and phased
over a period of years, shall be recorded with Beaver County as an
approved site plan following completion of all contemplated
improvements and structures. The as-built drawing shall contain all
that information required by § 195-8A of the Township of Brighton
Zoning Ordinance. One Mylar drawing shall be submitted to the Beaver
County Recorder of Deeds and two paper copies filed with the Township
of Brighton.
§ 180-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-77
1:387

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 180-78. Plan application fees, inspection fees and fees-in-lieu-ofdedication.
A. All applications submitted for the review and approval of plans of
subdivision and plans of land development prepared in preliminary or
final form shall be accompanied by a review fee and a deposit in
accordance with a schedule of fees and charges established or to be
established and adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors to
defray or to help defray any cost that may be incurred by the Township
in viewing and inspecting the site of the subdivision or land
development and reviewing the application, data and the plans
submitted relative to the same.
(1) A report shall be made at the time of application for preliminary
and final subdivision approval, with the Township of Brighton in
order to cover the costs of engineering review and inspection of
proposed improvements, legal fees and other consultants' fees
whose services are required in order to provide a comprehensive
review of the subdivision application.
(2) A review fee, as established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, and fees as charged to the Township for activities
related to the subdivision application shall be deducted from the
deposit as invoices are received.
(3) A full accounting of all expenses incurred during the review and
approval of a subdivision application, whether preliminary or final,
shall be kept by the Township Secretary and made available to the
applicant.
(4) An administrative fee of 5% on all services provided to the
Township by professional consultants shall be deducted from the
deposit as invoices are received. Any professional consultant’s fees
shall be deducted from the deposit as invoices are received.
[Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 184]
(5) Upon completion of all improvements to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer, and prior to final release, the Township may
retain 10% of the original amount of the posted financial security
for the subject improvements. [Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 184]
B. The schedule of fees and charges established or to be established may
vary and be regulated in accordance to the scope and complexity of the
plan of subdivision and land development project, such as:
(1) Number of parcels or lots in plan.
(2) Site development plans.
§ 180-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-78
1:389
(3) Utility development plans.
(4) Applicant's plan of construction and development of the land,
structures and facilities thereon and appurtenant thereto.
(5) Number of times that a plan is submitted or resubmitted for review
and request is made for approval of the same.
C. Where a plan of subdivision or land development for any reason has
been rejected by the Township Planning Commission and/or Board of
Supervisors, the applicant when resubmitting plans and application for
review and approval of the same shall be required to pay a fee as set
forth in the Township's schedule of fees and charges for such
submittals.
D. All review fees shall be made payable to the Township of Brighton. All
review fees deducted from the original deposit are nonrefundable, and
the approval or rejection for any reason of any plan of subdivision or
land development will not be reason or cause for the return of any fee
submitted.
E. Fees-in-lieu-of-dedication. Fees received as fees-in-lieu-of-dedication of
public recreation land, an option set forth in § 180-64.1, shall comply
with the following: [Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 146]
(1) Establishment of fund. Fees-in-lieu-of-dedication shall be deposited
in an interest-bearing account. This account shall be separate from
other municipal accounts and shall be clearly identified for the
purpose of funding the acquisition and development of recreation
facilities within the Township of Brighton and shall be expended
only for such purposes. Interest earned by each account shall
become funds of that account.
(2) Maintenance of records. The Township Manager/Secretary shall
maintain and keep adequate financial records for such recreation
fee account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all
revenues and ensure that monies expended are used solely for the
purposes stated.
(3) Refunds. If the Township has failed to utilize the fee paid for the
purposes set forth in this section within three years from the date
such fee was paid, upon request of any person who paid any fee
under this subsection, the Township shall refund such fee, plus
interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment.
§ 180-78 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-78
1:390
ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 180-79. Procedure for amendment.
A. A public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice for any
proposed amendment to the Township of Brighton Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
B. At least 30 days prior to the scheduled public hearing date, a copy of
the proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Beaver County
Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
C. Within 30 days after adoption, the Board of Supervisors shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the Beaver County Planning
Commission.
§ 180-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-79
1:391

ARTICLE XII
Enforcement Remedies
§ 180-80. Enforcement remedies; violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of the Brighton Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance enacted under Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, and all amendments thereto,86 shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this part to
have believed that was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township of Brighton the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-80
1:393

ARTICLE XIII
Preventive Remedies
§ 180-81. Preventive remedies.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Township of Brighton may institute
and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
B. The Township of Brighton may refuse to issue any permit or grant any
approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property
which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of
real property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to Act 247,
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.87 This authority to deny
such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-81
1:395

ARTICLE XIV
Certificates, Affidavits, Approvals, Etc.88
§ 180-82. List of documents.
The certificates quoted below shall be inscribed on the plan as quoted and
shall be properly signed and attested when the plan is submitted to the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors. All certificates shall be
placed on final plan in an arrangement suitable for placement of all required
seals.
A. Owners Adoption.
B. Individual Acknowledgement.
C. Corporation Adoption.
D. Corporation Acknowledgement.
E. Township Planning Commission Approval.
F. Approval by Township of Brighton.
G. Beaver County Planning Commission Acknowledgement.
H. Proof of Recording.
I. Professional Land Surveyor Certificate.
J. Township Engineer's Approval.
K. Owners Acceptance of Responsibility for Provided Stormwater
Drainage Facilities and Control of Stormwater Water Drainage.
88.Editor's Note: Forms of these documents are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-82
1:397

ARTICLE XV
Conflict with Other Provisions
§ 180-83. Brighton Township Zoning Ordinance.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to permit any waiver of the
restriction or requirements of the Brighton Township Zoning Ordinance, as
now enacted or hereafter amended.89
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 180-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-83
1:399

Part 2
Pub[lAicd oApntde dP2ri-v1a0t-e2 I0m03prBoyveOmrden. Nt Sot. a1n2d8a]rds
ARTICLE XVI
Administration
§ 180-84. Title.
These regulations shall be known as and referred to as the "Township of
Brighton Public and Private Improvements Code."
§ 180-85. General purposes.
The general purposes of these regulations are to:
§ 180-86. Interpretation of Code provisions.
The Township shall be responsible for the administration, enforcement and
interpretation of the Code.
§ 180-87. Applicability.
These regulations shall be applicable to the construction of all public and
private improvements in the Township.
§ 180-88. Construction of public and private improvements.
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
A. Establish construction standards and specifications governing
construction of public and private improvements in the Township.
B. Control the construction and installation of public and private
improvements in the Township by developers and public utility
companies.
C. Control the acceptance of public improvements.
D. Control the satisfactory completion of private improvements.
A. Public and private improvements constructed by any person or entity
including a developer shall be constructed in accordance with Article
XVIII, Construction Standards for Public and Private Improvements of
this Code and the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details.
§ 180-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-88
1:401

ARTICLE XVII
Definitions
§ 180-89. Definitions.
These definitions shall apply to this part.
APPLICANT — A landowner who filed an application for a grading permit, as
defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968,
as amended by Act 170 of 1988 as further amended by Act 209 of 1990 and
Act 131 of 1992, and all amendments thereto,90 who has filed an application
for development with the Township.
ARCHITECT — A registered architect licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AS-BUILT PLAN — A drawing showing the final as-built location, elevation
and/or depth, size and materials of all completed public and private
improvements including the location of all easements.
BEDROCK — Natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at ground surface or
beneath unconsolidated superficial deposits.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Brighton.
BUILDING CODE — The Township Building Code.91
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way surfaced for vehicular
use.
CODE — The Public and Private Improvements Code of the Township.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — The construction standards for streets,
stormwater management facilities, sanitary sewer systems, pedestrian
circulation, driveways, parking areas, fire hydrants, guide rails, cable TV
and other facilities as set forth in this Code.
DRIVEWAY — A private area used exclusively for circulation and ingress
and egress to a street by the owner or owners or visitors of the lot. All
driveways shall meet the requirements of this Code.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing one
dwelling unit occupied by one family and which is the only principal building
on the lot.
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and knowledgeable in civil engineering;
the Township Engineer who is charged with the design, development and
inspection of the work, and determining the quantities of materials and
labor to be paid for. During the execution of the work the Engineer shall
also be interpreted to mean the assistant, inspector, or other representative
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 180-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-89
1:403
acting within the authority given. The Engineer is to be considered an agent
of the Township.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as gravitational creep.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, disturbed, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location including the condition resulting therefrom.
FINANCIAL SECURITY — A corporate bond letter of credit, or escrow
account from a surety or a financial institution acceptable to the Township,
naming the Township as obligee in forms specified in Article XVIII of this
Code.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
GEOLOGIST — A registered professional geologist licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING REPORT — A report prepared by a
registered professional geological engineer.
GRADE — The elevation of the existing or proposed ground surface at the
location of any proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — An excavation or fill or a combination thereof.
GRADING ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Manager or his designated
representative.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required pursuant to the provisions of this
part.
HAZARD — Any danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or any
adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or stability of
property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and storm sewers,
including stream pollution.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in Chapter 100 of the Township Code, Floodplain Management,
and Chapter 195 of the Township Code, Zoning, as being inundated by
the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified as floodway
(FW), flood-fringe (FF) and general floodplain (FA).
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or parcel
of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether
or not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner) or other
persons having a proprietary interest in the lot.
§ 180-89 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-89
1:404
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OFF-SITE BORROW AREA — Excavating, loading, hauling and placement of
excavated material on another site for disposal.
OFF-SITE SPOIL AREAS — Storage of excavated material and stockpiling
on waste areas and dump sites including topsoil, aggregates and other
miscellaneous materials.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PARKING AREA — A public or private garage or a paved, open off-street
area other than a driveway or street with adequate means of access, which
meets the requirements of this Code and which is used exclusively for the
parking of vehicles of occupants or visitors of the lot; however, a driveway
serving a single-family dwelling or which is for the exclusive use of an
individual dwelling unit in a residential building may be used as a parking
area.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any landowner, agent of said landowner, or tenant with
the permission of said landowner who has been granted a grading permit
pursuant to the provisions of this part.
PERSON — A natural person, but also includes a partnership, corporation,
trust, association or any type of legal entity.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT — A street, sidewalk, walkway, gutter, curb,
sewer line, water line, driveway, parking area, street light, street sign or
related facility, to be operated and maintained by a private entity, but which
must comply with this Code.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — A street, sidewalk, walkway, gutter, curb,
sewer, water line, street light, street sign or related facility to be dedicated
to or maintained by the Township, and which must comply with this Code.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction of
and control by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or franchised
cable television company.
RETAINING WALL — A structure composed of concrete, steel, wood, or
other approved building material within the allowable stresses as specified
under the Building Code92 constructed for the purpose of supporting a cut
or filled embankment, or to retain or support the lateral pressure of earth
or other superimposed loads.
SECURITY — A bond, letter of credit or cash provided by the permit holder
to secure performance under this Code.
SIDEWALK — A walk for pedestrians constructed to the standards set forth
in this Code.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 180-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-89
1:405
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land which are adjoining and with respect to which GRADING work is to be
continuous and performed at the same time.
SLOPE — The upward or downward slant or inclination or degree of slant,
expressed either as a horizontal-to-vertical ratio or as a percentage of
vertical inclination from the horizontal.
SOIL CONSERVATION REPORT — A report, prepared by a registered
professional engineer, that includes a description of a site and topography,
drainage, cover, soils, soil limitations, erosion and sediment potential,
surface runoff changes and recommendations to minimize soil limitations,
erosion and sediment, and surface water disposal problems.
SOILS ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and having training and experience in
the branch of soils engineering.
SOILS SURVEY — The survey for Beaver County, Pennsylvania, and the
accompanying text, soil survey of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, as prepared
by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, et al.
SOLID WASTE — Any and all parts or combination of ashes, garbage,
refuse, radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and
industrial wastes such as food processing wastes, wood, plastic, scrap
metal, etc.
SPECIFICATIONS — Those portions of the contract documents consisting
of written technical descriptions of materials, equipment, construction
systems, standards and workmanship as applied to the work.
STEEP SLOPE — Where in a one-hundred-foot horizontal distance, the slope
exceeds 40%.
STREET — An avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane,
viaduct and any other ways used by vehicular traffic but not including
driveways, parking areas or walkways. Street includes the entire right-ofway.
SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of the Township.
TOWNSHIP — Brighton Township, a second class Township located in
Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP CODE — The Code of the Township adopted by the Board of
Supervisors and as amended from time to time.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The appointed engineer of the Township of
Brighton.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager of the Township of Brighton.
TRENCH — An excavation made for installation or replacement of utilities
where the depth exceeds the width of the trench.
UTILITY — A public service including but not limited to electric service, gas
service, telephone and cable TV service.
§ 180-89 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-89
1:406
WALKWAY — A walk for pedestrians constructed to the standards set forth
in the Public Improvements Code.
§ 180-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-89
1:407

ARTICLE XVIII
Construction Standards for Public and Private Improvements
§ 180-90. Streets. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
A. Street classifications.
(1) The following street classification system is hereby adopted for all
proposed streets in the Township:93
(a) Arterial street, refer to Detail RD-01 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
(b) Commercial collector street, refer to Detail RD-02 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(c) Residential collector street, refer to Detail RD-03 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(d) Local commercial street, refer to Detail RD-04 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(e) Local residential street, refer to Detail RD-05 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(2) The functional classification of all existing streets is as specified
and adopted by the Township in its Comprehensive Plan. Where a
proposed development abuts an existing street, the street it shall
be improved and widened in accordance with its classification for
the full length of the development.
(3) The functional classification of any proposed street that is not
specified in the current Comprehensive Plan of the Township,
adopted by the Township, shall be determined by the Engineer
consistent with the definitions for the street classification system.
(4) The functional classification of all proposed residential streets is
based on the average daily traffic volumes generated by the
proposed residential development as specified in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, 6th
Edition. All proposed streets where the anticipated average daily
traffic volume generated by the development exceeds 500 vehicles
per day shall be designated as collector streets.
(5) The functional classification of all proposed streets in a commercial
development is based on the average daily traffic volume generated
by the proposed commercial development as specified in the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) General Manual, 6th
Edition. All proposed streets where the anticipated average daily
traffic volume generated by the development exceeds 300 vehicles
per day shall be designated as collector streets.
93.Editor's Note: The following details are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 180-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-90
1:409
B. Street grading and paving standards.
(1) Arterial streets (RD-01). Typical section of grading, paving,
curbing, underdrains and berm grading for all arterial streets shall
be approved in accordance with construction standards on Detail
RD-01 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details. Geometric design shall be in accordance with the
appropriate design speed as specified in Detail RD-07 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details and as
determined by the Township upon recommendation by the
Engineer, the design standards of the Township Code, Subdivision
of Land, and this Code.
(2) Commercial/collector street (RD-02). Typical section of paving,
underdrains and berm grading for commercial/collector streets
shall be installed in accordance with the construction standards on
Detail RD-02 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards
and Details. Geometric design shall be in accordance with the
appropriate design speed as specified in Detail RD-07 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details and as
determined by the Township upon recommendation by the
Township Engineer, the design standards of the Township Code,
Subdivision of Land, and this Code.
(3) Residential collector street (RD-03). Typical section of paving,
underdrains and berm grading for residential collector streets shall
be in accordance with the construction standards on Detail RD-03
of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
Geometric design shall be installed in accordance with the
appropriate design speed as specified in Detail RD-07 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details and as
determined by the Township upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer, the design standards of the Township Code,
Subdivision of Land, and this Code.
(4) Local commercial street (RD-04). Typical section of grading,
paving, curbing, underdrains and berm grading for local
commercial or industrial streets shall be installed in accordance
with the construction standards on Detail RD-04 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details. Geometric design
shall be in accordance with the appropriate design speed as
specified in Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details and as determined by the Township upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer, the design standards of
the Township Code, Subdivision of Land, and this Code.
(5) Local residential street (RD-05). Typical section of grading, paving,
curbing, underdrains and berm grading for minor local residential
streets shall be installed in accordance with the construction
standards on Detail RD-05 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details. Geometric design shall be in accordance
§ 180-90 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-90
1:410
with the appropriate design speed as specified in Detail RD-07 of
the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details and
as determined by the Township upon recommendation of the
Township Engineer, the design standards of the Township Code,
Subdivision of Land, and this Code.
(6) Materials. The base course and wearing surface of all streets shall
be constructed in accordance with the standards of this Code, and
all materials used shall meet the latest Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation specifications. Additional base course depths may
be required as the Engineer may determine to be necessary for the
type of street that has been proposed.
(7) Bituminous curb underdrain. Permanent underdrains of a size and
slope to be determined by the Engineer shall be installed on the
upper or higher side of all streets, in cut areas where they are
necessary to prevent the infiltration of water under the paved
roadway and at the low points in all roads or streets. All
underdrains shall parallel the roadway as nearly as possible and
shall be in accordance with the construction standards on Details
RD-01, RD-02, RD-03, RD-04, RD-05, and SS-16 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(8) Shoulders. Street shoulders shall be graded for the full width of the
right-of-way in accordance with the typical street section in this
Code and thoroughly compacted by rolling all shoulders. Slopes
and berms shall be seeded to prevent erosion.
(9) Utilities in streets. All utilities crossing streets shall be installed in
trenches backfilled and compacted with aggregate meeting the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications and
approved by the Engineer, and all other utilities within the right-ofway
of streets shall be installed before the base, binder and
bituminous wearing course is installed.
(10) Trench repaving for bituminous paving (RD-19). All pavement
restoration in bituminous pavement shall be constructed in
accordance with the construction standard in Detail RD-19 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(11) Paving notch Detail (RD-15). New asphalt pavement shall meet
existing asphalt pavement in accordance with the construction
standard in Detail RD-15 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details.
(12) Two-phase paving. When the bituminous paving is in a subdivision
or other land development being developed at that time and it is
anticipated that construction activity and heavy material hauling
will be taking place for an extended period of time. A one-inch skim
coat of either FJ-1 bituminous material or 9.5mm HMA wearing
course material shall be applied. The final bituminous wearing
§ 180-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-90
1:411
course material shall be installed as specified in the developer's
agreement.
(13) Curb ramps. The location and design of all curb ramps for access
by disabled persons shall be approved by the Engineer. Such
approval does not represent compliance with the Accessibility
Guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities Act.94 Curb cuts in
straight curbs shall be in accordance with the current edition of
PennDOT RC-67M.
C. Street design criteria.
(1) All street classifications. Geometric design shall be in accordance
with § 180-21, Street requirements, of the Township Code and
Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards
and Details.
(a) Clear sight triangle. No obstructions shall be located within
the right-of-way or lot that obscures visibility at the
intersection of two streets or of a street and a residential
driveway. A clear sight triangle, as defined by this Code, shall
be maintained free of any obstructions. The sides of the clear
sight triangle shall be measured along the center line of the
intersecting streets and shall meet the minimum standards
shown in Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details. The clear sight triangle shall be shown
on the final plat for recording if it is beyond the boundary of the
right-of-way.
(b) Minimum sight distance. When a new street intersects an
existing street, the minimum sight distance at the intersection
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
minimum sight distance shown in Detail RD-07 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(c) Roadway design grade specification. The minimum allowable
street grade shall be 1%. The maximum allowable street grade
shall be 12% in accordance with Detail RD-07 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(d) Sight distance: for vertical curves, shall be of adequate length
in order to provide minimum sight distances in accordance
with Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details.
(e) Minimum center-line radii for horizontal curves shall be of
adequate length to provide a minimum sight distance in
accordance with Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
94.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 180-90 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-90
1:412
§ 180-91. Stormwater management facilities. [Amended 3-8-2004
by Ord. No. 134; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 199]
See Chapter 173 for stormwater management and MS4 prohibited
discharge provisions.
§ 180-92. Sanitary sewer and public water systems.
Design standards. All sanitary sewage facilities and all public water
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards and
requirements of all public boards or bodies having jurisdiction.
§ 180-93. Pedestrian circulation. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
202]
(f) Minimum right-of-way and cartway width shall be as per Detail
RD-07 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details unless otherwise required by Township Code
§ 180-21N(2).
(g) Minimum transient distances between reverse curves shall be
as specified in Detail RD-07 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
(2) Local residential (RD-08) and commercial culs-de-sac (RD-09):
Culs-de-sac shall meet the minimum standards shown in Details
RD-08 and RD-09 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details and the Township Subdivision of Land Code.
(3) Barricade for dead-end roads (RD-23). A barricade for dead-end
roads meeting the standard in Detail RD-23 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details shall be provided by
the developer when required by the Engineer.
(4) Pavement marking. All stop bars, symbols, transverse markings
and crosswalks shall be cold white plastic meeting Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation specifications. All longitude lines
shall be Traffic Zone Paint, Type II Waterborne.
(5) Cul-de-sac with island: planting requirement to allow emergency,
maintenance and delivery vehicles. Refer to Detail RD-10 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(6) Temporary hammerhead: turnaround shall meet the minimum
standards shown in Detail RD-11 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
(7) Cul-de-sac with island: residential or commercial, refer to Details
RD-12 and RD13 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards
and Details.
§ 180-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-93
1:413
§ 180-94. Driveways; access on to Township streets.
A. Sidewalks (concrete). All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance
with the following standards and as illustrated in Details RD-20 and
SD-08 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.95
Ramps for the physically challenged shall be provided at intersections
and crosswalks.
B. Walkways.
(1) Minimum width. Walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide. In
parking lots they shall be an additional 30 inches wide or separated
by an additional 30 inches of green space on each side where
automobiles or other vehicles may overhang the walkway.
(2) Height. Walkways in relation to parking lots and driveways shall be
raised to the same height as sidewalks in relation to streets. Refer
to Details RD-04 and SD-08 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details.
C. Multipurpose walking and biking paths.
(1) Eight feet minimum; 10 feet desirable.
(2) Multipurpose walking and biking paths shall be constructed as per
Detail RD-21 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards
and Details.
(3) Material shall be asphalt paving or other material if approved by
the Township.
A. General requirements. All driveways shall be located designed,
constructed, and maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or be
inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street.
B. General location restrictions. All driveways shall be permitted at
locations in which:
(1) Sight distance is adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the access driveway;
(2) The free movement of normal highway traffic is not impaired;
(3) The driveway will not create a hazard; and
(4) The driveway will not create an area of undue traffic congestion on
the highway.
(5) Adequate sight distance at all driveways shall conform to
PENNDOT latest Publication 282 (Highway Occupancy Permit
Handbook) and Pennsylvania Code Title 76 Transportation,
95.Editor's Note: Said details are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 180-93 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-94
1:414
§ 180-95. Parking areas and driveways on lots. [Amended 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 202]
Chapter 441 (Access to Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and
Local Roads). [Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
C. Residential driveway (SD-01 and SD-02). Within the right-of-way of
Township streets, residential driveways shall be constructed in
accordance with Details SD-01 and SD-0296 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 202]
D. Grade. Driveways shall be constructed to conform to the grade of the
finished shoulders. All descending or ascending grades of driveways
shall begin at the street right-of-way. No stormwater shall be permitted
to drain onto Township streets.
A. Minimum paving standards.
(1) For driveways and parking areas for single-family: none.
(2) All driveways and parking areas other than single-family shall have
an aggregate base course, a bituminous binder course and a
bituminous wearing course with sufficient structural strength to
carry anticipated wheel loads.
B. Parking area standards.
(1) Slopes.
(a) Maximum five-percent cross slope (along length of vehicle).
(b) Maximum seven-percent longitudinal slope (perpendicular to
vehicle).
(c) Minimum one-percent cross slope or longitudinal slope.
(2) Concrete mountable curbs (SD-06). When required, mountable
curbs shall be constructed to the standard in Detail SD-06 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.97
(a) Concrete curb detail (SD-10). When required, concrete curbs
shall be constructed to the standard in Detail SD-10 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(b) Depressed concrete curb detail (SD-11). When required,
depressed concrete curbs shall be constructed to the standard
in Detail SD-11 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details.
96.Editor's Note: Said details are included as attachments to this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Said details are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 180-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-95
1:415
§ 180-96. Fire hydrants.
Where fire hydrants are required, they shall be installed pursuant to
specifications of the body having jurisdiction.
§ 180-97. Type 2 weak post guide rails (RD-22). [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
All guide rails shall be constructed in accordance with Detail RD-2298 of the
Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
§ 180-98. Cable television.
Where Cable television is to be installed, it shall be installed pursuant to the
specifications of the body having jurisdiction.
§ 180-99. Electric.
Where electric is to be installed, it shall be installed pursuant to the
specifications of the body having jurisdiction.
§ 180-100. Gas.
Where gas is to be installed, it shall be installed pursuant to the
specifications of the body having jurisdiction.
(c) Typical street section with depressed concrete curb detail
(SD-11) or depressed bituminous curb (RD-18). When
required, typical street section with depressed concrete curbs
shall be constructed to the standard in Details SD-11 and
RD-18 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details.
(d) Plain concrete curb with gutter detail (SD-12). When required,
plain concrete curb with gutter shall be constructed to the
standard in Detail SD-14 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
(3) Curb ramps. The location and design of all curb ramps for access by
disabled persons shall be approved by the Engineer. Such approval
does not represent compliance with the accessibility guidelines of
the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(4) Accessible parking sign (SD-09). Parking spaces required or
designated to be accessible for the physically challenged shall be
identified by the installation of an accessible parking sign meeting
the requirements Detail SD-09 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
98.Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-95 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-101
1:416
§ 180-101. Water.
Where water is to be installed, it shall be installed pursuant to the
specifications of the body having jurisdiction.
§ 180-102. Underground utility installation.
A. General conditions.
(1) All street excavation within a Township right-of-way or easements
shall require a road opening permit.
(2) No street opening shall extend across more than half of the cartway
at a time. No street shall be closed at any time without prior
approval from Brighton Township.
(3) Two-way traffic should be maintained whenever possible.
(4) Access to driveways and/or buildings located within the work zone
shall maintained at all times.
(5) No more than 250 linear feet of excavation shall be opened at any
one time.
(6) Traffic control shall be maintained in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Highways Publication 203. The permittee shall
furnish and maintain such signs, barricades, lights and flag persons
as may be necessary to provide a safe and compliant work zone.
The Township may require a separate traffic control plan under
special circumstances.
(7) Provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater runoff at all
times. The work shall not be permitted to interfere with the normal
flow of surface or subsurface water.
(8) Future maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permittee
during the first two years after completion.
B. Pavement cuts. Open cutting of any street surface is not permitted
unless authorized by the Township Engineer.
(1) Cuts in the bituminous surface shall be a neat straight line the
entire length and width of the trench using a concrete saw. Cuts
through cement concrete shall be made to a sufficient depth to
enable the removal of the concrete in a clear straight break.
(2) All excavated material should be stored in such a manner as to not
interrupt pedestrian or automobile traffic. Pedestrian crosswalks
and sidewalks shall be kept clear at all times. Loose material shall
be promptly cleaned from the streets and sidewalks using
appropriate measures.
(3) Special backfill requirements may be set by the Township Engineer.
Backfill requirements will be determined at the time of application.
§ 180-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-102
1:417
§ 180-103. Monuments and markers.
(4) Restoration of asphalt pavement.
(a) Temporary pavement shall consist of the appropriate
compacted backfill material and topped with not less than
eight inches of cold patch. The temporary pavement shall be
replaced with the permanent repair immediately upon suitable
weather conditions or when the work is completed.
(b) Permanent repair shall be in accordance with Detail RD-1999 of
the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
C. Opening of berm or yard areas.
(1) All work performed in areas other than the improved surface
(asphalt or concrete) shall be performed in compliance with Detail
SD-21100 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
(2) All disturbed yard areas shall be graded, seeded, mulched and
restored to their original condition.
A. Type, material and size.
(1) Monuments. Monuments shall be of cast in place or precast
reinforced concrete at least six inches in diameter or four inches
square and at least 30 inches in depth, with a metal center plug.
The actual survey point shall be indicated by a one-sixteenth-inch
hole drilled in the metal plug.
(2) Markers. Markers shall be iron pins or pipes at least one-half inch
in diameter and not less than 30 inches in length or other material
acceptable to the Engineer.
B. Detection. Monuments and markers shall be detectable with
conventional ferrous metal or magnetic locators.
C. Acceptance of public improvements. No private or public improvements
shall be accepted by the Township until all required monuments have
been set and as-built drawings have been submitted and certified to, by
a professional land surveyor. As-built drawings shall be submitted as
follows: three paper copies (24 inches by 36 inches), one Mylar copy
and one copy on either a 3.5 floppy disc, CD, or e-mailed electronically
in an AutoCAD format. The following language shall be included on all
as-built drawings:
99.Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-102 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-103
1:418
§ 180-104. Traffic regulatory and guidance signs.
All installations, locations, and materials shall comply with Township and PA
DOT standards.
The professional land surveyor's certificate shall read as follows:
I, ____________________________, a registered professional surveyor
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania do hereby certify that this
plan is prepared from a field survey made on this ______ day
of _______________, 2002 (or current year) and it represents the
location of buildings, driveways, parking areas, landscaping and
elevations of the stormwater detention basin and its associated
facilities as shown thereon by me for the owners or agents.
________________________(SEAL)
Registration No. ______________________ Date:
D. As-built drawings. As-built drawings shall include, but need not to be
limited to, the following items:
(1) Commercial as-built drawings. Buildings and location in
relationship to; property lines; set back lines; property lines
(bearings and distances); property corner monuments; parking
delineation; line painting; right-of-way lines; easements; sanitary
sewer lines; water lines, fire hydrants, Fire Department
connections, handicap ramps, signage, parking; monument signs;
sidewalks; site lighting; paving areas (asphalt/concrete); curb
(asphalt/concrete); concrete pads; dumpster enclosure; drivewaysradius,
width, highway occupancy permit number, landscaping
required by Code; regulatory/warning signage; retaining walls;
guide rail; impervious/pervious computation; surveyors
certification block.
(2) Residential as-built drawings. Concrete monuments; monument
signs; easements; sanitary sewer lines, water lines, fire hydrants;
line painting; street lighting; centerline bearings and distances for
all public roadways; regulatory/warning signage; sidewalks;
handicap ramps; right-of-way lines; retaining walls; guiderail;
surveyors certification block.
(3) All as-built field surveys of the stormwater collection and detention
facilities shall include the top and invert elevations of all inlets and
manholes, endwalls and headwalls, easements and rights-of-way,
rock rip rap and grass swales, pipe sizes and materials, detention
basin storage volumes, outlet structure elevation with orifice size
and elevation with computation documenting that the stormwater
collection and detention facilities will manage and control the
approved allowable full range of storm events.
A. Traffic regulatory sign details and procedures.
§ 180-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-104
1:419
(1) Stop signs.
(2) Speed limit signs (25 mph, unless noted).
(3) No outlet signs.
(4) Yield signs.
(5) Weight, size and load restrictions.
(6) Turning restrictions.
(7) Stopping, standing and parking restrictions.
(8) Hazardous grade speed limits.
(9) No-passing zones.
(10) No turns on red restrictions.
(11) Removal of traffic hazards.
(12) School zones and school zone speed limits.
(13) Special speeds on bridges or elevated structures.
(14) Creation of one-way streets.
B. All traffic control signs (other than street names signs) must use the
following specifications:
(1) One sign per post.
(2) Must use easy erect channel.
(3) Ten-foot long galvanized steel posts.
(4) Three-foot counter sink posts.
(5) Break-away hardware.
(6) Theft proof nuts and bolts.
(7) All traffic control signs must be at least seven feet to the bottom of
the sign, and two feet to five feet behind the curb.
(8) Signs, when not at an intersection should be placed between lots,
on lot lines.
(9) Arrows indicate flow of traffic.
C. Street name signs.
(1) Developers may order street signs through the Township.
(2) The standard Brighton Township street sign will have the following
specifications:
§ 180-104 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-104
1:420
(a) The street name shall appear on street name signs in capital
letters six inches high.
(b) Prefixes such as "North" shall be abbreviated to N.
(c) Suffixes such as "Drive" shall be abbreviated to DR.
(d) Prefixes and suffixes shall be four inches high.
(e) The street name sign shall have 3M or equal white reflective
lettering, on 3M 7725-58 or equal greenish background.
(f) Signs shall be mounted on nine-inch-wide extruded aluminum
blanks predrilled to accept vandal-proof hardware.
(g) Required length of sign shall be determined by the road name.
(h) Post brackets and cross brackets for mounting the signs must
have a twelve-inch long slot for securing the signs and also be
drilled to accept vandal-proof hardware.
(i) The vandal-proof hardware shall consist of bolts with a 12 part
socket head.
(j) Sign posts shall be galvanized, 10.5 feet by 2.25 inches OD x
two feet ID round posts.
(3) Location.
(a) All street name signs should be located on the corner opposite
of where a stop sign will be.
(b) Post must be embedded in 24 inches to 30 inches of concrete
and two feet to five feet behind the curbs.
(4) Developers may install custom-made street name signs. The
specifications shall be as follows:
(a) Letter height must be four inch minimum.
(b) Letter width must be one-and-one-half-inch minimum.
(c) Letter stroke width must be three-fourths-inch minimum.
(d) Letter color must be white or white reflective material
(e) The background color must be contrasting from that of the
letters.
§ 180-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-104
1:421
*NOTE: All custom-made street name signs shall be the
responsibility of the respective homeowners' association and
shall be identified in the homeowners' association documents.
in the event that a custom-made sign for any reason may need
to be replaced, it shall be replaced in a reasonable amount of
time or the Township may replace it with a standard Brighton
Township sign.
(5) Type of installation required:
(a) Four-way signs shall be installed at all intersections where at
least one of the connecting roads are throughways that lead to
another street. If one of the streets has no outlet, then only a
two-way sign shall be required.
(b) Two-way signs shall be installed at intersections where none of
the streets are throughways that lead to another street.
D. Where required by the Township, the developer shall install one "No
Street Parking by Brighton Township Ordinance" sign at the street
entrance or entrance(s) to every plan. Specifications.
(1) The sign must be installed within the first 100 feet of the
entrance(s) to every development on the right-hand side of the
street.
(2) The sign design must be provided using specifications below (i.e.,
red lettering on reflective white background).
(a) Sign dimensions are 24 inches wide and 30 inches in height;
(b) The background must be white and be reflective;
(c) The lettering must be red;
(d) The sign must be outlined in red which is to be five-eighthsinch
stoke width;
(e) The lettering for "No Street Parking" is to be four inches in
height and five-eighths-inch stroke width;
(f) The lettering for "by Brighton Township Ordinance" is to be
two inches in height and three-eighths-inch stroke width;
(g) The layout of the sign shall be in accordance with current Penn
DOT regulations.
E. Final approval.
(1) All identification and traffic warning and regulatory signage must
be installed prior to the Township issuing any building permits.
(2) Bonds shall not be released for the streets until all signage
installations receive final approval from the Township Engineer.
§ 180-104 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-104
1:422
§ 180-105. Street lighting (SD-07). [Amended 12-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 146; 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
The Township may require developers to install street lighting along those
streets in the development to be dedicated to public use. All street lighting
shall be installed in compliance with Township standards for work in
Township rights-of-way. (See Detail SD-07101 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.) Payment for the energizing and
maintenance of the street lights shall be the responsibility of the developer
and/or the appropriate homeowners' association.
§ 180-106. Landscaping. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 202]
§ 180-107. Site design guidelines.
The maximum allowable slope on an embankment shall be two horizontal:
one vertical (ratio). All embankments steeper than 2:1 shall require a
retaining system.
(3) When all signs have been installed, the developer must request the
Township to review the installations. The Township will give written
acceptance/denial. (A copy must go to the Township.)
(4) All developers must purchase and install all signs on their own. The
Township will not order, pay for, receive, store or install any signs,
posts, etc., for the developer.
* NOTE: All PA DOT publications can be obtained from:
PA Dept. of Transportation
Publication Sales Store
P.O. Box 134
Middletown, PA 15057
A. Street tree planting specifications. Trees shall be of substantially
uniform size and shape and have straight trunks. Trees shall be
properly planted and staked and provisions made by the developer for
regular watering and maintenance until the development is complete
and Township acceptance of streets. Dead and dying trees shall be
replaced by the developer during the next planting season after the
initial planting. The following standards shall be used during planting
as approved by the Engineer:102
(1) (SD-03) Evergreen/deciduous tree planting detail: See Detail SD-03
of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
(2) (SD-04) Shrub planting detail: See Detail SD-04 of the Township
Minimum Construction Standards and Details.
101. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to this chapter.
102. Editor's Note: The following details are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 180-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-108
1:423
§ 180-108. Lighting.
All exterior parking lots, driveways, vehicular access aisles, pedestrian
access areas and loading spaces shall be sufficiently illuminated so as to
provide safe on-site movements.
A. Illumination shall be by sharp cutoff fixture-type with flush-mounted
lens cap only.
B. Fixtures shall be mounted parallel to the ground surface. Lighting for
the purpose of highlighting a structure or landscape feature shall be
exempt from this requirement, provided that the source of such light
shall not be visible from the property lines or public right-of-way.
C. Illumination shall not exceed one footcandle at all property boundaries.
D. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights
or from high-temperature processes (for example, combustion or
welding), so as to be visible from within any R-District.
§ 180-108 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-108
1:424
ARTICLE XIX
(Reserved)103
§ 180-109. through § 180-129. (Reserved)
103. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XIX, Site Grading, Excavation and Fill, was repealed 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 202. See now Ch. 104, Grading and Excavating.
§ 180-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-109
1:425

ARTICLE XX
Legal Responsibilities and Remedies
§ 180-130. Control of construction of public and private
improvements by developers. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 153]
All construction of public and private improvements in the Township must
comply with §§ 180-65 through 180-68 of this Code and shall be conducted
in accordance with §§ 180-84 through 180-140 of this Code.
A. Notice prior to start of work. In order that the Township may provide
inspection and emergency services during construction, the developer
shall file with the Township a notice of commencement in a form set
forth in Article XVIII not less than two days prior to start of work and
shall also submit the following:
(1) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the superintendent,
contractor and subcontractors and other responsible persons to be
contacted in case of emergencies.
(2) A general schedule of construction which is to be updated during
construction if changes are made.
B. Supervision and superintendence.
(1) The developer shall supervise and direct the work and be solely
responsible to see that the work is done in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications.
(2) The developer shall have available at all times while construction is
continuing a competent superintendent, who may be contacted
during an emergency. The superintendent will be the developer's
representative at the site and shall have authority to act on behalf
of the developer. All communications given to the superintendent
shall be as binding as if given to the developer. If the
superintendent is replaced, the developer shall give written notice
thereof to the Township immediately.
(3) The developer shall be fully responsible for the acts and omissions
of the contractors, the subcontractors, persons and organizations
directly or indirectly in his employ.
C. Site appearance. The developer shall keep the site free from
accumulation of waste materials, rubbish and other debris resulting
from the work. At the completion of the work, the developer shall
remove all waste materials, rubbish and debris from and about the site
as well as all tools, construction equipment and machinery, and surplus
materials and shall leave the site clean.
D. Parking. No construction vehicles, vehicles of construction employees,
equipment, materials or supplies shall encroach onto a public street. In
the case where there is a private street or proposed public street, not
§ 180-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-130
1:427
§ 180-131. Control of construction of utilities by public utility
companies.
A Township road occupancy permit is required for the installation of all
utilities located within an existing public street in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in the Code of the Township.
§ 180-132. Violations; enforcement notice.
yet accepted by the Township, the developer shall maintain an
eighteen-foot unobstructed clear path on such street for emergency
vehicle purposes.
E. Hours of construction. The operation of heavy construction or
excavation machinery, including but not limited to bulldozers, high-lifts,
backhoes, trucks, power shovels, pumps and jackhammers, and the
operation of equipment such as saws and drills or any other type of
machinery in conjunction with the construction of public and private
improvements which causes noise sufficient to disturb the peace and
general tranquility of the general public, shall be prohibited in the
entire Township between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday
through Saturday, and all day Sunday and holidays.
F. Dust control. The developer shall maintain the site so as to control the
dust. The developer shall employ measures necessary to control dust.
At the Township's direction the Township may require routine
maintenance of the site for dust control should, in the opinion of the
Township, the developer is not maintaining the site in a reasonable
manor.
G. Responsibility for compliance. The developer shall have the sole
responsibility to comply with all federal, state, and local laws, and the
Township disclaims any duty to enforce any violation of such laws or
inform the developer of noncompliance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any developer, owner or public utility company
to construct public or private improvements regulated by this Code, or
cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Code. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 134]
B. Enforcement notice.
(1) If any violation of this Public and Private Improvement Code has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
§ 180-130 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-132
1:428
§ 180-133. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this public and private improvement Code.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appear to the
Township Board of Supervisors within a prescribed period of
time in accordance with procedures set forth in this Public and
Private Improvement Code.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Township Board of
Supervisors, constitutes a violation with possible sanctions
clearly described.
C. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or who shall fail to
comply with any requirement thereof shall be subject to the penalties of
the Township Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense.
D. Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Township from instituting appropriate
action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate
a violation or to stop an illegal act.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this Code shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
Code to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event
there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
§ 180-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-133
1:429
§ 180-134. Legal remedies; causes of action. [Amended 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 134]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of any ordinance enacted by the Township, the Board of
Supervisors, or with the approval of the Board, an officer of the Township
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent,
in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a
violation.
§ 180-135. Severability.
§ 180-136. Stop-work order.
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of this Code shall be paid over
to the Township.
B. (Reserved)104
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. Should any section, clause, provision or portion of this Code be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or impair the validity of
any other section, clause, provision or portion of this Code.
B. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township, that this Code would have been adopted by the Township had
such invalid or unconstitutional provision not been included herein, and
the remaining portion declared invalid or unconstitutional had never
been a part hereof.
A. Notice to stop work. Upon notice from the Township that work on the
installation of public or private improvements is being prosecuted
contrary to the provisions of this Code, such work shall be immediately
stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to
the developer, or to the person doing the work. The stop-work order
shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
B. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about a work site having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding an order of stay, was repealed 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 134.
§ 180-133 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-136
1:430
§ 180-137. Procedure for acceptance of public improvements.
The procedure for acceptance of public improvements shall be in
accordance with Article IX, Conditions of Acceptance of the Subdivision and
Land Development Code of the Township.105
§ 180-138. Enactment of amendments to Code.
This Code may be amended by action of the Supervisors in accordance
with the Township Code; however, the construction standards in Article
XIX of this Code as they pertain to any particular public improvement may
be amended by resolution of the Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Engineer and Township Manager.
§ 180-139. Mediation of disputes.
unsafe conditions, shall be liable for the violations and penalties set
forth herein.
A. Should there arise any dispute between the developer and the Township
with regard to any provisions of this Code, the developer and Township
may elect to use the provisions of this section to mediate such dispute.
Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate.
B. Parties may agree to enter into mediation agreement provided it
contains at least the following minimum provisions.
(1) Identification of the selected mediator who, at a minimum, shall
have a working knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision
procedures and engineering practices. The mediator shall have
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(2) Time frame in which the mediation will be conducted and
completed.
(3) Provisions for suspension of time limits if necessary, for
applications subject to the same in regards to subdivision, land
development, PRD or other application or procedures pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.106
(4) Identification of all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(5) Subject to legal restraints determining whether the mediation
sessions or parts thereof shall be open to the public.
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Part 1.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-139
1:431
(6) Identification as to whether the results of such mediation shall be
binding upon the parties.
C. Funding for mediation shall be born equally between the Township and
the developer.
D. Mediated solutions shall be in writing and signed by the parties, and
become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decisionmaking
body when necessary.
E. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
§ 180-139 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-139
1:432
ARTICLE XXI
Figures
§ 180-140. Specifications and details. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 202]
Refer to the Township Minimum Construction Standards and Details as
adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-140
1:433
Chapter 184
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 166.
§ 180-140 BRIGHTON CODE § 180-140
1:434
ARTICLE I
Admissions Tax
[Adopted 7-12-1954 by Ord. No. 12]
§ 184-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
ADMISSION — Monetary charge of any character whatever, including
donations, contributions and dues or membership fees (periodical or
otherwise) charged or paid for the privilege of attending or engaging in
amusements as hereinafter defined, provided that in the case of persons
(except bona fide employees of the person conducting the amusement or
Township officers on official business) admitted free or at reduced rates at
a time when and under circumstances under which an established price is
charged to other persons, the term "admission" shall mean the established
price as charged to other persons.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, including, among
others, the following: theatrical performance, operatic performance,
motion-picture exhibition, carnival, circus, show, concert, lecture, sports
event, swimming or bathing pool, vaudeville show, side show, amusement
park and all forms of entertainment therein, dancing, golf course, bowling
alley, billiard game, athletic contest and any other form of diversion, sport
pastime or recreation for which admission is charged or paid, provided that
"amusement" shall not include any form of entertainment accompanying or
incidental to the serving of food or drink or the sale of merchandise, where
the charge for admission is wholly included in the price for refreshment
or merchandise, provided further that "amusement" shall not include any
form of entertainment, the proceeds of which, after payment of reasonable
expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of religious, education or
charitable institutions, societies or organizations; veterans' organizations;
or police or firemen's pension organizations.
PERSON — Includes natural person, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation (except such corporations as are exempt from taxation under
the Act of Assembly 1947, P.L. 1145, No. 481).107
§ 184-2. Imposition of tax. [Amended 4-15-1955 by Ord. No. 14;
3-12-1956 by Ord. No. 17; 12-7-1998]
A tax is hereby imposed, for general Township purposes, at the rate of
one cent on every twenty cents of admission to any amusement within the
Township of Brighton, provided that where no fixed admission is charged,
the tax shall be based upon the gross admissions collected.
§ 184-3. Permit.
107. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-21-1965 by Act of 1965, P.L. 5, No. 511, effective
1-1-1966. See now 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-3
1:435
§ 184-4. Payment of tax.
A. After August 13, 1954, any person desiring to conduct or to continue to
conduct any amusement within the Township shall file with the
Supervisors of the Township an application for a permanent amusement
permit or a temporary amusement permit, as the case may be, and shall
pay the fee for such permit required by this section. In the case of any
amusement that is to continue for longer than 10 days, a permanent
amusement permit shall be issued at a fee of $1. In the case of any
amusement that is to continue for 10 days or less, a temporary permit
shall be issued at a fee of $0.50.
B. The Secretary of the Supervisors shall procure at the expense of the
Township a sufficient number of permit forms, on each of which the
following information shall be printed or inserted in ink or by
typewriter:
(1) The name of the Township.
(2) Whether a temporary or a permanent permit.
(3) The name and address of the person receiving the permit.
(4) The location of the amusement covered by the permit.
(5) The type of amusement.
(6) The period for which the permit is issued. (Permanent permits shall
be good until December 31 of the year in which issued; temporary
permits shall be good until the last day the amusement is
conducted.)
(7) The number of the permit.
(8) The date when the certificate is issued.
(9) The signature of the Secretary of the Supervisors.
C. Every permit shall be issued in duplicate. The original, to which the
Township Seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the person applying for
the permit and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the Secretary of the
Supervisors.
D. In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any permit, the person
to whom the permit was issued shall apply to the Secretary of the
Supervisors, who may issue a new permit, for which a fee of $0.50 shall
be charged.
A. Every holder of a permanent permit shall, on or before the 10th day of
every month, transmit to the Secretary of the Supervisors a report,
under oath or affirmation, of the total admissions charged or collected
and the total amount of tax due from such person upon such admissions
§ 184-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-4
1:436
§ 184-5. Late payment.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
§ 184-6. Confidentiality.
Any information gained by the Secretary of the Supervisors or any other
official or agent of the Supervisors as a result of any returns, investigations
or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information,
contrary to the provisions of this section, shall constitute of a violation of
this article.
§ 184-7. Taxes and penalties to be recoverable.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Township Solicitor or as other debts of like amount are
recovered.
§ 184-8. Violations and penalties.
under this article and at the same time shall pay over to the Secretary
of the Supervisors the entire amount of tax due.
B. Every holder of a temporary certificate shall, at the close of each day on
which the amusement is held, pay over to the Secretary of the
Supervisors the amount of tax due from such person under this article
upon admissions for such day and at the same time shall submit to the
Secretary of the Supervisors a report of the total admissions charged or
collected on such day and the total amount of tax due on such
admissions. On the day of expiration of such temporary permit, the
person to whom such permit is issued shall, in addition, submit a report,
under oath or affirmation, of all admissions charged or collected during
the period in which such temporary permit was in effect and of all taxes
due and paid.
C. In every case, the Secretary of the Supervisors shall furnish to the
person paying any tax levied under this article a receipt for the payment
of such tax.
A. Any person convicted before a District Justice of the Township of
violating or failing to carry out any of the provisions or requirements of
this article or of neglecting, failing or refusing to furnish complete and
correct reports or returns or to pay over any tax levied by this article at
the time required or of knowingly making any incomplete, false or
fraudulent returns or of attempting to do anything whatever to avoid
the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed under this
article shall be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding $100 for each
and every offense and the costs of prosecution thereof and, in default
§ 184-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-8
1:437
§ 184-9. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it
is beyond the legal power of the Supervisors of the Township of Brighton to
impose the tax or duties herein provided for.
thereof, to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by
any other section of this article.
§ 184-8 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-9
1:438
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-29-1960 by Ord. No. 31; amended in its entirety
5-11-1987]
§ 184-10. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Resolution of the
Township of Brighton."
§ 184-11. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Brighton, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 184-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
county or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 184-17 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 184-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-12
1:439
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township of Brighton,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 184-12 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-12
1:440
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 184-13. Imposition of tax; interest.
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximately those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under clause A or B above, the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 184-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:441
§ 184-14. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 184-15. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds of
Beaver County, Pennsylvania, whereon the date of the payment of the
tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the collecting agent shall be
set forth.
C. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 184-16 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township of Brighton is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
§ 184-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-15
1:442
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
§ 184-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-15
1:443
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
§ 184-15 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-15
1:444
§ 184-16. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 184-15, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 184-17. Acquired company.
§ 184-18. Credits against tax.
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
§ 184-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-18
1:445
§ 184-19. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 184-20. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 184-21. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Township
of Brighton based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Township of Brighton.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
§ 184-18 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-21
1:446
§ 184-22. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 184-23. Civil penalties.
§ 184-24. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of Brighton, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township of Brighton all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 184-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-24
1:447
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law and the Solicitor
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Beaver County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 184-25. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 184-26. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Beaver County, Pennsylvania, is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 184-24 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-26
1:448
ARTICLE III
Sanitary Landfill Operations Tax
[Adopted 2-16-1987]
§ 184-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed them in this
section:
CUSTOMER — Any person paying consideration to an operator for the
disposal of disposable material.
DISPOSABLE MATERIAL — Includes garbage, rubbish, waste material,
ashes, refuse and industrial residuals and solid wastes, as these terms are
defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Includes the total of the landfill receipts received by
an operator during a taxable period.
INSIDE CUSTOMER — A customer who transports his disposable material
to the sanitary landfill site.
LANDFILL RECEIPTS — Includes:
OPERATOR — Any person operating a sanitary landfill.
OUTSIDE CUSTOMER — A customer for whom the operator performs
substantial additional services, such as collection or transportation of
disposable material, off the premises of the sanitary landfill.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association or
corporation.
SANITARY LANDFILL — Any place where disposable material is dumped,
stored, treated, buried or otherwise disposed of.
STANDARD UNIT RATES — The standard rates paid by paying inside
customers per truckload, ton, yard or other measures, during the taxable
period.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton.
TREASURER — That person duly appointed as Township Manager by the
Supervisors of Brighton Township.
§ 184-28. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby levied upon operators for the
privilege of engaging in the sanitary landfill business within the Township
of Brighton at the rate of 10% of the gross receipts from such business,
from the effective date of this article during the year 1987 and thereafter,
A. The total consideration paid by an inside customer; and
The portion of the consideration paid by an outside customer which is
allocated to landfill operations as is hereinafter set forth.
B.
§ 184-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-28
1:449
from year to year on a calendar-year basis. No person shall engage in such
business without complying with all of the provisions of this article and
paying the tax hereby levied.
§ 184-29. Returns and payments.
§ 184-30. Calculation of gross receipts.
In calculating the gross receipts from the sanitary landfill business, the
operator shall include the total consideration received from the inside
customers and shall include such portion of the consideration received from
outside customers as shall be allocated to landfill receipts pursuant to the
following section.
§ 184-31. Allocation of receipts.
Where a landfill operator performs substantial off-the-premises services,
such as collection or transportation of disposable material for a customer,
an allocation of the total consideration paid by the customer shall be made
so as to impose the tax levied by this article on the on-site operations as
follows:
A. Each operator, upon forms prescribed by the Treasurer, shall file on or
before January 31, April 30, July 31 and October 31 of each calendar
year, returns showing gross receipts received with respect to each
sanitary landfill during the respective three-month period ending on the
last day of the month preceding the month in which the return due date
occurs. At the time of filing the return, the operator shall pay to the
Treasurer of the Township all tax due for the period to which the return
applies.
B. The initial return of gross receipts received and tax due under this
article shall be due on or before April 30, 1987, and shall cover the
period of February 15, 1987, through March 31, 1987.
C. Any operator who, for the preceding quarterly period, has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the Township Treasurer may be
required by the Treasurer to file subsequent returns and pay the tax
monthly. In such cases, payments of the tax shall be made to the
Treasurer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month
for which the tax is due.
A. Any operator who serves inside customers and outside customers may
apply his standard unit rates to the quantity of material handled for
outside customers and allocate that sum to the landfill receipts for such
outside customers.
B. Any operator who does not serve inside customers may apply the
average standard unit rates charged by the other operators in the
Township to the quantity of material he handles for outside customers
and allocate that sum to his landfill receipts for such outside customers.
§ 184-28 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-31
1:450
§ 184-32. Records.
Each operator shall maintain, separately with respect to each sanitary
landfill, complete and accurate records of all transaction, gross receipts,
contracts and landfill receipts. Each operator shall allow the Treasurer
and his designated employees and agents access to all such records and
evidence at all reasonable times and shall provide verification of the same,
as the Treasurer may require. The Treasurer and agents designated by him
are hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of each
operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
has been made, to ascertain the tax due.
§ 184-33. Confidentiality.
Any information gained by the Treasurer, his agents or any other official or
agent of the Township pursuant to the administration of this article shall
be confidential and shall not be disclosed except for official purposes or in
accordance with proper judicial order or for purposes expressly authorized
by this article. The Treasurer and his agents shall have the duty to disclose
the average standard unit rates, on request, to any operator having a proper
use of them and any change in formula allowed by the Treasurer to any
operator shall be disclosed to all operators.
§ 184-34. Payment under protest.
The Treasurer is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of any
taxes claimed by the Township in any case where the taxpayer disputes
the validity or amount of the Township's claim to tax. If it is thereafter
judicially determined that the Township has been overpaid, the amount of
the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
C. If the applicable formula set forth in Subsection A or B does not fairly
allocate the total receipts between an operator's landfill operation and
his other services, such operator shall present satisfactory evidence
thereof to the tax collector. If the Treasurer is satisfied by such
evidence, he shall then establish a formula which does fairly allocate
such receipts, but, in such event, the Treasurer must notify all other
operators in Brighton Township and such other operators shall have the
option of having their receipts from outside customers allocated in the
same manner. The new formula shall be effective for the operator who
requested its establishment as of the date of his request and shall be
effective as of the same date for all other operators who notify the
Treasurer in writing of their election to have their receipts allocated
thereby within 30 days of receipt of notice from the Treasurer. If an
operator elects at some later time to have his receipts allocated
according to the new formula, his election shall be effective as of the
date the Treasurer receives his election in writing.
§ 184-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-35
1:451
§ 184-35. Collection of delinquent taxes.
The Treasurer shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest, costs,
fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If, for any reason, any
tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount
of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% per month shall be
added to the tax and collected. The taxpayer shall be liable for all costs of
collection.
§ 184-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with or violating any provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be fined not more
than $300 and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be committed
to the Beaver County Jail or Workhouse for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 184-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-36
1:452
ARTICLE IV
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 8-12-2002108]
§ 184-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as public assistance or unemployment compensation
payments by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses
or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs covering
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
108. Editor's Note: This resolution superseded former Art. IV, Earned Income Tax, adopted
12-9-1996, as amended.
§ 184-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-37
1:453
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer the tax
on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 184-38. Imposition of tax.
A tax at the rate of 10 mills on each dollar is hereby imposed on all earned
income and net profits, as defined herein, earned by residents of Brighton
Township, and on all earned income and net profits earned by nonresidents
of Brighton Township, for work done or services performed or rendered in
said township. This tax shall become effective January 1, 2003, and shall
remain in effect thereafter on a calendar-year basis or taxpayer-fiscal-year
basis without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently
changed.
§ 184-39. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall on or before April 15 of
each year make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed by
the Officer a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current
year and pay to the Officer in four equal quarterly installments the
tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at the time of filing
the declaration and the other installments on or before June 15 of
§ 184-37 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-39
1:454
the current year, September 15 of the current year and January 15
of the succeeding year.
(2) On or before April 15 of the succeeding year, every taxpayer shall
make and file a final return on a form prescribed by the Officer
showing the amount of net profits earned during the period
beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending December 31,
of the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the
total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the return the
taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the balance of the tax due or shall
demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(3) Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment
of his estimated tax, elect to make and file with the Officer on or
before January 31, of the succeeding year, the final return as
hereinabove required.
(4) The Officer is authorized to provide by regulation for the making
and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits, and for
the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who
has filed the declaration hereinabove required anticipates
additional net profits not previously declared or finds that he has
overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of
the current year, shall, within thirty days after the discontinuance
of business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay
the tax due.
B. Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or before
April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the Officer on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer a final return showing the
amount of earned income received during the period beginning January
1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the
total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the
amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax
due. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment.
C. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation and
who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating
to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer a quarterly return on or before
April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of
the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth
the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding by
him during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current
year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the current year and
§ 184-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-39
1:455
§ 184-40. Collection at source.
December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to the tax,
together with such other information as the Officer may require. Every
taxpayer making such return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to
the Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of Brighton who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer
the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three-month
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon between
the Officer and employer, shall show the name and social security
number of all such employees, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom,
the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during such preceding threemonth
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
B. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods has
failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed to pay
over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority may be required
by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases,
payments of tax shall be made to the Officer on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee, and the amount of tax paid to the Officer.
Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
§ 184-39 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-40
1:456
§ 184-41. Powers and duties of Officer.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this
section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was required to
withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been recovered from the
employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of the
resolution relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by the resolution. It shall also be his duty to keep
a record showing the amount received by him from each person or
business paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
B. Bond.
(1) Each Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Township of Brighton. If the Township of
Brighton shall by resolution designate any bond previously given by
the Officer as adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of the subsection.
(2) Each such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more
corporate sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to
do business in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the
Insurance Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(3) Each bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required by him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of all moneys
and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by him by virtue
of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in
office of all books, papers, documents or other official things held in
right of his office.
(4) Each such bond shall be taken in the name of the appointing
authority or authorities and shall be for the use of the political
subdivision or political subdivisions appointing the Officer and for
the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall be
collected or received or as his or her interest shall otherwise
§ 184-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-41
1:457
appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the
acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
C. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of the resolution is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the resolution,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of the resolution. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution by the Supervisors of
Brighton Township. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in
force shall be available for public inspection.
(1) Unless a refund is specifically requested by the taxpayer, a refund
of $10 or less shall be carried forward as a credit against the
earned income tax due by the taxpayer for the succeeding year.
(2) Refunds of $1 or less shall be carried forward as a credit against
the earned income tax due by the taxpayer for the succeeding year.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer or to any agent designated
by him the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his agents or by any other official
or agent of the taxing district, as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by the
resolution, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except
in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law.
G. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
§ 184-41 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-41
1:458
§ 184-42. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 184-43. Interest, penalties and late filing fee.
H. The Officer shall, at least quarterly, distribute earned income taxes to
the appropriate political subdivisions. The political subdivisions shall
not be required to request the Officer to distribute the funds collected
but shall at least annually reconcile their receipts with the records of
the Officer and return to or credit the Officer with any overpayment. If
the Officer, within one year after receiving a tax payment, cannot
identify the taxing jurisdiction entitled to a tax payment, he shall make
payment to the municipality in which the tax was collected.
A. The Officer may sue in the name of Brighton Township for the recovery
of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by the resolution shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
revisions of the resolution, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
persons or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of the
resolution and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit Brighton Township from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided that
such suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the
suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the
refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. If for any reasons the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. In
§ 184-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-43
1:459
§ 184-44. Violations and penalties.
addition to the foregoing, a late filing fee of $10 shall be assessed
against the taxpayer. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs
of collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the governing body
may, by ordinance or resolution, establish a one-time period during
which interest or interest and penalties that would otherwise be
imposed for the nonreporting or underreporting of earned income tax
liabilities or for the nonpayment of earned income taxes previously
imposed and due shall be waived in total or in part if the taxpayer
voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the taxes in full during the
period so established. Each governing body may adopt regulations to
implement the provisions of this subsection.
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under the provisions of this article or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be commenced
on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B if the
returns are determined to be substantially true and correct and the
taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete or fraudulent return or
attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice or court of
competent jurisdiction in the County of Beaver, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs, and, in default of
payment of said fines and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 184-43 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-44
1:460
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by the resolution shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 184-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-44
1:461

ARTICLE V
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-7-1998]
§ 184-45. Levy of tax.
An annual tax of $5 shall be and the same is hereby levied upon each
resident or inhabitant of the Township of Brighton 18 years of age or over
for the calendar year of 1999.
§ 184-46. Collection of tax.
It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector of the Township of Brighton to
collect and receive the taxes imposed by this article.
§ 184-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-46
1:463

ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 157109]
§ 184-47. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Brighton
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 184-48. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
§ 184-49. Purpose.
The purpose of this tax is to provide revenue for police, fire and emergency
services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of property
taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax from
time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 184-50. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax
herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section
13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political
subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VI, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 150.
§ 184-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-50
1:465
§ 184-51. Levy of tax.
§ 184-52. Exemptions; refunds.
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1251, Section 13, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned
on or performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision
for which compensation is charged or received; whether by means of
salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISON — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Brighton.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 184-51 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.
B. "He," "his" or "him" indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
A. An annual tax in the amount of $52 per annum is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Township of Brighton during the tax year. This tax shall continue on a
calendar basis annually thereafter until modified or repealed by a
subsequent ordinance. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Township of Brighton
from time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; road construction
and/or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief
through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to
homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no
less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services.
This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on
each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of
political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
B. The tax of $52 shall be divided as follows: $47 shall be paid to Brighton
Township and $5 shall be paid to the Beaver Area School District.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
§ 184-50 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-52
1:466
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces who is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
§ 184-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-52
1:467
§ 184-53. Duty of employers to collect.
the local services tax from the person under clause Subsection
B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Township of Brighton, in consultation with the Collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Township of Brighton or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within Brighton Township, as well as those employers
situated outside Brighton Township, but who engage in business within
the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the duty of collecting
the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for
him within the political subdivision and making a return and payment
thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to
deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ, whether said
employee is paid by salary, wage or commission, and whether or not all
such services are performed within Brighton Township.
§ 184-52 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-53
1:468
§ 184-54. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 184-52B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 184-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-54
1:469
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 184-55. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
Collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30, and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on or before
July 30, October 30 and January 31, respectively.
§ 184-56. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who has earned income or realizes net profit,
as those terms are defined herein, within Brighton Township shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax due to the Collector on
or before the 30h day following the end of each quarter.
§ 184-57. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent
employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in more
than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim
to collect the local services tax shall be in the following order:
§ 184-58. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of Brighton Township, but who perform services of any
type or kind, or engage in any occupation or profession within Brighton
A. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed.
B. Second, the political subdivision in which a person resides and works if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In case of
dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year
declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima
facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 184-54 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-58
1:470
Township do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of Brighton
Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within Brighton
Township, and an employee of a nonresidential employer may, for the
purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the
event his or her tax is not paid, Brighton Township shall have the option
of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 184-59. Administration of tax.
§ 184-60. Suits for collection.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector
to accept and keep a record of the information submitted by employers
relating to the number of employees subject to the tax, the number of
employees exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates
and refunds of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid for 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
§ 184-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-60
1:471
§ 184-61. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon such conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 184-62. Construal of provisions.
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 184-60 BRIGHTON CODE § 184-62
1:472
Chapter 189
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 184-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-62
1:473

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 189-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 189-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Township of Brighton.
§ 189-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except
that in this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with
the word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. "Township" shall mean the Township of Brighton, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania.
C. "Board of Supervisors" shall mean the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
D. "Township Manager" shall mean the Township Manager for the
Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
E. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
F. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular.
A. The Township Manager shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township Manager and the police in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:475
§ 189-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 189-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction, maintenance
or special events.
§ 189-6. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the
Township, at intersections, in public and in other places where the Vehicle
Code or this chapter applies.
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature.
A. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle in violation of any
such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or
specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or
station police officers at each end of the closed portion, while
construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is
being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
§ 189-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-6
1:476
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 189-7. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 189-35), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of 25 miles per hour. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a higher speed than the
maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
§ 189-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule II (§ 189-36), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 189-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind
designated (left, right, all) at any of the intersections described in Schedule
III (§ 189-37), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 189-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 189-38), attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 189-11. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 189-39), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for
traffic on that street.
§ 189-12. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along those streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VI (§ 189-40), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake
or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone described in said schedule.
§ 189-13. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VII (§ 189-41), attached to and
made a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through
streets established by this chapter), are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position
§ 189-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-13
1:477
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street in the direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street,
in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop
before entering any such intersection.
§ 189-14. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 189-42), attached to and
made a part of this chapter (in addition to intersections with the through
streets established by this chapter), are hereby established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
street in the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a
vehicle approaching any such intersection upon the first-named street, in
the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop
the vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on the second-named street so closely as to constitute a
hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or within such
intersection.
§ 189-15. Vehicle weight limits. [Amended 8-13-2012 by Ord. No.
181]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or
other tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combination, having a gross weight
in excess of that respectively prescribed upon any of the streets or bridges,
or portions thereof, described in Schedule IX (§ 189-43) and Schedule IXA
(§ 189-43.1) attached to and made a part of this chapter, except for the
purpose of making local deliveries on said streets.
§ 189-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-15
1:478
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 152]
§ 189-16. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Whenever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for
any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 189-17. Prohibited parking on streets and rights-of-way. [Added
4-13-2020 by Ord. No. 225110]
A. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle at any
place designated as a “No Parking” area, which place is designated by
the erection of appropriate “No Parking” signs.
B. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle within 15
feet of any fire hydrant.
C. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle within 30
feet of any stop sign or yield sign.
D. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle upon the
public highways of the Township road system unless it shall be
positioned parallel to and with the right-hand wheels within 12 inches
of the right-hand curb, or in the absence of a curb, as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
E. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle at any time
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule X (§
189-44 of the Brighton Township Code)
F. No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle on any
public street within the Township following the deposit or accumulation
of ice and/or snow of three inches or greater in depth until the snow has
been completely plowed for the full width of the cartway.
G. No person shall park on any street within this Township any trailer,
combination of truck or truck-trailer and trailer or semitrailer, or truck
having a load capacity greater than 15,000 pounds, except for local
deliveries.
H. Unregistered, uninspected or inoperable vehicles. No person shall park
or leave on the streets of this Township any vehicle without current
registration plates or current inspection stickers issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Further, no person shall
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 189-17, Parking prohibited at all
times.
§ 189-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-17
1:479
§ 189-18. Penalties for parking violations. [Amended 4-13-2020 by
Ord. No. 225]
park or leave on any street in this Township any mechanically
inoperable or unsafe vehicles.
I. Greasing and repairing. No person shall park any vehicle upon any
street in this Township for the principal purpose of greasing, oiling or
repairing such vehicle, except such repairs necessitated due to an
emergency.
A. Any person who violates § 189-17F or § 189-17H shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs.
B. Any person who violates any other provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs
C. The police officer issuing the notice of violation shall place upon the
motor vehicle in violation a copy of the notice, advising the owner of the
section of this article which has been violated, that the fine is payable at
the Brighton Township Police Office within five days during normal
business hours, and that failure to pay within the time prescribed will
result in charges being filed before the District Magistrate.
D. In addition to the penalties set forth in § 189-18A and B, the Township is
authorized to remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle parked in
violation of § 189-17, and to store said vehicle in a public garage or
other place of safety selected by the Township. The registered owner of
said vehicle, if known, shall be notified in writing of the fact of said
removal and the place of storage of said vehicle, and that said vehicle
may be reclaimed upon payment of the towing and storage charges.
§ 189-17 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-18
1:480
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 189-19. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code111 and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound
vehicles that are parked on any street within the Township in violation of
any provision of this chapter.
§ 189-20. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded
except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 189-21. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time
by the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability
insurance in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient
to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to
those vehicles while in the custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage. No different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 189-22. Notification of removal and impounding.
The appropriate law enforcement officer shall give immediate notice by the
most expeditious means and by certified mail, return receipt requested, of
the impoundment and location of the vehicle or combination to the owner of
the vehicle or combination and the owner of the load and any lien holders
if the names and addresses of the owner and any lien holder are known or
can be ascertained by investigation.
111. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 189-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-23
1:481
§ 189-23. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice. Payment
of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 189-24. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 189-25. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 189-26. (Reserved)
§ 189-27. (Reserved)
§ 189-28. (Reserved)
§ 189-29. (Reserved)
§ 189-23 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-29
1:482
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 189-30. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as herein specified, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
§ 189-31. (Reserved)
§ 189-32. (Reserved)
§ 189-33. (Reserved)
§ 189-34. (Reserved)
§ 189-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-34
1:483

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 189-35. Schedule I: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-7, speed limits of 25 miles per
hour are hereby established upon the following named streets within the
Township of Brighton:
Township Road No. Road Name
327 Ninth Avenue
428 Darlington Road
T-429 [Added 5-8-2017
by Ord. No. 205]
Jodi Drive
430 Whitehead Road
T-431 [Added 5-8-2017
by Ord. No. 205]
Ashley Ridge Court
432 Pine Grove Road
T-433 [Added 5-8-2017
by Ord. No. 205]
Ericson Circle
434 Neville Road
T-435 [Added 5-8-2017
by Ord. No. 205]
Timothy Trail
440 May Road
442 McDevitt Road
500 Todd Road
T-501 [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 188]
Nicholas Drive
T-502 [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 188]
Brianna Drive
T-503 [Added 5-8-2017
by Ord. No. 205]
James Drive
506 Center Drive
509 Oak Grove Road
513 Mudlick Hollow Road
523 Westview Drive
525 Midway Drive
527 Upland Avenue
535 Chapel Road
536 Eighth Avenue
§ 189-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-35
1:485
Township Road No. Road Name
538 College Avenue
555 Brady's Ridge Road
556 Beacon Drive
648 [Added 3-8-2004
by Ord. No. 132]
Fernwood Drive
649 Beaver Street
650 Western Avenue
651 Orchard Road
652 Pleasantview Avenue
653 First Avenue
654 Ridge Avenue
655 Yost Drive
656 McKenny Drive
657 Maple Drive
658 Coleman Drive
659 Circle Drive
660 Lake Drive
661 Woodridge Avenue
662 Spring Lane
663 Morrow Lane
664 Mackall Drive
665 Laurel Drive
666 Ridgeview Drive
667 Evergreen Circle
668 Stokes Drive
669 Hill Drive
670 Walnut Street
671 Beech Street
672 Birch Street
673 Chestnut Street
674 Elm Street
675 Hemlock Street
676 Locust Street
678 Oak Drive
679 Pine Street
680 Spruce Street
§ 189-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-35
1:486
Township Road No. Road Name
681 Sycamore Street
682 Windy Ghoul Drive
683 Ermine Drive
684 Colvin Drive
685 Second Avenue
686 Third Avenue
687 Tenth Avenue
688 Terrace Avenue
689 Ornida Drive
690 North Avenue
691 Seventh Avenue
692 Northview Circle
693 Pinkerton Drive
694 Virginia Drive
695 Appletree Drive
696 Woodlawn Drive
697 Willow Street
698 Crest Drive
699 Duncan Circle
700 Allan Drive
701 Pin Oak Drive
702 Grandvue Avenue
703 Allison Drive
704 Poplar Street
705 Little Beaver Drive
706 Murray Drive
707 Forrest Drive
708 Maplewood Drive
709 Spicewood Drive
710 Doe Drive
711 Marylee Drive
712 Ellie Drive
713 Wishart Drive
714 Highland Drive
715 Glenfield Drive
716 Overlook Drive
§ 189-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-35
1:487
Township Road No. Road Name
717 Edgewood Drive East
718 Edgewood Drive West
719 Crandon Circle
720 Dove Street
721 Raven Drive
723 Valley Drive
724 Vandviort Drive
725 Jaunita Drive
726 Woodview Drive
727 Lynne Haven Drive
728 Woodbine Drive
729 Magnolia Drive
730 Norwood Drive
731 Shadeland Drive
732 Hickory Street
733 Cypress Street
735 [Added 3-8-2004
by Ord. No. 132]
Pine Meadow Lane
736 Gypsy Glen Road
737 Sebring Road
738 Barrett Drive
739 Shadylane Drive
740 Glenview Drive
741 Kaye Circle
742 [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
215]
Eric Drive
743 [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
215]
Lawrence Drive
744 [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
215]
Brian Drive
745 Brighton Fields Drive
746 Matthews Drive
747 Sherwood Drive
§ 189-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-35
1:488
Township Road No. Road Name
748 [Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 208]
Aspen Drive
749 [Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 208]
Fineview Circle
T-749 [Added
1-13-2020 by Ord. No.
224]
Fineview Circle
750 [Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 208]
Leo Drive
751 [Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 208]
Cottonwood Drive
752 [Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 208]
Wheatfield Drive
§ 189-36. Schedule II: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-8, traffic control signals shall be
installed and operated at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 189-37. Schedule III: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-9, no driver of any vehicle
shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the following
intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
Of
(Reserved)
§ 189-38. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-10, no driver of any vehicle shall
make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts thereof described below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 189-39. Schedule V: One-Way Streets. [Amended 5-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 205]
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-11, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
§ 189-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-39
1:489
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
James Drive West 210 feet westwardly from
intersection with Barclay Hill
Road - do not enter from James
Drive
Nicholas Drive,
north fork
West 209 feet westwardly from
intersection with Barclay Hill
Road - do not enter from
Nicholas Drive
Nicholas Drive,
southern fork
East 210 feet eastwardly to
intersection with Barclay Hill
Road - do not enter from
Barclay Hill Road
§ 189-40. Schedule VI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-12, no-passing zones are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 189-41. Schedule VII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-13, the following described
intersections are hereby established as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Allen Drive South Pinkerton Drive
Allen Drive West Pinkerton Drive
Allison Drive West Neville Road
Appletree Drive North Dutch Ridge Road
Ashley Ridge Court
[Added 5-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 205]
Northeast Ericson Circle
Aspen Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
East Cottonwood Drive
Aspen Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
East Fineview Circle
§ 189-39 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-41
1:490
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Aspen Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
East Sebring Road
Aspen Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
West Cottonwood Drive
Aspen Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
West Leo Drive
Barrett Drive North Dutch Ridge Road
Beacom Drive South Dutch Ridge Road
Beaver Street North Midway Drive
Beaver Street North Western Avenue
Beaver Street South Midway Drive
Beech Street East Chestnut Street
Beech Street West Maple Drive
Birch Street North Willow Street
Birch Street North Walnut Street
Birch Street South Willow Street
Bradys Ridge Road East Beacom Drive
Bradys Ridge Road South Dutch Ridge Road
Brian Drive [Added
7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
215]
North Eric Drive
Brian Drive West Brighton Fields Drive
Brianna Drive [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 188]
North Nicholas Drive
Brianna Drive [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
205]
South James Drive
Brighton Fields Drive South Dutch Ridge Road
Center Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Chapel Road East Dutch Ridge Road
Chapel Road East Grange Road
Chapel Road West Darlington Road
Chapel Road West Dutch Ridge Road
§ 189-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-41
1:491
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chapel Road West Grange Road
Chestnut Street North Pine Street
Chestnut Street North Spruce Street
Chestnut Street North Sycamore Street
Chestnut Street North Tuscarawas Road
Chestnut Street North Walnut Street
Chestnut Street South Spruce Street
Chestnut Street South Sycamore Street
Chestnut Street South Walnut Street
Circle Drive South (1) Tuscarawas Road
Circle Drive South (2) Tuscarawas Road
Coleman Drive North Tuscarawas Road
College Avenue North Midway Drive
College Avenue North Western Avenue
College Avenue South Midway Drive
Colvin Drive East Tenth Avenue
Colvin Drive West Dutch Ridge Road
Cottonwood Drive
[Added 2-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 208]
North Aspen Drive
Crandon Circle West Mackall Drive
Crest Drive West Coleman Drive
Cypress Street East Magnolia Drive
Darlington Road North Chapel Road
Darlington Road North Marylee Drive
Darlington Road South Chapel Road
Darlington Road South Marylee Drive
Darlington Road South Tuscarawas Road
Doe Drive East Darlington Road
Dove Drive North Crandon Circle
Dove Drive South Crandon Circle
Duncan Circle East Woodbine Drive
Duncan Circle North (1) Dutch Ridge Road
Duncan Circle North (2) Dutch Ridge Road
Edgewood Drive East West Little Beaver Drive
§ 189-41 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-41
1:492
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Edgewood Drive East West Sherwood Drive
Edgewood Drive West East Little Beaver Drive
Edgewood Drive West East Shadeland Drive
Edgewood Drive West West Shadeland Drive
Eighth Avenue North Western Avenue
Eighth Avenue South Dutch Ridge Road
Eighth Avenue South Western Avenue
Elm Street East Pine Street
Elm Street East Spruce Street
Elm Street West Pine Street
Eric Drive East Brighton Fields Drive
Ericson Circle [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
205]
North Both intersections with
Timothy Trail
Evergreen Circle (1) North Laurel Drive
Evergreen Circle (2) North Laurel Drive
Fernwood Drive [Added
3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
132]
North Tuscarawas Road
Fineview Circle [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
North Aspen Drive
First Street East Pleasantview Drive
Forrest Drive East Murray Drive
Glenfield Drive South Dutch Ridge Road
Glenview Drive South Shadylane Drive
Grandvue Drive South Dutch Ridge Road
Gypsy Glen Road North Dutch Ridge Road
Hemlock Street (1) North Maple Street
Hemlock Street (2) North Maple Street
Highland Drive West Spring Lane
Highland Woods Drive
[Added 3-12-2007 by
Ord. No. 151]
East Sebring Road
Hill Drive North Laurel Drive
§ 189-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-41
1:493
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Jodi Drive [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
205]
East Ericson Circle
Jodi Drive [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
205]
West Ericson Circle
Juanita Drive West Neville Road
Kaye Circle West Center Drive
Lake Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Laurel Drive East Stokes Drive
Laurel Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Laurel Drive West Ridgeview Drive
Lawrence Drive [Added
7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
215]
North Eric Drive
Lawrence Drive South Brian Drive
Leo Drive [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
208]
South Aspen Drive
Little Beaver Drive North Edgewood Drive East/West
Little Beaver Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Locust Street North Sycamore Street
Locust Street South Walnut Street
Lynne Haven Drive North Dutch Ridge Road
Lynne Haven Drive South Western Avenue
Mackall Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Magnolia Drive North Birch Street
Maple Drive North Beech Street
Maple Drive North Birch Street
Maple Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Maple Drive North Walnut Street
Maple Drive North Willow Street
Maple Drive South Beech Street
Maple Drive South Hemlock Street
Maple Drive South Willow Street
Maplewood Drive North Dutch Ridge Road
§ 189-41 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-41
1:494
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Marylee Drive East Darlington Road
Matthews Drive West Sebring Road
Matthews Drive South Sebring Road
May Road South Bradys Run Road
McDevitt Drive South Bradys Run Road
McKenney Drive East Sebring Road
Midway Drive East Beaver Street
Midway Drive West Dutch Ridge Road
Morrow Lane North Tuscarawas Road
Mudlick Hollow Road West Sebring Road
Murray Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Neville Road North Tuscarawas Road
Neville Road South Pine Grove Road
Nicholas Drive [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 188]
East Barclay Hill Road
Nicholas Drive [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 188]
West Nicholas Drive
Ninth Avenue North Western Avenue
Ninth Avenue South Dutch Ridge Road
North Avenue East Eighth Avenue
North Avenue West Eighth Avenue
North Avenue West Tenth Avenue
Northview Circle South Tuscarawas Road
Norwood Drive South Edgewood Drive West
Oak Grove Road East Pine Grove Road
Orchard Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Ornida Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Overlook Drive West Spring Lane
Pin Oak Drive North Windy Ghoul Drive
Pine Grove Road North Tuscarawas Road
Pine Grove Road South Doyle Drive
Pine Meadow Lane
[Added 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 132]
South Gypsy Glen Road
§ 189-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-41
1:495
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pinkerton Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Pleasantview Drive North First Street
Pleasantview Drive South Tuscarawas Road
Poplar Street East Neville Road
Poplar Street West Spruce Street
Raven Drive West Crandon Circle
Ridge Avenue South Tuscarawas Road
Ridgeview Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Sebring Road North Tuscarawas Road
Seventh Avenue North North Avenue
Seventh Avenue South Western Avenue
Shadeland Drive North Edgewood Drive West
Shadeland Drive South Edgewood Drive West
Shadylane Drive South Northview Circle
Sherwood Drive South Edgewood Drive East
Spring Lane North Tuscarawas Road
Spruce Street East Chestnut Street
Spruce Street West Birch Street
Spruce Street West Chestnut Street
Stokes Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Stokes Drive South Laurel Drive
Sycamore Street East Chestnut Street
Sycamore Street East Neville Road
Sycamore Street West Chestnut Street
Sycamore Street West Maple Drive
Tenth Avenue North Beaner Hollow Road
Tenth Avenue North North Avenue
Tenth Avenue South North Avenue
Tenth Avenue South Western Avenue
Terrace Avenue East Seventh Avenue
Terrace Avenue West Eighth Avenue
Third Avenue South Western Avenue
Timothy Trail [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
205]
North Tuscarawas Road
§ 189-41 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-41
1:496
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Todd Road East Sebring Road
Todd Road West Barclay Hill Road
Upland Avenue East Beaver Street
Upland Avenue West College Avenue
Valley Drive West Barclay Hill Road
Vandivort Drive West (1) Barclay Hill Road
Vandivort Drive West (2) Barclay Hill Road
Walnut Street East Chestnut Street
Walnut Street East Neville Road
Walnut Street West Chestnut Street
Walnut Street West Maple Drive
Western Avenue East Dutch Ridge Road
Western Avenue [Added
6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
130]
East Eighth Avenue
Western Avenue East Lynne Haven Drive
Western Avenue West Dutch Ridge Road
Western Avenue [Added
6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
130]
West Eighth Avenue
Western Avenue West Lynne Haven Drive
Westview Drive North Dutch Ridge Road
Wheatfield Drive
[Added 2-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 208]
North Aspen Drive
Whitehead Road East Pine Grove Road
Windy Ghoul Drive East Dutch Ridge Road
Windy Ghoul Drive East Windy Ghoul Drive
Wishart Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Woodlawn Drive West Appletree Drive
Woodridge Drive West Allen Drive
Woodview Drive West Glenfield Drive
Yost Drive North Tuscarawas Road
Yost Drive South McKenney Drive
§ 189-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-42
1:497
§ 189-42. Schedule VIII: Yield Intersections
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-14, the following described
intersections are hereby established as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection With
Northview Circle East Dutch Ridge Road
§ 189-43. Schedule IX: Vehicle Weight Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-15, gross weight limits of 7.5
tons are hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other
tractor, trailer or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets, bridges or
portions thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local
deliveries on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
A. Locations enumerated.
(1) Center Drive, T-506, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road,
S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of 3,464 feet to its terminus.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Center Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
(2) Mudlick Hollow Road, T-513, from its intersection with Sebring
Road, T-737, formerly L.R. 04041, southeastwardly for a distance of
9,002 feet to the Vanport Township municipal boundary line.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Mudlick Hollow Road with the Vanport
Township Municipal boundary line.
(3) Sebring Road, T-737, formerly L.R. 04041, from its intersection
with Tuscarawas Road, S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of
11,262 feet to its intersection with the Vanport Township municipal
boundary line.
(a) Appropriate restriction signs shall be erected at the
intersections of Sebring Road with Tuscarawas Road and
Sebring Road with the Vanport Township municipal boundary
line.
(4) Lake Drive, T-660, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road, S.R.
4028, northwardly for a distance of 1,214 feet to its intersection
with Woodridge Avenue, T-661.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Lake Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
§ 189-42 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-43
1:498
(5) Mackall Drive, T-664, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road,
S.R. 4028, northwardly for a distance of 663 feet to its intersection
with Crandon Circle, T-719.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Mackall Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
(6) Pinkerton Drive, T-693, from its intersection with Tuscarawas
Road, S.R. 4028, northwardly for a distance of 317 feet to its
intersection with Allan Drive, T-700.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Pinkerton Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
(7) Gypsy Glen Road, T-736, formerly L.R. 04091, from its intersection
with Dutch Ridge Road, S.R. 4018, southeastwardly for a distance
of 14,494 feet to its intersection with the Beaver Borough
municipal boundary line.
(a) Appropriate restriction signs shall be erected at the
intersections of Gypsy Glen Road with Dutch Ridge Road and
Gypsy Glen Road with the Beaver Borough municipal boundary
line.
(8) Brady's Ridge Road, T-555, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge
Road, S.R. 4018, northwardly for a distance of 5,859 feet to its
intersection with Beacom Drive, T-556.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Brady's Ridge Road with Dutch Ridge Road.
(9) Beacom Drive, T-556, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4018, northwardly for a distance of 3,725 feet to its
intersection with Brady's Ridge Road, T-555.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Beacom Drive with Dutch Ridge Road.
(10) Chapel Road, T-535, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4020, westwardly for a distance of 13,780 feet to its
intersection with Darlington Road, T-428.
(a) Appropriate restriction signs shall be erected at the
intersection of Chapel Road with Dutch Ridge Road and at the
intersections of Chapel Road with Grange Road, S.R. 4031,
east and west.
(11) Darlington Road, T-428, from its intersection with Tuscarawas
Road, S.R. 4028, northwardly for a distance of 4,188 feet to the
South Beaver Township municipal boundary line.
(a) Appropriate restriction signs shall be erected at the
intersections of Darlington Road with Tuscarawas Road and at
§ 189-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-43
1:499
the intersection of Darlington Road with the South Beaver
Township Municipal Boundary Line.
(12) Neville Road, T-434, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road,
S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of 11,403 feet to its
intersection with Pine Grove Road, T-432.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Neville Road with Tuscarawas Road.
(13) Pine Grove Road, T-432, from its intersection with Tuscarawas
Road, S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of 12,308 feet to its
intersection with Doyle Drive, S.R. 4039.
(a) Appropriate restriction signs shall be erected at the
intersection of Pine Grove Road with Tuscarawas Road and at
the intersection of Pine Grove Road with Doyle Drive.
(14) Oak Grove Road, T-509, from its intersection with Pine Grove Road,
T-432, westwardly for a distance of 4,435 feet to its intersection
with the Industry Borough boundary municipal boundary line.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Oak Grove Road with the Industry Borough
municipal boundary line.
(15) Chestnut Street, T-673, from its intersection with Tuscarawas
Road, S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of 1,795 feet to its
intersection with Pine Street, T-679.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Chestnut Street with Tuscarawas Road.
(16) Maple Drive, T-657, from its intersection with Beech Street, T-671,
southwardly for a distance of 423 feet to Sycamore Street, T-681.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Maple Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
(17) Tenth Avenue, T-687, from its intersection with Beaner Hollow
Road, S.R. 4016, southwardly for a distance of 1,690 feet to its
intersection with Western Avenue, T-650.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Tenth Avenue with Beaner Hollow Road.
(18) Colvin Drive, T-684, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4018, eastwardly for a distance of 1,373 feet to its intersection
with Tenth Avenue, T-687.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Colvin Drive with Dutch Ridge Road.
§ 189-43 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-43
1:500
(19) Yost Drive, T-655, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road, S.R.
4028, southeastwardly for a distance of 300 feet to its intersection
with McKinney Drive, T-656.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Yost Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
(20)Western Avenue, T-650, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge
Road, S.R. 4018, eastwardly for a distance of 944 feet to its
intersection with Eighth Avenue, T-536.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Western Avenue with Dutch Ridge Road.
(21)Western Avenue, T-650, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge
Road, S.R. 4018, westwardly for a distance of 2,534 feet to its
intersection with Friendship Circle.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Western Avenue with Friendship Circle.
(22) Eighth Avenue, T-536, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4018, northwardly for a distance of 740 feet to its intersection
with Western Avenue, T-650.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Eighth Avenue with Dutch Ridge Road.
(23) Midway Drive, T-525, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4018, eastwardly for a distance of 900 feet to it intersection
with College Avenue, T-538.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Midway Drive with Dutch Ridge Road.
(24) Ninth Avenue, T-327, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge Road,
S.R. 4018, northwardly for a distance of 528 feet to its intersection
with Western Avenue, T-650.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Ninth Avenue with Dutch Ridge Road.
(25)Westview Drive, T-523, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge
Road, S.R. 4018, southeastwardly for a distance of 1,795 feet to its
intersection with Beaver Street, T-649.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Westview Drive with Dutch Ridge Road.
(26) Todd Road, T-500, from its intersection with Barclay Hill Road, S.R.
4037, southeasterly for a distance of 3,010 feet to its terminus.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Todd Road with Barclay Hill Road.
§ 189-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-43
1:501
§ 189-43.1. Schedule IXA: Additional Weight Limits. [Added
8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 181]
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-15, gross weight limits of 10 tons
are hereby established as indicated for commercial vehicles or other tractor,
trailer or tractor-trailer combinations, upon the streets, bridges or portions
thereof described below, except for the purpose of making local deliveries
on said streets, bridges or portions thereof:
(27) Lynne Haven Drive, T-727, from its intersection with Dutch Ridge
Road, S.R. 4018, southwardly for a distance of 950 feet to its
intersection with Western Avenue, T-650.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Lynne Haven Drive with Dutch Ridge Road.
B. Local deliveries to homes located on those Township streets on which
this chapter imposes a seven and one-half ton weight limit shall be
exempt from the weight restriction imposed by this chapter.
C. Required permit, over-posted-weight vehicle and excess maintenance
agreement. Where it is determined that a vehicle operator will be
utilizing over-posted-weight vehicles to supply and service a site, an
over-posted-weight hauling permit shall be required. Prior to the
issuance of such permit, the operator and the Township shall conduct
an on-site inspection of the posted roads to be utilized and enter into an
excess maintenance agreement in a form acceptable to the Township.
The operator shall post a bond to guarantee maintenance and
restoration of Township streets. In addition to the bond requirement,
such excess maintenance agreement shall include the operator
undertaking the responsibility to pay for all excessive road maintenance
costs and repair the road as required by Township Code and
Pennsylvania law. The permit application, and any amended permit
application, shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of Brighton Township. [Added 6-6-2011 by
Ord. No. 175]
A. Locations enumerated.
(1) Ornida Drive, T-689, from its intersection with Tuscarawas Road,
S.R. 4028, southwardly for a distance of 1,584 feet to its terminus.
(a) An appropriate restriction sign shall be erected at the
intersection of Ornida Drive with Tuscarawas Road.
B. Local deliveries to homes located on those Township streets on which
this chapter imposes a ten-ton weight limit shall be exempt from the
weight restriction imposed by this chapter.
C. The fines for violation of this section shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902).
§ 189-43 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-44
1:502
§ 189-44. Schedule X: Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Amended
6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 130]
In accordance with the provisions of § 189-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Beacom Drive (T-556) Both From its intersection with Dutch
Ridge Road (S.R. 4018) northwardly
for a distance of 1,500 feet
Birch Street (T-672) Both Between Willow Drive (T-697) and
Spruce Street (T-680)
Brady's Run Road (S.R.
4012) [Added 6-8-2015
by Ord. No. 196]
Both From the intersection of Brady's Run
Road with Park Road (S.R. 4019) west
to its intersection with McDevitt Road
(T-442)
Brighton Road (S.R.
4035) [Added
4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
140112]
Both Between the northern line of
Tuscarawas Road (S.R. 4028) and the
southern line of Dutch Ridge Road
(S.R. 4020), except the Park n Ride
area designated by PennDOT113
Gypsy Glen Road (T-736)
[Amended 12-9-2013
by Ord. No. 185]
Both From the Brighton Township/Beaver
Borough line west for a distance of
1,845 feet
Tuscarawas Road (S.R.
4028)
Both Between Darlington Road (T-428) and
Little Beaver Drive (T-705)
Tuscarawas Road (S.R.
4028)
North Between Brighton Road (S.R. 4035)
and Murray Drive (T-706)
Westview Drive (T-523) North Between Dutch Ridge Road (S.R.
4018) and Beaver Street (T-649)
§ 189-45. (Reserved)
§ 189-46. (Reserved)
§ 189-47. (Reserved)
§ 189-48. (Reserved)
§ 189-49. (Reserved)
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all fines for violation of its provisions
shall be as prescribed in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
113. Editor's Note: A metes and bounds description of the Park n Ride area is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 189-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-50
1:503
§ 189-50. Specific ordinances repealed.
The following ordinances of Brighton Township are hereby repealed in their
entirety for the reason that the content of these ordinances is incorporated
in the foregoing ordinance.
§ 189-51. Inconsistent or conflicting ordinances repealed.
Any ordinance, or part thereof, inconsistent with or in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed.
A. Ordinance No. 57 enacted August 9, 1976, prohibiting parking on both
sides of a portion of Tuscarawas Road.
B. Ordinance No. 93 enacted September 11, 1995, prohibiting parking on
the north side of Gypsy Glen Road.
C. Ordinance No. 101 enacted December 8, 1997, prohibiting parking on
the north side of Westview Drive.
D. Ordinance No. 106 enacted July 13, 1998, prohibiting parking on the
north side of a portion of Tuscarawas Road.
E. Ordinance No. 111 enacted November 8, 1999, establishing a speed
limit of 25 miles per hour on all Township streets.
F. Ordinance No. 118 enacted July 9, 2001, establishing a weight limit of
7.5 tons on designated Township streets.
§ 189-50 BRIGHTON CODE § 189-51
1:504
Chapter 195
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authorities — See Ch. 5.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 47.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 133.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 175.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
§ 189-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-51
1:505

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 195-1. Title.
§ 195-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 195-3. Interpretation; construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the Township
of Brighton and its citizens and its provisions should be interpreted and
applied accordingly. Applications for subdivision, land development or
planned residential development approvals are encouraged to contain site
design elements that exceed these minimum standards. It is not intended by
this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any rules or regulations
previously adopted or permits previously issued by the Township which are
not in conflict with any provisions of this chapter, nor is it intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants,
building restrictions or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or premises or upon the heights of the building or requires a
larger open space than is imposed or required by such rules, regulations
A. Long title: An ordinance permitting, prohibiting, regulating, restricting
and determining the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of
water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair,
maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the
areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by
uses and structures, as well as courts, yards and other open spaces, and
distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures; the density of
population and intensity of use; and providing for the administration
and enforcement of such ordinance.
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Township of Brighton Zoning Ordinance."
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, appropriate density of population, civil
defense, disaster evacuation, airports, National Defense facilities,
provisions for adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking
and loading space, signage, transportation, water, sewage, schools,
public grounds and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-3
1:507
or permits or by easements, covenants, building restrictions or agreements,
the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 195-4. Uses not provided for.
A. Whenever, in any district established under this chapter, a use is
neither specifically permitted nor prohibited and an application is made
by a property owner to the Zoning Officer for such use, the Zoning
Officer shall determine the status of the use. Upon an adverse
determination, the property owner may appeal the Zoning Officer's
decision to the Zoning Hearing Board for an interpretation of this
chapter as it applies to the permissibility of the proposed use.
B. In the alternative, when a land use proposed by a property owner is not
listed as a permitted use, a conditional use or a use by special exception
in any of the established zoning districts, the Zoning Officer shall refer
such proposed land use to the Zoning Hearing Board following denial of
the zoning permit application. The proposed use shall be reviewed as a
request for a special exception in the C-2 Mixed Use District. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall apply the general standards outlined in
Article XVIII, § 195-157.1, to all such requests. [Added 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 119; amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 195-3 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-4
1:508
ARTICLE II
Development Goals
§ 195-5. Purpose.
In addition to the purpose set forth in § 195-2, this chapter is intended
to assist in achieving to the extent possible the implementation of the
Township of Brighton General Development Plan.
§ 195-6. Community goals. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
A. The development goals of the Township of Brighton Comprehensive
Plan include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Parks, recreation and quality of life.
(a) Goal: To ensure that there are sufficient public parks and
recreation facilities that are inviting, well-maintained, free
from vandalism, accessible to all residents and which meet the
current safety standards through the coordinated efforts of the
Township, municipal partnership, community groups,
businesses, the School District and individual volunteers.
(b) Goal: To encourage, support and promote community building
activities in order to foster a cohesive community identity.
(2) Community development.
(a) Goal: To promote quality development which capitalizes on the
Township's unique locational advantage and which respects
the natural landscape and existing character of the community.
(b) Goal: To build upon the strengths of the Township's existing
residential housing base, stable neighborhoods and unique
bedroom community character.
(3) Transportation. Goal: To improve the safety and flow of pedestrian
and vehicular travel and to reduce the overall traffic congestion
while encouraging multiple modes of public/private transportation
that are conducive to the needs of the community.
(4) Community services facilities. Goal: To ensure that municipal
administration services and facilities are provided and coordinated
in an efficient and effective manner.
(5) Historical, cultural and natural resources. Goal: To preserve and
enhance the natural, scenic and historic areas of the community.
B. Community development objectives. The community development
objectives of the Township of Brighton Comprehensive Plan include, but
are not limited to, the following:
§ 195-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-6
1:509
(1) Manage development in areas of steep slopes, poor soils,
floodplains, wetland and clay mining areas.
(2) Encourage the preservation of woodlands, unique views and
historical heritage.
(3) Encourage protection of the natural ground cover, minimize soil
erosion and siltation, and encourage proper methods of stormwater
drainage in development areas.
(4) Preserve the current blend of rural ambiance and single-family
detached development.
(5) Maintain the dominant land use theme of a bedroom community
with limited regional commercial and professional office uses.
(6) Develop specific design standards for adaptive reuse, infill projects
and facade improvements in key commercial, profession, and office
area.
(7) Maintain densities in the Township in harmony with the traditional
character of the area.
(8) Ensure that built features, zoning densities and recreation serve
the needs of the entire community (seniors, children and adults).
(9) Encourage the evolution of cohesive development areas with each
having a distinctive character and identity, by discouraging urban
sprawl in the form of scattered or strip development.
(10) Limit industrial development around the Route 60 interchange.
(11) Improve existing and future commercial nodes with streetlights,
landscaping, pedestrian paths, traffic control and other streetscape
amenities.
(12) Design new developments so that they contribute to, and have, a
relationship to the community as a whole. Site planning should be
accomplished by considering the elements of the site as well as the
site's relationship to surround parcels and street system.
(13) Encourage the development and use of passive open areas and
parks [such as small urban plazas, passive park areas, greenways
with street furniture (benches, etc.)] in site design.
(14) Improve and increase recreational opportunities in terms of land
purchase, program development and administration.
(15) Achieve pedestrian-friendly residential development with
sidewalks, walkways, and bicycle paths.
(16) Promote the expansion of retail sales and service activities,
collectively, in properly designed service centers.
§ 195-6 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-6
1:510
§ 195-7. Statement of consistency. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 119]
This chapter is prepared in accordance with an overall growth management
program, the Township of Brighton Comprehensive Plan as updated and
adopted in 1999, and with consideration for the character of the
municipality, its natural and man-made environment and the suitability of
the land for particular uses and structures.
§ 195-8. (Reserved)114
(17) Coordinate efforts of the School District in the location of schools,
recreational areas, and police and fire stations within their
respective service areas, thus avoiding duplication of effort and
expenditure.
(18) Investigate expansion of the service areas for public water and
sewer as appropriate.
(19) Encourage the construction of a variety of housing types to provide
affordable housing for all incomes.
(20) Support the attraction of businesses which add to the quality of life
and increases the economic base in the Township.
(21) Promote roadway design standards and off-street parking
requirements to assure the availability of roads to carry existing
and future traffic volumes.
(22) Require integration of proposed streets with existing road network.
(23) Implement street design improvement on an on-going basis.
114. Editor's Note: Former § 195-8, Achievement of goals, was repealed 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119.
§ 195-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-8
1:511

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 195-9. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words herein shall be
interpreted as follows unless otherwise expressly stated:
§ 195-10. Definition of terms.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purposes of this chapter, the
following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings herein
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building to the
principal use building permitted on a lot, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main or principal building. Where accessory structures are
attached, setbacks for the principal use shall apply. Accessory structures
are not permitted where a principal use building has not been erected on
the lot.[Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
ACCESSORY USE — A use on the same lot with and of a nature incidental
and subordinate to the principal use and not occupying more than 15%
of the lot area, including but not limited to storage sheds, nonintegral
garages, satellite dishes, swimming pools, radio antennas, platforms, decks
and carports. Where accessory use structures are attached, setbacks for the
principal use shall apply. However, in no event shall the square feet of an
accessory use structure exceed the total square feet of the principal use
structure, excluding agricultural buildings.[Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 163; 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. The words "person," "owner" or "developer" include a profit or
nonprofit corporation, company, partnership, association or individual.
C. Words used in the singular shall include the plural; words used in the
plural shall include the singular.
D. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied."
E. The word "building" includes "structure."
F. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
G. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
H. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 195-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:513
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.[Added
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 103]: —
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
103]
ADULT DAY CARE — A service offered to adults with supervisory needs as
an accessory to assisted living or nursing facilities.[Added 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 119]
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
A commercial establishment which, as one of its business purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more
of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassette or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designated for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that
do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store so long as one of its business purposes is the offering for
sale or rental for consideration of the specified materials which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B.
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration
for the purpose of providing patrons with closed-circuit television
A.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:514
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall auditorium, stage or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged in
the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock
and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation
for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and
aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that
implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of
crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent
with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or
are consistent with technological development within the agricultural
industry.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, meaning a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities or
an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing height,
adding additional supports or a combination of both and the movement from
one location or position to another.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in any district which includes revisions
to the Zoning Ordinance text and/or the Official Zoning Map. The authority
for any amendment lies solely with the Township of Brighton Board of
Supervisors, and upon enactment, a copy of any zoning text or map revision
shall be forwarded to the Beaver County Planning Commission.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and birds or
fowl by a veterinarian.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes,
whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception
of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the description
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, and
has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the
availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions; or
Offers any single sleeping room for rent three or more times in one
calendar day.
B.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:515
(rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other
wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include tower-based wireless
communications facilities defined below.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE[Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198] —
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on an antenna support
structure, including antennas mounted on the structure.[Amended
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, including his heirs, successors or
assigns, who has filed an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit and an application for the approval of a development plan.
ARCHERY — The shooting of arrows or bolts from a bow.[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS — That part of a building or structure
exempt from bulk requirements and minimum yard requirements due to its
aesthetic and functional characteristics, including but not limited to bay
windows and chimneys.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building, all accessory buildings, exclusive
of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AREA, LOT — The total area within the lot lines.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Residences for the frail elderly that provide
rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered
medication on a daily basis as adult day care or for an extended period
of time. They may provide other services, such as recreational activities,
Any pole, telescoping mast, tripod or any other structure which
supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio
frequency energy, including amateur radio, harm or citizens' band radio
antennas. The required setback from the base of an antenna support
structure or any guyed wire anchors to any property line shall be the
largest of the following:
One hundred percent of the height of the antenna support
structure; or
(1)
The minimum setback for a principal use in the underlying zoning
district.
(2)
A.
B. This definition shall not include wireless communications facilities.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:516
financial services, and transportation.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
AUTOMOTIVE RECYCLING — The use of more than 100 square feet of the
area of any lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including
scrap material from the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for supplying
gasoline, oil, minor accessories and service for automobiles at retail direct
to the motorist consumer, including the making of minor repairs, but not
including major repairs, such as spray painting, body, fender clutch,
transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs; major overhauling
of engine requiring removal therefrom of cylinder head or crankcase pan;
repairs of radiator requiring removal thereof; complete recapping or
retreading of tires.
BAFFLES — Barriers to contain bullets and to reduce, redirect or suppress
sound waves. Baffles are placed either overhead, alongside or at ground
level to restrict or interrupt errant or off-the-target shots.[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
BANQUET FACILITY — A commercial establishment that is rented by
individuals or groups to accommodate private functions such as banquets,
weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations. Banquet use may
or may not include kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering of food
and beverages. The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. Outdoor tents
or activities are prohibited. Banquet facilities must comply with industrial
and development performance standards set forth in § 195-137.13.[Added
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
BAR/TAVERN — An establishment where the principal use is the serving
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to the general
public and which may or may not serve food. Bars and taverns must comply
with industrial and development performance standards set forth in
§ 195-137.13. See § 195-137.16.[Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall
be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground
is more than five feet or if used for business or dwelling purposes, other
than a game or recreation room.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A residential structure converted for use as a
transient facility for overnight guests. See § 195-137.5.[Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
BILLBOARD — A sign other than one indicating a business conducted on the
premises; a sign on which advertising matter of any character is printed,
posted or lettered; and it may be either freestanding or attached to a
surface of a building or other structure.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:517
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which up to two persons are housed
or lodged for hire in individual sleeping rooms, with or without meals,
and the owner is a full-time resident. A rooming house or a furnished
room house shall be deemed a boardinghouse. See § 195-137.14.[Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
BUFFER YARD — Open space which includes landscaped areas, fences,
walls, berms, or a combination thereof used to physically separate or screen
one use or property from another.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
BUILDING, FRONTLINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the frontline of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps or patios.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs and
to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line located on the lot at a fixed distance from the
street right-of-way line and interpreted as being the nearest point that a
building may be constructed to the street right-of-way line. The building
line shall limit the location of porches, decks and similar construction, steps
excepted, to the face of the building.
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected having an
ascertainable stationary location on or in land, whether or not affixed to
the land, including but not limited to mobile or modular homes, signs,
billboards, barns, swimming pools, silos, stables and sheds.[Amended
3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
CAMPGROUNDS — A tract or parcel of land used or held out for the
purpose of providing two or more campsites to the public.[Added
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107]
CAMPSITES — Include:[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107]
CARPORT — An open space for the storage of one or more vehicles in
the same manner as a private garage, which may be covered by a roof
supported by columns or posts, except that one or more walls may be the
walls of the main building to which the carport is an accessory building or
extension.
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way surfaced for vehicular
use. Width is determined from face of curb to face of curb or from one edge
of driving surface to the other edge of driving surface.115
Overnight parking spaces, with or without utilities, for camping or
recreational vehicles; or
A.
B. Space for use for camping in tents.
115. Editor's Note: The former definition of "cell cite," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:518
CELLAR — A story partly underground having more than half of its clear
height below the average level of adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
considered in determining the permissible number of stories.
CEMETERY — Land that is set apart or used as a public place for the
interment of the dead or in which human bodies have been buried, and for
which the primary use of the land is that of a cemetery.[Added 10-8-2007
by Ord. No. 154]
CENTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES — The Governor's Center
for Local Government Services located within the Department of
Community and Economic Development.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement, based on an inspection,
signed by the Zoning Administration Officer, setting forth either that a
building or structure complies with this chapter or that a building, structure
or parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified use, or both.116
CHICKEN COOP — The building used for the housing of chickens.[Added
10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 189]
CHICKENS — A chicken (Gallus domesticuous) refers only to a female
chicken.[Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 189]
CLINIC — An establishment where patients are admitted for examination
and treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more physicians, dentists,
other medical personnel, psychologists or social workers and where
patients are not lodged overnight.[Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs, including antennas,
on an existing tower-based WCF or on any structure that already supports
at least one non-tower WCF.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
COMMERCIAL — Engaging in a business, enterprise, activity or other
undertaking for profit.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site, designed
and intended for the common use of the residents of a planned residential
development. Common open space may be of two types:
IMPROVED — Land area of a site containing recreational structures
and facilities, as long as the total impervious surfaces in the area (paved
bike paths, tennis or basketball courts, roofs, etc.) constitute no more
than 5% of the improved common open space.
A.
UNIMPROVED — Land area of a site void of buildings, structures,
parking areas and street rights-of-way.117
B.
116. Editor's Note: The former definition of "clear sight triangle," which definition immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135.
117. Editor’s Note: The definitions of "communications antenna," added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
107, as amended; "communications equipment building," added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
107; and “communications tower,” added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107, all of which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:519
COMMUNICATIONS EMERGENCY — A condition that:[Added 8-10-2015
by Ord. No. 198]
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A site where the controlled process of
degrading organic matter by the production of microorganisms takes place.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions in Article VI, Section 603, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.118 Conditional uses are
allowed or denied under the provisions of Article XX of this chapter and
require a public hearing prior to action.
CONSISTENCY — An agreement or correspondence between matters being
compared which denotes a reasonable rational, similar, connection or
relationship.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIAL STORAGE SITES — A lot or portion
thereof, used by a contractor or builder where equipment and materials
are stored and/or where a contractor or builder performs shop or assembly
work off the construction site and/or a site used as a staging area for
construction off site.[Added 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 168]
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An age-restricted
development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care, from
independent living to long-term bed care, and enters into contracts to
provide lifelong care.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DISPENSATION FACILITY — Any public or
private facility that sells, dispenses, distributes, provides and/or
administers any controlled substance, as that term is defined in the
Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 802 et seq., as the same may be
amended from time to time, including, but not limited to, methadone or
suboxone or similar anti-opioids, to any person known, or believed by such
facility or to any employee, agent or individual otherwise connected to
such facility, to be physically or psychologically dependent on the use of
such controlled substances, for the detoxification treatment or maintenance
treatment of such dependency, unless said controlled substance is sold,
dispensed, distributed, provided and/or administered for the cure or
treatment of an illness, malady or disease other than controlled substance
dependency. Such facilities include any facility licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health for such operations.[Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No.
210]
CONVERSION APARTMENT UNIT — The remodeling of a single-family
dwelling unit into two or more separate living units each having a minimum
of 500 square feet of habitable area, exclusive of basement and/or cellar
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the public; or
A.
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided.
B.
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:520
dwellings; one bathroom and three habitable rooms; separate and private
water, sanitary, cooking and dining facilities; and a minimum of two offstreet
parking spaces per living unit.
CORNER LOT — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets or other public spaces, the angle of intersection
being not more than 135°.
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A land use and growth management
plan prepared by the County Planning Commission and adopted by the
County Commissioners which establishes broad goals and criteria for
municipalities to use in preparation of their Comprehensive Plan and land
use regulation.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
COVERAGE, BUILDING (BULK) — That portion or percentage of the plot or
lot area covered by the building area.
CREMATORY — An establishment containing a furnace designed to cremate
or reduce to ashes human remains of the deceased.[Added 12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 206]
DATA COLLECTION UNIT (DCU) — A non-tower wireless communications
facility that utilizes wireless technology to capture and transmit
data.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility licensed by the commonwealth, located
within a building or structure not used as a dwelling, for the care, during
part of the twenty-four-hour day, of children under the age of 16 years or
disabled persons.[Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
dBA — The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured using the impulse
mode and "A" weighting network on a precision sound level meter.[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
DECK — A structure attached to the exterior of the principal use as an
accessory use. All setbacks shall be those established for the principal
structure or principal use.
DENSITY — A measure of the number of dwelling units which occupy or
may occupy an area of land.
DENSITY, GROSS RESIDENTIAL — The number of dwelling units in relation
to an area of land actually in use or proposed to be used for residential
purposes, including public rights-of-way, whether exterior or interior,
parking areas and access lanes, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, common
open space and any residual land within the tract of land proposed for
development.
DENSITY, NET RESIDENTIAL — The number of dwelling units in relation
to the land area actually in use or proposed to be used for residential
purposes, exclusive of commercial areas, parking areas, public rights-ofway,
streets, access lanes, sidewalks, utility or drainage easements, parks,
playgrounds and common open space.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:521
DEVELOPMENT MODEL — A prototype for development containing
parameters governing character and design, site layout, lot types and the
mix of uses.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT — Any land
development that, because of its character, magnitude, or location, will have
substantial effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of citizens in more than
one municipality.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of land, including
a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public utilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan," when used
in this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in
this definition.
DIRECT FIRE ZONE — The area on a firing range established according to
the relationship of the firing position and target position. Typically set up on
a one-to-one basis (one target to each firing point).[Added 12-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 179]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — A network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.[Added 8-10-2015
by Ord. No. 198]
DISTRICT or ZONING DISTRICT — An area constituted by or pursuant to
this chapter and delineated by text and map as to location, extent, nature
and contents.
DOG KENNEL — The keeping of four or more dogs that are more than six
months old, or the keeping of dogs for breeding or boarding.[Amended
5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 168]
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for one
or more families. The terms "dwelling," "one-family dwelling," "multiple
dwelling," "two-family dwelling" or "dwelling group" shall not include
automobile or recreational vehicle, courts, rooming houses, tourist homes
or hotels.
DWELLING TYPE —
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION UNIT — To be considered a conversion,
any proposed alteration must be confined to the interior of any already
existing structural shell. Any proposal to extend the sides or increase
the height of an existing structure shall not be considered a conversion
and shall be required to meet the appropriate provisions established in
that district for that particular use.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling unit accommodating a
single-family and having two side yards.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED (DUPLEX, TRIPLEX,
QUADRAPLEX) — Two, three or four dwelling units accommodating
two, three or four families which are attached side by side through
C.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:522
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof which is designed
and used exclusively for residential purposes of one family and includes
complete kitchen and bathroom facilities.
DWELLING UNIT AREA — The minimum or average square footage
necessary to constitute a dwelling unit.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any service directly related to the operation of an
sexually oriented business.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
ERECTED — Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any
physical operations on the land required for the building. Excavation, fill
drainage and the like shall be considered part of the erection.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, which includes engaging in
one or more specified sexual activities.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
103]
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its business purposes
for a fee, tip or other consideration.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITIES — The erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions, of necessary facilities and accessory equipment in connection
therewith, including buildings or accessory structures, but excluding
communications towers, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions. (See § 195-127.)
FAMILY — One person or a group of two or more persons living together
and interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage or legal adoption or
the use of a party wall and having one side yard adjacent to each end
dwelling unit or which are located one over the other and having two
side yards.
TOWNHOUSE (ROW DWELLING) — Five or six dwelling units
accommodating five or six families which are attached side by side
through the use of common party walls and which may have side yards
adjacent to each end unit. Each dwelling unit is generally two stories
in height, but may conceivably be either one story or three stories in
height.
D.
GARDEN APARTMENT DWELLING — Seven or more dwelling units
accommodating seven or more families which are located one over the
other or side by side by story through the use of common party walls
and which may have side yards adjacent to each first story end unit.
The structure accommodating the dwelling unit is generally built to a
height of three or four stories, but may conceivably be built to a height
of only two stories, each dwelling unit being accessible by a common
stairwell.
E.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:523
a group of not more than three unrelated persons, living together and
maintaining a common household.
FARM (AGRICULTURAL USE) — Any parcel of land containing 10 or more
acres, except as otherwise specified, which is used for gain in the raising
of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products. It includes
necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits and the storage
of equipment used. It excludes the raising of fur-bearing animals, riding
academies, livery or boarding stables and dog kennels.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.[Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
FIREARM — A term used to describe any weapon, including but not limited
to pistols, rifles, and shotguns, capable of firing a projectile using an
explosive charge as a propellant, air guns and/or archery
equipment.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
FIRING LINE — A line parallel to a target from which firearms or arrows
are discharged.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
FIRING POSITION (POINT) — An area directly behind the firing line having
a specified width and depth that is occupied by a shooter, his equipment
and, if appropriate, an instructor or coach.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 179]
FIRING RANGE[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179] —
FIRING RANGE COMPLEX — A grouping of two or more ranges of differing
types, purposes or firing distances located at a single site location or
property. It may include a clubhouse, parking facilities and other related
structures. Does not include incidental target practice areas on private
property.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
FLOOR AREA, NET (as applied to off-street parking) — The area used or
intended for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients or tenants,
including areas occupied for fixtures and equipment used for display or sale
of merchandise. Floor areas may be excluded which are used exclusively
for storage, housing of mechanical equipment integral with the building,
for maintenance facilities or for those areas so restricted that customers,
patients, clients, salesmen and the general public are denied access.
FLOOR SPACE, GROSS (also GROSS FLOOR AREA) — The sum of the
gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building and its necessary
buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and basement floor areas not
devoted to residential use, but including the area of roofed porches and
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between the exterior
faces of walls.
A facility designed for the purpose of providing a place on which to
discharge firearms, shoot air guns and/or archery equipment.
A.
May refer to several ranges constructed in a complex. Does not include
incidental target practice areas on private property.
B.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:524
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.[Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
FUELING STATION — Mechanical equipment arranged to dispense fuel to a
maximum of two vehicles simultaneously.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of one
or more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service
is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car is
leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or structure where motor vehicles can be
temporarily stored or parked.
GAS — Any of the following:[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
GENERAL CONSISTENCY, GENERALLY CONSISTENT — That which
exhibits consistency.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (or COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT
PLAN) — A Comprehensive Plan (overall program) consists of maps,
charters and textual matter and indicates the recommendations of the
Planning Commission for the continuing development of a municipality. The
General Development Plan includes, but is not limited to, the following
related basic elements: a statement of objectives; a plan for land use; a
plan for the movement of people and goods; a plan for community facilities
and utilities; and a map indicating the relationship of the municipality and
its proposed development to adjacent municipalities and areas. For the
purpose of this chapter, the Township of Brighton General Development
Plan shall be the Township of Brighton General Development Plan as
adopted November 19, 1974, and as may be amended.119
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Township Supervisors, of the Township
of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the streets as
officially approved by the Township.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
A fluid, combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural
state from the earth and maintains a gaseous or rarified state at a
standard temperature of 60° F. and pressure of 14.7 PSIA.
A.
Any manufactured gas, by-product gas or mixture of gases or natural
gas liquids.
B.
119. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:525
GROUP HOME — A household of not more than five residents, not including
resident supervision, which by design and intent shall provide for the longterm
needs of its residents, whose physical or emotional disabilities would
otherwise impair their ability to live independently. The household shall
have the generic character of a family and be relatively permanent and not
a framework for transients or transient living or institutional arrangement.
On-site medical or counseling services shall be limited to the occupants and
shall not be provided to nonresidents.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — The assembly, processing, production, forging or
fabrication of products from raw materials, including any process using
hazardous materials, as regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and/or the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (US EPA).[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
HEIGHT — See "building, height of."
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a
tower-based WCF, including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s, birthday, Presidents
Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Flag Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.[Added
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
HOME GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or
vegetables on a piece of ground adjoining the dwelling, excluding the
keeping of livestock.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character conducted
within a dwelling by the residents which is secondary to the use of the
dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof
or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a small
nameplate. See § 195-137.4 for additional regulations.[Amended
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
HOSPITAL — A building containing rooms and facilities intended to be used
and occupied to provide care, diagnosis, treatment and health care services
to humans.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public with access to individual rooms from the interior of the
building, and providing services such as restaurants, meeting rooms,
entertainment and recreational facilities.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 119]
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Signs which are illuminated by electrical,
mechanical or other means as well as those using luminous paint or
reflectorized glass to reflect light.
INDUSTRIAL — The manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing,
packaging or treatment of raw material or other products.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:526
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A land use customarily operated by a public or
private institution, including but not limited to county, commonwealth and
federal governments, nonprofit and for-profit organizations or societies and
public and private schools.
INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE — Adequate sight distance shall be
provided pursuant to PENNDOT Publication 13M (Latest Edition) (Design
Manual Part 2 Highway Design).[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135]
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — The assembly, processing or production of finished
products, not involving the use of any raw materials or any hazardous
materials, as regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP) and/or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (US EPA), including, but not limited to, communications equipment
and services; computer components and accessories; dolls, toys and
sporting goods; electrical parts, accessories and equipment; electronic
components, accessories and equipment; jewelry and musical instruments;
laboratory apparatus; machinery, equipment and supplies; metal fabrication
and machining; office machines and equipment; optical instruments and
products; precision instruments; printing, publishing, shipping, packaging,
mailing and distribution; and similar products and services.[Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
LIGHTING —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development other than those activities specified as exclusions in
Section 503 (1.1) of Article V of the Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, as amended.120
C.
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from the
source through a translucent cover or shade.
A.
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:527
LINE, BUILDING — See "building line."
LOADING SPACE OR UNIT — An off-street space or berth on the same lot
with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
stopping of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials, and which abuts upon an alley, street or other appropriate means
of access and which is not less than 12 feet wide, 60 feet in length and 14
feet in height.
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with
such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter,
having not less than the minimum area and width required by this chapter
for a lot in the district in which such land is situated and having its principal
frontage on a public street or on such other approved means of access.
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane measured at grade and bounded
by the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance across the lot between the side lot
lines, measured at the building line.
MATERIAL SALVAGE YARD — Any lot, site, parcel, building or structure or
part thereof, used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale,
salvage or disposal of any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris,
whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled,
destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or
disposition including but not limited to: unregistered, inoperable vehicles;
tires; vehicle parts; equipment; paper; rugs; metal; glass; household
appliances; machinery and building materials.[Added 3-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 135]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT — Act 16 of 2016, 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et
seq.[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to be
illuminated.
B.
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is entirely
hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector from which it is
reflected to the object to be illuminated.
C.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:528
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural
person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which is registered by the Department of Health under
the Medical Marijuana Act to dispense medical marijuana. The term does
not include a health care medical marijuana organization under Chapter 19
of the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a
natural person, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other entity,
or any combination thereof, which is registered by the Department of
Health under the Medical Marijuana Act to grow and process medical
marijuana. The term does not include a health care medical marijuana
organization under Chapter 19 of the Medical Marijuana Act.[Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Includes all activity which removes from the
surface or beneath the surface of the land some material mineral resource,
natural resource or other element of economic value, excluding oil and
gas, by means of mechanical excavation or drilling necessary to separate
the desired material from an undesirable one; or to remove the strata
or material which overlies or is above the desired material in its natural
condition. Open pit mining includes, but is not limited to, the excavation
necessary to the extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone,
coal, clay, shale and iron ore.[Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176]
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not
coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite,
sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore,
vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and
crude oil and natural gas.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
MINI-WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings designated in a
controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individual compartments to be used exclusively for storing excess personal
property.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A two- or three-story building which houses
nonresidential uses, including retail shops and offices on the ground floor,
and uses within the upper floors that include residential uses.[Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A development in the C-2 Mixed Use
District that blends residential and nonresidential uses, where those
functions are physically and functionally integrated, and that provides
pedestrian connections. See §§ 195-97 through 195-100.[Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:529
operations and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE OR MODULAR HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land which have been so designated and improved that they contain two or
more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR OR MANUFACTURED HOME — Two portable modular or
sectional units designed and built to be towed on their own separate chassis
and permanently combined on site to form a single immobile dwelling unit
and having a minimum of 900 square feet of habitable floor area. It shall
be regarded as a single-family detached dwelling, but may be located in a
mobile or modular home park at the discretion of the owner.
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure,
designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support
communications antennas and connecting appurtenances.[Added
8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
MOTEL — An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a
majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.[Amended
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
MULTIMUNICIPAL PLAN — A plan developed and adopted by any number
of contiguous municipalities, including a joint municipal plan as authorized
by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
MULTIMUNICIPAL PLANNING AGENCY — A planning agency comprised
of representatives of more than one municipality and constituted as a
joint municipal planning commission in accordance with Article XI of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, or
otherwise by resolution of the participating municipalities, to address, on
behalf of the participating municipalities, multimunicipal issues, including,
but not limited to, agricultural and open space preservation, natural and
historic resources, transportation, housing, and economic
development.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
NATURAL GAS — A fossil fuel consisting of a mixture of hydrocarbon
gases, primarily methane, and possibly including ethane, propane, butane,
pentane, carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen sulfide and other
gas species. The term includes natural gas from oil fields known as
associated gas or casing head gas, natural gas fields known as
nonassociated gas, coal beds, shale beds and other formations. The term
does not include coal bed methane.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an oil and gas
well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for the
delivery of oil and gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline,
natural gas processing plant or underground storage field, including one
or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks
and other equipment.[Added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176]
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:530
NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS — Hydrocarbons in natural gas which are
separated from the gas as liquids through the process of absorption,
condensation, adsorption or other methods in gas processing of cycling
plants.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and constructed
to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and other
constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such natural
gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for transmission
or distribution to commercial markets, but not including facilities or
equipment that are designed and constructed primarily to remove water,
water vapor, oil or natural occurring liquids from natural gas.[Added
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176]
NIGHTCLUB — A commercial establishment where the principal use is
evening, late-night to early morning entertainment that typically serves
food and/or alcoholic beverages, and may provide either live or prerecorded
music or video, comedy acts, floor shows, and similar entertainment with or
without the opportunity for dancing. A nightclub does not include a sexually
oriented business. Nightclubs must comply with industrial and development
performance standards set forth in § 195-137.13. See § 195-137.15.[Added
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:[Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking or lighting. No significant additional vehicular
or pedestrian traffic to the residence shall be created, nor shall the use
require delivery by tractor trailer trucks.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:531
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure not
designed to comply with the applicable use provisions of this chapter and/
or its predecessor zoning ordinances or any amendments hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the application of this chapter
or amendments. Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited
to nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment.
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER
WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications facilities, including, but not
limited to, antennas and DCUs. Non-tower WCFs shall not include support
structures for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the
ground or at ground-level, or on building roofs.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 198]
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities may be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.[Added
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
NURSING HOME — A long-term facility or a distinct part of a facility
licensed or approved as a nursing home with skilled nursing care, including
an infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical
institution.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
OFFICE PARK — A development on a tract of land that contains a number
of separate office buildings, accessory and supporting uses, and open space
designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and
coordinated basis.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
Signs shall be permitted in accordance with §§ 195-109 through
195-117.
I.
J. Permits shall be obtained in accordance with § 195-137.4B.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:532
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system
approved by the Township in which sewage is carried from individual lot or
dwelling units by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant
which may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A potable water distribution system
approved by the Township in which water is carried to individual lots or
dwelling units by a system of pipes from a central water source located
beyond the limits of the lot being served which may be publicly or privately
owned and operated.121
OIL — Hydrocarbons in liquid form at a standard temperature of 60° F. and
pressure of 14.7 PSIA; also referred to as "petroleum."[Added 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 191]
OIL AND GAS OPERATION — Includes the following:[Added 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 191]
OIL AND GAS WELL — Well site preparation, construction, operation,
drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration associated with oil
and gas wells of any depth; and the installation and use of all associated
equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and structures,
whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation, construction,
Oil and gas well location assessment, including seismic operations, well
site preparation, construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing and site
restoration associated with an oil and gas well of any depth.
A.
Water and other fluid storage or impoundment areas used exclusively
for oil and gas operations.
B.
Construction, installation, use, maintenance and repair of:
(1) Oil and gas pipelines;
(2) Natural gas compressor stations;
Natural gas processing plants or facilities performing equivalent
functions.
(3)
C.
Construction, installation, use, maintenance and repair of all equipment
directly associated with activities specified in Subsections A, B and C to
the extent that:
The equipment is necessarily located at or immediately adjacent to
a well site, water impoundment area, oil and gas pipeline, natural
gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant; and
(1)
The activities area is authorized and permitted under the authority
of a federal or commonwealth agency.
(2)
D.
121. Editor’s Note: The definition of “oil and gas development,” added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No.
176, as amended, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 191.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:533
installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas pipelines and associated
equipment.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities approved by the Township serving only a single lot and disposing
of sewage in whole or in part into the soil.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving only a single lot and obtaining the water either in whole
or in part from a primary source located within the limits of the lot being
served.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building or structure.
OPERATOR — The mineral extraction and oil and gas operation applicant,
and any well operator or operator as defined in the Oil and Gas Act,122 and
including any and all subcontractors of such operator.[Added 9-12-2011
by Ord. No. 176; amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space having an area of not less than 200
square feet, 10 feet wide by 20 feet deep, whether inside or outside of a
structure, for the temporary standing of automotive vehicles to be used
exclusively as a parking stall for one automotive vehicle plus 150 square
feet used exclusively for turning and access to the parking space.
PATIO — An outside surfaced area having no roof and no more than three
sides walled or fenced. For the purposes of this chapter, patios are not
considered as accessory structures.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or
apparel.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
PET CREMATORY — An establishment containing a furnace designed to
cremate or reduce to ashes animal remains.[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 206]
122. Editor's Note: See 58 P.S. § 601.101 et seq.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:534
PLACE OF WORSHIP (CHURCH) — A building regularly used as a place
of religious worship and education and/or teaching, but it shall not include
rescue missions or the occasional use for religious purposes of properties
not otherwise used.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district. A planned residential
development may include and shall be limited to:
PLANNING COMMISSION — The duly constituted Planning Commission of
the Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT — A map, plan or layout of a subdivision indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.
PORCH (COVERED DECK) — A roofed over structure projecting from the
front, side or rear wall of a building. For the purpose of this chapter, a porch
or covered deck is considered a part of the principal building and is not
permitted to extend into any required yards.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building constructed
thereon.
PRESERVATION OR PROTECTION — When used in connection with natural
and historic resources, includes to conserve and safeguard these resources
from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize
the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of
natural resources.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
PRIME AGRICULTURAL LAND — Land used for agricultural purposes that
contains soils of the first, second or third class as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture natural resource and conservation
services county soil survey.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
PRINCIPAL USE — The major or dominant use of the lot on which it is
located.
PRIVATE CLUB — An organization, including fraternal clubs, lodges, social
clubs and recreational clubs, catering exclusively to members and their
guests; or premises and buildings for recreation or athletic purposes which
are not conducted primarily for gain, provided that any vending stands,
merchandising or commercial activities are conducted only as required
generally for the membership of such club. A sexual encounter center
and sexually oriented business which are regulated under § 195-136 are
Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached or multistoried
structures or any combination thereof; and
A.
Those nonresidential uses deemed to be appropriate by the Township
Supervisors for incorporation in the design of the planned residential
development.
B.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:535
specifically excluded from the definition of private club.[Amended
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
PRIVATE (COMMERCIAL) RECREATION — An enterprise operated by other
than a public agency for profit, for the indoor or outdoor pursuit of leisure
activities, sports and recreation, including, but not limited to, miniature and
par-3 golf courses, golf or batting practice facilities, playing fields, racquet
clubs, swimming pools, skating rinks and similar facilities.[Amended
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Any office or business conducted by an
individual or association, including but not limited to engineers, lawyers,
doctors, dentists, architects, chiropractors and veterinarians who must be
licensed under the laws of the commonwealth.
PROTECTED STRUCTURE — Any occupied residence, commercial
business, school, religious institution, or public building located within
1,000 feet of the surface location of any industrial or other use subject
to § 195-137.13 that may be impacted by noise generated from such
operations. The term shall not include any structure owned by an oil and
gas lessor who has signed a lease or agreement with the operator granting
surface drilling rights to drill the subject well, or whose owner has signed
a waiver relieving the operator from implementation of the measures
established in § 195-137.13 of the Township Code for the owner's or
occupant's benefit.[Added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; amended
2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting open to the general public held
pursuant to proper public notice by the governing body or planning agency,
intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in
accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."123
PUBLIC (NONCOMMERCIAL) RECREATION — An enterprise operated by a
public agency, available to the general public, whether or not an admission
fee is charged, including either indoor or outdoor facilities for the pursuit
of leisure activities, sports and recreation, including but not limited to
parks, playgrounds, playing fields, golf courses, tennis courts, skating rinks,
golf or batting practice facilities, swimming pools and similar facilities;
and excluding campgrounds, campsites, and firing ranges.[Amended
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days or fewer than seven days from the date of the hearing.
123. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now Sunshine
Act, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:536
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a road, street, alley,
crosswalk, pedestrian way or other public purposes.
PUBLIC USES — A building or use intended, designed and owned by the
Township or municipal authorities or as may be chartered by the Township
to provide fire, police or other municipal services, not to include public or
private schools.
PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEMS — Within the terms of this chapter, utility
systems shall be defined as gas, electric, telephone and cable television
and/or any such service regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single axle or multiple axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile, either
with its own motive power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by
an automotive vehicle for the purpose of travel, camping, vacation and
recreational use, including but not limited to travel trailers, motor homes,
tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, pickup trucks or van campers and horse
trailers, but not including mobile homes.
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY — A planning agency that is comprised of
representatives of more than one county. Regional planning responsibilities
shall include providing technical assistance to counties and municipalities,
mediating conflicts across county lines and reviewing county
comprehensive plans for consistency with one another.[Added 11-13-2001
by Ord. No. 119]
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incident
to, or necessary for the operation of a tower-based WCF or non-tower
WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes,
but is not limited to, generators, base stations, sheds, and mounting
platforms.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A research, testing or
experimental laboratory for carrying out investigations in the natural,
physical or social sciences, engineering, or biomedical fields.[Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where the principal use is the serving
of food to the general public and which may or may not serve alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises. Restaurants must comply with
industrial and development performance standards set forth in
§ 195-137.13.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119; amended 4-11-2016
by Ord. No. 203]
RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are kept for riding,
driving or stabling for compensation or incidental to the operation of any
club, association, ranch or similar establishment.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:537
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — A set of two parallel lines which denote an area of
land between them used for public access.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW — The surface of and space above and below any
real property in the Township in which the Township has a regulatory
interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or
hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues,
roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other
public place, area or property under the control of the Township, and
any unrestricted public or utility easements established, dedicated, platted,
improved or devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands other than
streets that are owned by the Township. The phrase "in the right(s)-ofway"
means in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way.
For the purpose of this chapter, "ROW" shall include streets and roads
owned by Beaver County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and any other
Pennsylvania state agencies.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
ROOSTER — A male chicken.[Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 189]
ROW HOUSE — See "townhouse."
RURAL RESOURCE AREA — An area described in a municipal or
multimunicipal plan within which rural resource uses, including, but not
limited to, agriculture, timbering, mining, quarrying and other extractive
industries, forest and game lands and recreation and tourism, are
encouraged and enhanced, development that is compatible with or
supportive of such uses is permitted, and public infrastructure services are
not provided except in villages.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
SAFETY FAN — An area designed to contain all projectiles fired on a firing
range.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
SANITARY LANDFILL — A lot or land or part thereof, licensed by the
commonwealth and regulated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, used primarily for the disposal of garbage, refuse
and other discarded materials, including but not limited to solid and liquid
waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural and
residential activities. The operation of a sanitary landfill normally consists
of:
SAWMILLS or PLANING MILLS — Mills intended for the primary
processing of timber or saw logs into lumber and shall exclude any
secondary processing of the lumber thus produced.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A building or institutional use intended, designed,
operated, owned or leased by a person who charges a fee for those persons
attending said school facilities.
A. Depositing the discarded material in a planned controlled manner.
B. Compacting the discarded material in thin layers to reduce its volume.
C. Covering the discarded material with a layer of earth.
D. Compacting the earth cover.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:538
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — A building or institutional use intended, designed,
operated and owned by the Township's area school district.
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining residential
districts the structures and uses on the premises on which the screen
planting is located.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps and devices.[Added 1-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 103]
SENIOR HOUSING — Residential uses designed for persons 55 and over,
that satisfies the exemption of 24 CFR 100, Subpart E, of Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments
Act of 1988 and the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 (HOPA),124 and
developed for private rental, publicly assisted rental, publicly assisted longterm
lease, or condominium use. See § 195-137.17.[Amended 3-12-2018
by Ord. No. 210]
SERVICES, ESSENTIAL — See "essential service facilities."
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business, commercial enterprise, or
adult club, whether or not for profit, that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 103; amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult club, adult motel, adult motionpicture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103; amended
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
SHOTFALL ZONE — An area within which the shot or pellets contained in a
shotgun shell typically fall.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
SIGN — Any surface, fabric, device or structure bearing lettered, pictorial
or sculptured matter intended, designed or used to convey information
visually and exposed to public view, which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. The
term "sign" does not apply to a flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political
unit, school or religious group.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry, located upon the premises where the sign is displayed, to type
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the same or opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between persons of the same or opposite sex when one or
more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
124. Editor’s Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:539
of products sold, manufactured or assembled upon the premises and/or to
service or entertainment offered on said premises.
SIGN, FLASHING — Any illuminated sign or device in which the artificial
light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at
all times.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF — The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign. All signs
shall be limited to not more than two faces. All area limitations shall be
computed in square feet. Each face of a double-face sign may equal the
maximum size permitted for the particular type of sign. When individual
letters are used separately on the surface of a building wall, the spaces
between said letters shall be included in computing the area of the sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used to identify only the name of the
individual or organization occupying the premises, the profession of the
occupant, the name of the building on which the sign is displayed and the
address of the property.
SIGN, MOVING — Any sign or any part thereof located on said sign which
oscillates, rotates or moves.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign used to identify only the name of the
individual occupying the premises and the address of the occupant.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining only to the rental, lease or sale of
the property on which it is located.
SIGN, SELF-SUPPORTING — A sign mounted on its own self-supporting
structure and constructed on a permanent base.
SIGN, WALL-MOUNTED — A sign mounted, attached or painted on a
building.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and the provisions of this chapter of the
Brighton Township Codification of Ordinances.[Amended 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 119]
SPECIFIC PLAN — A detailed plan for nonresidential development of an
area covered by a municipal or multimunicipal comprehensive plan, which
when approved and adopted by the participating municipalities through
ordinances and agreements supersedes all other applications.[Added
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103]
A. Includes any of the following:
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:540
STABLE, PRIVATE — A building in which horses are kept.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building in which any horses are kept or boarded for
remuneration, hire or sale.
STATE LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT REPORT — A
comprehensive land use and growth management report to be prepared
by the Center for Local Government Services and which shall contain
information, data and conclusions regarding growth and development
patterns in this commonwealth and which will offer recommendations to
commonwealth agencies for coordination of executive action, regulation
and programs.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications towers, antennas and other facilities which render them
more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing
structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally
visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed
to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsection A(1) through (3) above.
(4)
The term does not include any of the following:
Medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications
or films.
(1)
Any art or photography publications which devote at least 25% of
the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing
with subjects of art or photography.
(2)
Any news periodical which reports or describes current events
and which from time to time publishes photographs of nude or
seminude persons in connection with the dissemination of the
news.
(3)
Any publication or films which describe and report different
cultures and which from time to time publish or show photographs
or depictions of nude or seminude when describing cultures in
which nudity or seminudity is indigenous to the population.
(4)
B.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:541
STOOP — A covered or uncovered area at a front, side or rear door not
exceeding four feet by six feet or 24 square feet in area.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost
story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where
there is no ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. A story shall be a maximum
of 12 feet.
STREET — A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting
properties.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; a manufactured or mobile home; a storage tank for gases or liquids;
or any other permanent, man-made facilities.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 179]
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means (including partition by a court among heirs) into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing
lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of
ownership or building or land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access shall be
exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198] —
SURFACE DANGER ZONE — Any area that may reasonably expect
projectile impact resulting from direct fire, including misdirected and
accidental discharges, and ricochets from any firearm or bow, which takes
into consideration all mitigation efforts as submitted by the applicant and
determined by a certified engineer.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any reasonably permanent pool or open
tank, not located within a completely enclosed building, and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than 24
inches. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided that swimming
was not the primary purpose of their construction. (See Article XV.)
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth by the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act if necessary to avoid
interference with existing antennas; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array.
B.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:542
SWIMMING POOL (TEMPORARY), PRIVATE — Pool or open tank containing
or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than
18 inches erected on a property with a principal use for a period of time
not to exceed 120 days, after which time it will be removed or placed within
storage. See § 195-122.1.[Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
TARGET LINE — A line parallel to the firing Line along which targets are
placed.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWERBASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and light poles. DAS hub
facilities are considered to be tower-based WCFs.[Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Brighton.[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
103]
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — An area of land
developed for a compatible mixture of residential units for various income
levels and nonresidential commercial and workplace uses, including some
structures that provide for a mix of uses within the same building.
Residences, shops, offices, workplaces, public buildings, and parks are
interwoven within the neighborhood so that all are within relatively close
proximity to each other. Traditional neighborhood development is relatively
compact, limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian activity. It has an
identifiable center and a discernible edge. The center of the neighborhood
is in the form of a public park, commons, plaza, square or prominent
intersection of two or more major streets. Generally, there is a hierarchy
of streets laid out in a rectilinear or grid pattern of interconnecting streets
and blocks that provides multiple routes from origins to destinations and
are appropriately designed to serve the needs of pedestrians and vehicles
equally.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:[Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
103]
UNCONVENTIONAL FORMATION — A geological shale formation existing
below the base of the elk sandstone or its geologic equivalent stratigraphic
interval where natural gas generally cannot be produced at economic flow
rates or in economic volumes except by vertical or horizontal well bores
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for the
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:543
stimulated by hydraulic fracture treatments or by using multilateral well
bores or other techniques to expose more of the formation to the well
bore.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
UNCONVENTIONAL WELL — A bore hole drilled or being drilled for the
purpose of or to be used for the production of natural gas from an
unconventional formation.[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
USE, MIXED — The occupancy of a building or of a lot for more than one
use, such as both a business and a residential use; both an industrial and a
residential use, etc.
VARIANCE — The permission granted by the Zoning Hearing Board,
following a public hearing that has been properly advertised as required by
the appropriate municipal code, for an adjustment to some regulation which
if strictly adhered to would result in an unnecessary hardship and where the
permission granted would not be contrary to the public interest and would
maintain the spirit and original intent of this chapter.
VILLAGE — An unincorporated settlement that is part of a Township where
residential and mixed use densities of one unit to the acre or more exist or
are permitted and commercial, industrial or institutional uses exist or are
permitted.[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
WATER IMPOUNDMENT — An open, earthen receptacle intended to store
fresh water or wastewater to supply one or more well site.125[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 178]
WBCA — The Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — Any device such as a
wind charger, windmill or wind turbine, which converts wind energy to
a form of usable energy. In the case of commercial operation the term
"wind energy conservation system (WECS)" may include electric-generating
facilities, substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other
appurtenant structures and facilities. A WECS shall not be attached to any
building.[Added 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line-of-sight, cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), microwave, satellite, or radio signals.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 198]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT)
— Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building
permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way
125. Editor’s Note: The definition of "well site," added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191.
§ 195-10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-10
1:544
(ROW) or other Township-owned land or property.[Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other support
structure that is primarily constructed to support the placement or
installation of a non-tower wireless communications facility (i.e., antenna or
DCU) if approved by the Township.[Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure. No portion of any principal or accessory structure, as
defined, shall project into any required yard except as otherwise provided.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front
line of the building and the street right-of-way line.
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear
line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of
the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line
shall be deemed a side line.
ZONING — The legal and administrative process whereby a municipality
divides its territory into districts and applies to each district a number of
regulations to control the use of land, the height and bulk of buildings and
the area of ground built upon.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Township
of Brighton, as duly constituted by and established pursuant to this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual authorized by the Township of Brighton
to be the administrator of the daily application of the provisions contained in
this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall hold no elective office, have a working
knowledge of zoning and meet the qualifications established for the position
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-10
1:545

ARTICLE IV
Designation of Districts
§ 195-11. Identification of Zoning Districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Brighton is hereby divided
into three residential districts, two commercial districts, one institutional
district and one conservation district, which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Rural Residential District
R-2 Agricultural Residential District
UD Unified Development District
HC-1 Health Care Service District
SC-1 Special Conservation District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
§ 195-12. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled the "Township of Brighton, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, Official
Zoning Map," on file in the offices of the Board of Township Supervisors.
Said map and all the notations, references and other data shown thereon is
attached for reference as Exhibit No. 1.126
§ 195-13. District boundaries. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
Where uncertainty exists as to the location of the zoning district boundaries
of any district as shown on the Township of Brighton Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of streets and stream channels and to lot or property lines as
they exist on a recorded deed or plan of record in the Beaver County
Recorder of Deeds office at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions and
shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where a zoning district boundary line is not fixed by dimensions and
where it approximately follows lot lines and where such zoning district
boundary line does not scale more than 10 linear feet from the recorded
lot line, the lot lines shall be construed to be such zoning district
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In subdivided land or where a zoning district boundary line divides a
lot, the location of such zoning boundary, unless the same is indicated
126. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-13
1:547
§ 195-14. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty remains, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the
intent of the Township of Brighton Zoning Map as to location of zoning
district boundary lines.
by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the maps.
§ 195-13 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-14
1:548
ARTICLE V
R-1 Rural Residential District
§ 195-15. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-1 Rural Residential District is to provide for the
development of a mix of moderate-density residential and service uses
where public utilities are or will be most readily available. It is the intent of
this district to provide for a variety of housing types and compatible support
uses which supplement residential development.
§ 195-16. Permitted uses.
A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure may be erected and
used for any of the following purposes:
A. Principal uses.
(1) One single-family detached dwelling per lot. A mobile home is not
permitted. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
(2) Duplex, either side by side or over and under, with public sanitary
sewerage and public water service.
(3) Agriculture, limited to the raising and sale of grain, fruit or
vegetable crops on a minimum of five acres.
(4) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; amended 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(5) Forestry. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(6) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Home occupations.
(2) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted principal uses, including but not limited to storage
sheds, garages and satellite dishes.
(3) Private swimming pools as per the provisions of Article XV.
(4) Greenhouses not to exceed 400 square feet, for the private use of
the occupants of the principal use.
(5) Signs as provided for in Article XIV.
§ 195-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-16
1:549
§ 195-17. Conditional uses. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
A lot or parcel may be used and buildings or structures may be erected and
used for any of the following purposes, in the R-1 Rural Residential District,
subject to the granting of a conditional use and following the conduct of a
public hearing as per the provisions of §§ 195-163 and 195-164.
(6) Private stable located on a minimum lot of five acres and a
minimum of 200 linear feet from any dwelling unit and 100 feet
from the closest property line. The pasture area shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from the closest property line, unless the
adjacent property closest to the subject property has been
established for agricultural or pasturage use or is forested in a
natural state or undeveloped, in which case no fifty-foot separation
shall be required. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
(7) Antenna support structures. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107;
amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
(8) No-impact home-based business. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
129]
(9) Accessory WECS. (See § 195-137.8A.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
(10) Private dog kennels (see § 195-137.9A). [Added 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 171]
A. Conversion apartment unit.
B. Planned residential developments. (See §§ 195-39 through 195-70.)
C. Bed-and-breakfast on a minimum three-acre lot and in accordance with
§ 195-137.5.
D. Nonresidential uses as follows: public uses, schools, public and private,
places of worship, and public (noncommercial) recreational facilities
subject to the following:
(1) Minimum setback contiguous to a residential use or residential
zoning district: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum setback from the right-of-way of all streets: 50 feet.
(3) Parking and lighting shall be in accordance with §§ 195-104
through 195-108.
(4) Signs in accordance with §§ 195-109 through 195-117.
(5) Buffer yard B for side and rear yards, and buffer yard A adjacent to
any right-of-way in accordance with § 195-137.1.
(6) Minimum lot area without both public water and public sewer: one
acre.
§ 195-16 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-17
1:550
§ 195-18. Lot area, yard and height requirements.
These standards are hereby established as the minimum necessary to
achieve the community goals and objectives identified. Development
proposals which exceed these standards are encouraged.
§ 195-19. Lot or parcel area.
E. Oil and gas wells only if the well site can be placed so that the well head
is at least 1,000 feet from any property line; otherwise oil and gas wells
are prohibited. See § 195-137.12. [Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
158; amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
F. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public rightsof-
way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
G. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
H. Boardinghouse. See § 195-137.14. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
203]
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) With on-lot septic disposal and/or private well:
(a) Minimum lot area one acre: (43,560 square feet).
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the building line.
(c) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 30%.
(2) With public sanitary sewer service or connected to a private
sanitary treatment plant and public water distribution system:
(a) Minimum lot area: 12,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 90 feet at the building line.
(c) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 30%.
B. Duplex, with both public water and sanitary sewer service.
(1) Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the building line.
(3) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 35%.
§ 195-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-20
1:551
§ 195-20. Yard requirements.
The following yard regulations shall apply to all permitted and conditional
uses in the R-1 Rural Residential District, unless otherwise specified:
§ 195-21. Height requirements.
A. Front yard for permitted use.
(1) Minimum 40 feet from the right-of-way line of collector or arterial
roadways.
(2) Minimum 30 feet from the right-of-way of local streets.
B. Front yard for conditional use.
(1) Minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way line of collector or arterial
roadways.
(2) Minimum 40 feet from the right-of-way of local streets.
(3) On corner lots, all yards with frontage on a right-of-way shall be
considered front yards.
C. Side yard for permitted use.
(1) Minimum 10 feet each side yard.
(2) Minimum 20 feet for the side yards of a corner lot, measured from
the right-of-way line.
D. Side yard for conditional use.
(1) Minimum 30 feet each side yard.
E. Rear yards for permitted and conditional uses: minimum 40 feet.
F. Accessory uses: minimum five feet side and rear yards for structures
720 square feet or smaller in size and a minimum 10 feet side and rear
yards for structures larger than 720 square feet in size. Accessory uses
located in the front yard or side yard on a corner lot shall be set back
from the right-of-way line in conformance with the required setback of
the principal use. Private swimming pools shall comply with the
provisions of Article XV, § 195-123. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
163]
A. Building height shall be a minimum of one story and a maximum of
three stories or 36 feet, whichever is less. [Amended 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 162]
B. Agricultural accessory uses, including but not limited to barns and
silos, may be constructed to a height of 70 feet.
§ 195-20 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-22
1:552
§ 195-22. Off-street parking regulations.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XIII. Parking for other
permitted or conditional uses shall be provided in accordance with the offstreet
parking regulations, Article XIII.
§ 195-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-22
1:553

ARTICLE VI
R-2 Agricultural Residential District
§ 195-23. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-2 Agricultural Residential District is to provide for
areas where agricultural activities should be preserved and low-density
residential development encouraged. Further, it is the purpose of this
district to provide space for certain types of low-impact development which,
by its nature, will not create an undue hardship on municipal resources for
public services and facilities.
§ 195-24. Permitted uses.
A. Principal uses. A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure
may be erected and used for any of the following purposes:
(1) Agricultural uses related to the tilling of the land, the raising of
farm products, the raising and keeping of horses, cattle and other
livestock and the raising of poultry and poultry products on a
minimum ten-acre lot.
(2) Horticultural uses related to the raising, propagating and selling of
trees, shrubs, flowers and other vegetative material on a minimum
five-acre lot.
(3) Forestry uses related to the growing and harvesting of lumber
products.
(4) One single-family detached dwelling per lot. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
(5) Mobile homes on individual lots subject to the provisions of Article
XV, § 195-134.
(6) Public stables on a minimum ten-acre lot.
(7) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; amended 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(8) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
permitted principal uses, including but not limited to storage
sheds, garages and satellite dishes.
§ 195-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-24
1:555
§ 195-25. Conditional uses. [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 98;
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
A lot or parcel may be used and buildings or structures may be erected and
used for any of the following purposes in the R-2 Agricultural Residential
District subject to the granting of a conditional use and following the
conduct of a public hearing, as per the provisions of §§ 195-163 through
195-164.
(2) Private swimming pools as per the provisions of Article XV.
(3) Signs as provided for in Article XIV.
(4) Barns, silos, corncribs, chicken coops, pig sties and similar
structures necessary for the proper operation of the permitted
agricultural uses listed herein.
(5) Private stable located on a minimum lot of five acres and a
minimum of 200 linear feet from any dwelling unit and 100 feet
from the closest property line. The pasture area shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from the closest property line, unless the
adjacent property closest to the subject property has been
established for agricultural or pasturage use or is forested in a
natural state or undeveloped, in which case no fifty-foot separation
shall be required.
(6) Greenhouses not to exceed 400 square feet, for the private use of
the occupants of the principal use.
(7) Home occupations.
(8) Private dog kennels (see § 195-137.9A). [Amended 5-10-2010 by
Ord. No. 168; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 171]
(9) Antenna support structures. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107;
amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
(10) No-impact home-based business. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
129]
(11) Accessory WECS. (See § 195-137.8A.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
(12) The keeping of chickens. (See § 195-137.11.) [Added 10-13-2014
by Ord. No. 189]
A. Sanitary landfills in accordance with § 195-132.
B. Automotive recycling in accordance with § 195-130.
C. Mineral extraction in accordance with § 195-131.
D. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public rightsof-
way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
§ 195-24 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-25
1:556
Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
E. Planned residential developments in accordance with §§ 195-39
through 195-70.
F. Bed-and-breakfast on a minimum three-acre lot and in accordance with
§ 195-137.5.
G. Mobile home parks on a minimum twenty-acre lot pursuant to the
mobile home park developments, §§ 180-46 through 180-61.
H. Commercial greenhouses on a minimum five-acre lot.
I. Campgrounds in accordance with § 195-137.
J. Other nonresidential uses as follows: public uses, places of worship,
public (noncommercial) recreation, and private (commercial)
recreation. [Amended 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
(1) Minimum setbacks contiguous to a residential use or residential
zoning district: 50 feet.
(2) Minimum setback from the right-of-way from all streets: 50 feet.
(3) Parking and lighting shall be in accordance with §§ 195-104
through 195-108.
(4) Signs in accordance with §§ 195-109 through 195-117.
(5) Buffer yard B for side and rear yards, and buffer yard A adjacent to
any right-of-way in accordance with § 195-137.1.
(6) Minimum lot area without both public water and public sewer: one
acre.
K. Cemeteries. (See § 195-137.7.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
L. Commercial WECS. (See § 195-137.8B.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
M. Oil and gas wells. See § 195-137.12. [Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
158; amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
N. Public dog kennels (see § 195-137.9B and C). [Added 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 171]
O. Water impoundment. See § 195-137.12. [Added 12-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 178; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
P. Firing range or firing range complex. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
179]
§ 195-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-25
1:557
§ 195-26. Lot area, yard and height requirements.
These standards are hereby established as the minimum necessary to
achieve the community goals and objectives identified. Development
proposals which exceed these standards are encouraged.
§ 195-27. Lot or parcel area.
§ 195-28. Yard requirements.
The following yard requirements shall apply to all permitted and conditional
uses in the R-2 Agricultural Residential District, unless otherwise specified:
Q. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
R. Boardinghouse. See § 195-137.14. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
203]
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
(1) With on-lot septic disposal and/or private well:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the building line.
(c) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 30%.
(2) With public sanitary sewer service or connected to a private
sanitary treatment plant and and public water distribution system:
(a) Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet or .5 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 100 feet at the building line.
(c) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 30%.
A. Front yard for permitted use.
(1) Minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way line of collector or arterial
roadways.
(2) Minimum 30 feet from the right-of-way of local streets.
B. Front yard for conditional use.
(1) Minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way line of collector or arterial
roadways.
(2) Minimum 40 feet from the right-of-way of local streets.
§ 195-25 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-28
1:558
§ 195-29. Height requirements.
§ 195-30. Off-street parking regulations.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
provided in accordance with the off-street parking regulations, Article XIII.
Parking for other permitted or conditional uses shall be provided in
accordance with Article XIII.
(3) On corner lots, all yards with frontage on a right-of-way shall be
considered front yards.
C. Side yard for permitted use.
(1) Minimum 15 feet each side.
(2) Minimum 20 feet for the side yards of a corner lot measured from
the right-of-way line.
D. Side yard for conditional use.
(1) Minimum 30 feet each side yard.
E. Rear yard for permitted and conditional use: minimum 40 feet.
F. Accessory uses: minimum 10 feet side and rear yards. Accessory uses
located in the front yard or side yard on a corner lot shall be set back
from the right-of-way line in conformance with the required setback for
the principal use. Private swimming pools must comply with § 195-123
of Article XV.
A. Building height shall be a minimum of one story and a maximum of
three stories or 36 feet, whichever is less. [Amended 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 162]
B. Agricultural accessory uses, including but not limited to barns and
silos, may be constructed to a height of 70 feet.
§ 195-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-30
1:559

ARTICLE VII
UD Unified Development District
[Amended 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119;
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
§ 195-31. Purpose.
The purpose of the UD Unified Development District is to provide an area
where a mix of recreational, residential and commercial uses may be
combined with other appropriate compatible uses on an aggregate of
abutting parcels controlled by a single owner and where public utilities are
available.
§ 195-32. Permitted uses.
A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure may be erected and
used for the following purposes.
A. Principal uses.
(1) One single-family detached dwelling per lot. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex, triplex or
quadraplex) with public sanitary sewage and public water.
(3) Townhouse, with public sanitary sewage and public water.
(4) Public uses with public sanitary sewerage and public water.
(5) Places of worship with public sanitary sewerage and public water.
(6) Schools, public or private with public sanitary sewerage and public
water.
(7) Private (commercial) recreation with public sanitary sewerage and
public water.
(8) Public (noncommercial) recreation with public sanitary sewerage
and public water.
(9) General business offices with public sanitary sewerage and public
water.
(10) Restaurants with public sanitary sewerage and public water.
(11) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
[Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
(12) Forestry.
(13) Bed-and-breakfast. See § 195-137.5. [Amended 4-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 203]
§ 195-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-32
1:561
§ 195-33. Conditional uses.
(14) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(15) Boardinghouse. See § 195-137.14. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
203]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use.
(2) Signs as provided for in §§ 195-109 through 195-117 of this
chapter.
(3) No-impact home-based business.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Private swimming pools as per the provisions of § 195-123 of this
chapter.
(6) Antenna support structures. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
(7) Accessory WECS. (See § 195-137.8A.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
(8) Private dog kennels (see § 195-137.9A). [Added 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 171]
(9) Private stable as an accessory use to a single-family residence
located on a minimum lot of five acres and a minimum of 200 linear
feet from any dwelling unit and 100 feet from the closest property
line. The pasture area shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
the closest property line, unless the adjacent property closest to
the subject property has been established for agricultural or
pasturage use or is forested in a natural state or undeveloped, in
which case no fifty-foot separation shall be required. [Added
10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 189]
A. A lot or parcel may be used and buildings or structures may be erected
and used for any of the following purposes in the UD Unified
Development District, subject to the granting of a conditional use and
following the conduct of a public hearing, as per the provisions of
§§ 195-163 through 195-164 of this chapter.
B. Each of the specified conditional uses must have public sanitary sewer
service or be connected to a private sanitary treatment plant, have
public water and have a minimum lot area of three acres.
(1) Private clubs.
§ 195-32 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-33
1:562
§ 195-34. Lot area, yard and height requirements.
These standards are hereby established as the minimum necessary to
achieve the community goals and objectives identified. Development
proposals that exceed these standards are encouraged.
§ 195-35. Lot or parcel area.
(2) Garden apartments. (Including supplemental service or
convenience uses to a maximum of 100% of the gross floor area of
one floor.)
(3) Senior housing. See § 195-137.17. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 210]
(4) Hotels.
(5) Convention centers.
C. Oil and gas wells only if the well site can be placed so that the well head
is at least 750 feet from any property line; otherwise oil and gas wells
are prohibited. See § 195-137.12. [Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
158; amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
D. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public rightsof-
way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
E. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
F. Banquet facility. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
A. Single-family detached dwelling with on-lot septic disposal and/or
private well:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the building line.
(3) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 30%.
B. Single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwellings (duplex) with public sanitary sewer service or connected to a
private sanitary treatment plant and public water:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet for a single-family detached
dwelling unit or 7,500 square feet per each duplex unit.
§ 195-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-35
1:563
§ 195-36. Yard requirements.
The following yard regulations shall apply to all permitted and conditional
uses in the UD Unified Development District unless otherwise specified:
(2) Minimum lot width: 80 feet at the building line for single-family
detached dwelling unit or 100 feet at the building line for each
duplex unit.
(3) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 35%.
C. Single-family semidetached dwellings (triplex or quadraplex) and
townhouse dwellings with public sanitary sewer service or connected to
a private sanitary treatment plant and public water:
(1) Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the building line.
(3) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 40%.
D. All other permitted and conditional uses:
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet at the building line.
(3) Maximum lot coverage including accessory structures shall not
exceed 60%.
A. For a single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwellings (duplex).
(1) Front yards:
(a) Minimum 40 feet from the right-of-way of collector or arterial
roadways.
(b) Minimum 30 feet from right-of-way of local streets.
(2) Side yards:
(a) Minimum 10 feet each side.
(b) Minimum 20 feet for the side yards of a corner lot measured
from the right-of-way line.
(3) Rear yards: minimum of 40 feet.
(4) Accessory uses: minimum five feet side and rear yards for
structures 720 square feet or smaller in size and a minimum 10 feet
side and rear yards for structures larger than 720 square feet in
size. Accessory uses located in the front yard or side yard on a
§ 195-35 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-36
1:564
corner lot shall be set back from the right-of-way line in
conformance with the required setback of the principal use. Private
swimming pools shall comply with the provisions of Article XV,
§ 195-123. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
B. Triplex, quadraplex, townhouse or other multifamily dwellings shall
have the following minimum distances:
(1) Front yards: minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way of all or access
drives roadways.
(2) Side yards:
(a) Adjoining similar use: minimum 15 feet each side.
(b) Adjoining all other uses: minimum 25 feet each side.
(3) Rear yard: minimum 40 feet.
(4) Accessory uses: minimum five feet side and rear yards. Accessory
uses located in the front yard shall be set back from the right-ofway
line in conformance with the required setback of the principal
use. Private swimming pools shall comply with the provisions of
§ 195-123.
(5) Distance between buildings:
(a) End walls face each other but contain no windows: 30 feet.
(b) End walls face each other and contain windows: 40 feet.
(c) End wall of one building faces principal facade (front or rear)
of neighboring building: 45 feet.
(d) Principal facades (front or rear) of neighboring buildings face
each other: 75 feet.
(e) Connected groups of abutting buildings shall not exceed in
total length 300 feet.
(f) Distances shall be measured from the shortest dimension
between any parts, including projecting balconies, of adjacent
buildings.
C. All other permitted uses:
(1) Front yards: minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way of all access
drives or roadways.
(2) Side yards: minimum 50 feet each side within which a buffer yard B
(moderate) consistent with § 195-137.1 shall be provided.
(3) Rear yards: minimum of 50 feet within which a buffer yard B
(moderate) consistent with § 195-137.1 shall be provided.
§ 195-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-36
1:565
§ 195-37. Height requirements.
Building height shall be a maximum of three stories or 36 feet, whichever is
less.
§ 195-38. Off-street parking regulations.
Parking shall be provided in accordance with §§ 195-104 through 195-108
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading Regulations.
D. Conditional uses:
(1) Front yards: minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way of all access
drives or roadways.
(2) Side yards:
(a) Adjoining other conditional uses or a nonresidential use:
minimum 30 feet each side within which a buffer yard A
(minor) consistent with § 195-137.1 shall be provided.
(b) Adjoining residential use or zoning or adjoining undeveloped
lands under separate ownership: Minimum 75 feet each side
within which a buffer yard C (major) consistent with
§ 195-137.1 shall be provided.
(3) Rear yards:
(a) Adjoining other conditional uses or a nonresidential use:
minimum 40 feet each side within which a buffer yard A
(minor) consistent with § 195-137.1 shall be provided.
(b) Adjoining residential use or zoning or adjoining undeveloped
lands under separate ownership: minimum 75 feet each side
within which a buffer yard C (major) consistent with
§ 195-137.1 shall be provided.
§ 195-36 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-38
1:566
ARTICLE VIII
PRD Planned Residential Development
§ 195-39. Purpose. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
The purpose of the planned residential development designation is to
establish standards, conditions, regulations and procedures governing said
land uses, including densities, open spaces and design criteria, and to
provide for the administration and enforcement of these alternative land
uses. This article is enacted pursuant to the Brighton Township
Comprehensive Plan 1999 for the purpose of:
§ 195-40. Coordination with other regulations. [Amended
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
A. Allowing and encouraging innovation in residential development and
redevelopment so that the changing demand for housing may be met by
greater variety and type, design and layout of dwellings together with
the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said
dwellings;
B. Promoting flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in the
location of structures, while preserving the property values of existing
areas;
C. Promoting the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic
arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses and utilities;
D. Preserving to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape
features and amenities and to utilize such features in a harmonious
fashion;
E. Providing for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities and
other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided
under conventional land development procedures;
F. Combining and coordinate architectural styles, building forms and
building relationships within the planned residential development;
G. Ensuring a quality of construction commensurate with other
developments within the Township; and
H. Protecting the existing residential neighborhoods and surrounding
areas from being adversely affected by the proximity of incompatible
land uses.
A. This article is based upon and shall be interpreted in relation to the
Brighton Township Comprehensive Plan 1999, providing for the
development, continuing development and future development of the
Township of Brighton. Every application for tentative approval of a
planned residential development shall be based upon and interpreted in
relationship to the Brighton Township Comprehensive Plan 1999.
§ 195-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-40
1:567
§ 195-41. Interpretation; construal of provisions. [Amended
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
This article is intended to supplement the zoning regulations of the
Township of Brighton by permitting land improvement and residential
development by methods other than lot by lot development. This article
is not intended to repeal, abrogate or amend the zoning regulations of
the Township of Brighton. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton that in those instances
where this article may be directly conflicting with the zoning regulations
of the Township of Brighton, the provisions of this article shall control. The
provisions of this article are hereby declared to be and shall be construed
as the minimum requirements governing the evaluation and approval of
proposals for planned residential developments.
§ 195-42. Definitions.
For the purposes of administering the provisions of this article, the
definition of terms outlined in Article III shall be applicable.
§ 195-43. Eligibility requirements.
No application for approval of a planned residential development shall be
considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
§ 195-44. Infrastructure. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
B. It is the intent of this chapter that subdivision review under Chapter
180 Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Brighton shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of the
planned residential development.
C. The development plans required under this article of this chapter shall
be in a form which will satisfy the requirements of Chapter 180,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Township of
Brighton for preliminary and final plats.
A. Tract size. The tract proposed for a planned residential development
shall be a contiguous area of land containing a minimum of 20 acres.
B. Ownership requirements. An application for tentative approval of a
planned residential development may be filed by a person having an
interest in the property to be included in the planned residential
development. The application shall be filed in the name or names of the
recorded owner or owners of property included in the development.
However, the applications may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable
interest in such property. In any event, the applicant shall evidence a
full ownership interest in the land (legal title or the execution of a
binding sales agreement) before final approval of his plan.
§ 195-40 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-44
1:568
§ 195-45. General development plan consistency. [Amended
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
All proposals for planned residential development shall be consistent with
the Brighton Township Comprehensive Plan, 1999. A statement of
consistency shall be submitted by the developer indicating the compatibility
of the planned residential development to the Township of Brighton
Township Comprehensive Plan, 1999. Such statement shall outline the
social, economic and environmental impact of the planned residential
development on the surrounding area and the Township as a whole, and
shall include specific references to Brighton Township Comprehensive Plan,
1999. The impact statement shall be prepared by an American Institute of
Certified Planners certified firm, individual or other entity with expertise
and competence in the preparation of impact statements.
§ 195-45.1. Sketch plan review. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No.
125]
A. Planned residential developments shall be so located with respect to
major streets and highways or other transportation facilities as to
provide direct access to the planned residential development without
creating traffic along local roads in residential neighborhoods outside
of the planned residential development.
B. Planned residential developments shall be serviced by a public central
water supply and sewer system. A distribution system shall be designed
to furnish an adequate supply of water to each dwelling unit, with
adequate main sizes and fire hydrant locations. Fire hydrants shall be
provided as required by the Township Fire Marshal. The sewer system
shall comply with the Township Code and all applicable DEP
regulations.
C. Planned residential developments shall adhere to the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission with
respect to gas, electric and telephone services.
A. Developers are encouraged to submit a sketch plan of the proposed
PRD to the Planning Commission for an informal review. The Planning
Commission's comments and suggestions will be advisory only and will
not constitute any legally binding action by the Planning Commission or
Township. Time deadlines applicable to tentative or final approval do
not apply to sketch plans.
B. It is recommended that the sketch plan be submitted early in the
planning stages of the PRD but at least 60 days in advance of the
tentative application.
C. There is no prescribed form for the submission of the sketch plan;
however, it must include sufficient information to describe the location
and size of the proposed PRD, dwelling unit types and approximate
densities, natural site characteristics (slope, soils, etc.), plans for
§ 195-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-45.1
1:569
§ 195-46. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
The following uses are permitted in a planned residential development:
§ 195-47. Design standards. [Amended 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107;
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
providing transportation access and internal circulation, sewer and
water service, recreation and other common facilities, and provisions
for common open space. The sketch plan should identify natural, unique
or environmentally sensitive features of the site, along with the
potential effect of the proposed development on these areas.
D. Upon submission of the sketch plan, the Township will schedule a
meeting with the Planning Commission and other appropriate Township
officials. A developer may submit revised plans, to clarify any issues or
problems raised during the meeting with the Planning Commission. All
documents submitted as part of the sketch plan shall become the
property of the Township.
E. The applicant is responsible for the cost of engineering reviews by the
Township, Sewage Authority and Municipal Authority if the applicant
requests those types of reviews for a sketch plan.
A. Principal uses. residential uses in the R-1 Rural Residential District:
single-family detached dwellings; two-family detached dwellings
(duplex), triplex or quadraplex, and townhouse dwellings shall be
permitted, provided that:
(1) A minimum of 35% of the dwellings are single-family detached
dwellings; and
(2) A maximum of 60% of the dwellings shall be of any single-dwelling
type, except that single-family dwellings shall be permitted to a
maximum of 100%.
B. Principal uses. Residential Uses in the R-2 Agricultural Residential
District: Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Accessory uses in R-1 or R-2 Districts.
(1) Private garages and parking areas.
(2) Signs as provided in Article XIV (see also Article XIX,
Administration).
(3) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use.
(4) No-impact home-based business. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
129]
§ 195-45.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-47
1:570
§ 195-48. Lot size. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
A. Residential density. The maximum allowable gross residential density in
single-family and mixed-use PRD's shall not exceed the following:
Dwelling Units per Acre
District Single-Family PRD Mixed-Use PRD
R-1 4.5 6
R-2 3 n/a
B. Buildable area is determined by subtracting all or portions of the land in
the following categories:
Land
Percent Reduction for
Calculating Type of Buildable
Area
Land in existing ROW easements or
otherwise restricted by deed or
covenant
100%
Floodplains (100 year) 100%
Lakes, ponds or wetlands 100%
Slope (40% or more) 100%
Slope (25% and less than 40%) 50%
Slope (15% and less than 25%) 25%
C. Common open space.
(1) Common open space shall comprise at least 25% in an R-1 Zoning
District and 30% in an R-2 Zoning District of the total buildable
area of the planned residential development.
(2) Of the minimum required open space to be established, no
wetlands or areas of 20% slope or greater shall be included in the
calculated open space area.
(3) Landscaped areas devoted to recreational activities, freely
accessible to residents, may be counted toward the total common
space required at a value of 60% of the actual area devoted to this
use.
(4) Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses
located in common open space areas shall be considered improved
open space as long as the total impervious surfaces (pavings, roofs,
etc.) constitute no more than 5% of the total common open space.
(5) The Township Comprehensive Plan encourages lineal trails and
trail connections between neighborhoods. The Planning
Commission will recommend, and the Board of Supervisors can
require, trails to further the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 195-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-48
1:571
§ 195-49. Environmental considerations. [Amended 10-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 125]
A. Residential uses permitted in a planned residential development shall
have the following lot area requirements:
(1) In a R-1 Zoning District, a minimum lot width of 80 feet at the
building line for single-family detached dwellings and a minimum
lot width of 85 feet at the building line for two-family detached
dwellings (duplex) shall be required. Single-family detached
dwellings and two-family detached family dwellings (duplex) shall
have a minimum of thirty-foot front yard, a minimum of ten-foot
side yard, and a minimum of 20 feet between dwellings or other
structures.
(2) In a R-2 Zoning District, a minimum lot width of 85 feet at the
building line shall be required. Single-family detached dwellings
shall have a minimum of ten-foot side yard, and a minimum of 20
feet between dwellings or other structures.
(3) Triplex, quadraplex, townhouse or other multifamily dwellings shall
have the following minimum distances:
(a) End walls face each other but contain no windows: 20 feet.
(b) End walls face each other and contain windows: 35 feet.
(c) End wall of one building faces principal facade (front or rear)
of neighboring building: 45 feet.
(d) Principal facades (front or rear) of neighboring buildings face
each other: 60 feet.
(e) Connected groups of abutting buildings shall not exceed in
total length 300 feet.
(f) Distances shall be measured from the shortest dimension
between any parts, including projecting balconies, of adjacent
buildings.
B. Recreation uses permitted in a planned residential development shall
have minimum lot area requirements sufficient to accommodate the use
relative to other uses, including parking.
A. The developer shall take every precaution to preserve the natural site
amenities and to minimize the disturbance to the natural environment.
B. The development will be designed and programmed so as to minimize
earthmoving activity, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction of
natural amenities.
C. Existing trees shall be preserved where possible. The location of trees
must be considered when planning the common open space, location of
§ 195-48 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-49
1:572
buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds,
parking areas and finished grade levels.
D. Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize topsoil.
E. Erosion control measures such as minimizing the area of exposed soil,
mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting temporary
ground cover shall be instituted as necessary.
F. In order to ensure the preservation of the natural characteristics of the
land, trees and ground cover, natural bodies of water and other
significant natural features, a detailed landscaping plan and an erosion
control and sedimentation plan will be required at the time of initial
plan submission.
G. Floodplains.
(1) All floodplains, as defined in § 180-9, shall remain as permanent
open space in a PRD. Only the following uses shall be permitted in
the floodplain:
(a) Recreational uses not requiring permanent or temporary
structures, such as picnic areas, fishing sites, trails, and
similar uses.
(b) Most essential road and utility facilities, such as bridges,
transmission lines, sewage treatment plant outlets and similar
facilities, which cannot be placed elsewhere on the site outside
the floodplain, provided all necessary approvals and permits
have been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(2) Any use or facility in a floodplain shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Township of Brighton.
H. Ponds, wetlands, watercourses.
(1) These areas shall remain as permanent open space.
(2) No realignment, development, filling, piping and concentrating, or
diverting shall be permitted except for most essential road and
utility facilities which cannot be placed elsewhere on the site or as
otherwise directed by the Township and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
I. Steep slopes.
(1) In areas with slopes 15% to 25%, no more than 75% of such areas
shall be regraded, stripped of vegetation and/or developed (i.e.,
construction of dwellings, road, etc.).
(2) In areas with slopes 25% to 40%, no more than 30% of such areas
shall be regraded, stripped of vegetation or developed.
§ 195-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-49
1:573
§ 195-50. Site considerations. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119; 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
§ 195-51. (Reserved)127
§ 195-52. Parking and lighting facilities. [Amended 10-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 125]
(3) No dwelling or other structure shall be permitted in areas with
slopes 40% or greater. However, the Township may approve limited
regrading for the constructing or installation of roads, utilities or
similar facilities which cannot be located elsewhere. Such approval
shall be upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer.
A. All dwelling units shall be designed with regard to topography and the
natural features of the site. Orientation to the prevailing winds and the
sun in the physical layout and form of the proposed dwelling units shall
be taken into account.
B. All dwelling units shall be sited so as to enhance privacy and to ensure
natural light for all principal rooms.
C. Variations in setbacks shall be provided where necessary to create a
more pleasing site design. A minimum thirty-foot setback on all local
streets shall be required.
D. Dwelling units and other facilities or structures near the periphery of
the planned residential development shall be designed so as to be
harmonious with contiguous neighboring areas.
E. No structure shall be within 25 feet of the right-of-way of an access road
or within 20 feet of parking areas.
F. No structure shall be less than 50 feet from the property lines at the
perimeter of the development. A buffer yard B (Moderate) shall be
required along the entire perimeter boundary of a Planned Residential
Development, as defined in § 195-137.1.
A. For each dwelling unit, there shall be two off-street parking spaces as
per the provisions of Article XIII, § 195-104.
B. Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to other
parking areas.
C. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, roads and
traffic arteries with hedges, dense plantings, earth berms, changes in
grade or walls.
D. No more than 10 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row
without being interrupted by landscaping.
127. Editor's Note: Former § 195-51, Traffic circulation, as amended, was repealed 3-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 135.
§ 195-49 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-52
1:574
§ 195-53. Design and construction improvements. [Amended
10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
Design and construction standards for streets, curbs, drainage, sewage,
water and other such facilities shall be governed by Article V and Article
VI of Chapter 180 of the Township of Brighton Subdivision and Land
Development Code and any amendments thereto.
§ 195-54. Phased development.
A developer may construct a planned residential development in phases if
the following criteria are met:
E. Any off-street loading area shall be paved and the design thereof
approved by the Planning Commission. All areas shall be marked so as
to provide for orderly and safe loading, parking and storage.
F. Parking for recreational purposes shall be provided appropriate to the
type of recreational use, as deemed adequate by the Planning
Commission.
G. All parking areas shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be
so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining residences.
H. All parking areas and off-street loading areas shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding
and other inconvenience.
I. Street lighting shall be installed where required by the Township.
(1) Lighting facilities shall be designed and located so as not to shine
directly into residential buildings, private yards or streets, and
lighting standards shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
(2) All common parking areas, steps, ramps, walkways of high
pedestrian use, and directional signs shall be adequately lighted.
Lighting shall comply with § 195-105A of this Township Code.
A. The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned
residential development and shows the location and approximate time
of construction for each phase.
B. At least 20% of the dwelling units in the planned residential
development given tentative approval shall be included in the first
phase.
C. The second and subsequent phases shall be consistent with the
tentatively approved plan. In no event shall the second or any
subsequent phases contain less than 20% of the dwelling units
receiving tentative approval.
D. Gross residential density may be varied from phase to phase. However,
final approval shall not be given to any phase if the net density of the
§ 195-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-54
1:575
§ 195-55. Location of common open space.
Common open spaces shall be distributed more or less equitably throughout
the planned residential development in relation to the dwelling units of
the people they are intended to serve and consistent with good design
principles. Common open spaces shall not be isolated in one corner of the
planned residential development, but shall be accessible to all dwelling
units in the plan.
§ 195-56. Ownership of common open space.
§ 195-57. Homeowners' association.
area which includes phases already finally approved and the phase for
which final approval is being sought exceeds by more than 10% the
gross density allowed for the entire planned residential development in
the tentatively approved plan. Where it is necessary to allocate open
space to early phases to avoid exceeding the maximum gross residential
density, the developer will be required to establish said open space in
the manner prescribed in the tentative approval.
A. There shall be provisions which ensure that the common open space
land shall continue as such and be properly maintained. The developer
shall either:
(1) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another public
agency has indicated it will accept such dedication;
(2) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such open
space land; or
(3) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
B. In the case of Subsection A(1) or (2) above, each organization shall be a
nonprofit homeowners' corporation, unless the developer demonstrates
that a community open space trust is a more appropriate form of
organization.
A. If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall be
governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The association is organized by the developer and operating with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary before the
sale of any lots within the development.
(2) Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors.
(3) The association shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance
and taxes on common open space.
§ 195-54 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-57
1:576
(4) The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space.
(6) Articles of incorporation of the homeowners' association shall be
recorded simultaneously with the recording of the initial phase
receiving final approval.
B. In the event that the association established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any time
after establishment of the planned residential development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the development plan, the Township may serve written
notice upon such association's officers or upon the residents of the
planned residential development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable condition and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days of the date of
receipt of the notice of deficiency and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing the Township may modify the terms of the original notice
as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said
30 days or any extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
taxable values of the properties within the planned residential
development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a
public nuisance, may enter upon said common space and maintain the
same for a period of one year. Said maintenance by the municipality
shall not constitute a taking of said common open space, nor vest in the
public any rights to use the same. Before the expiration of said year, the
Township shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common open space, call a public hearing upon notice to such
association's officers or to the residents of the planned residential
development, to be held by the Board of Supervisors at which hearing
such association of the residents of the planned residential
development shall show cause why such maintenance by the Township
shall not, at the option of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that such association is
ready and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain the common open space
at the end of said year. If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said common open space during the next
succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in
§ 195-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-57
1:577
§ 195-58. Application for tentative approval.
each year thereafter. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be
subject to appeal to court in the same manner and within the same time
limitation as is provided for.
C. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed ratably
against the properties within the planned residential development that
have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become
a lien on said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon
said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a
notice of such lien in the office of the Prothonotary of Beaver County,
upon the properties affected by such lien within the development.
A. The application for tentative approval shall be made by or on behalf of
the landowner and filed with the Township Secretary. A fee for such
review and approval as per the fee resolution adopted by the Board of
Supervisors, shall accompany said application. Such fee shall cover
processing and administrative costs for the review of applications for
tentative approval. In addition, a deposit shall be made with the
Township to cover the costs of related services provided to the
Township by municipal consultants and engineers in connection with
the review of said application, plus 5% for administrative costs.
B. The application for tentative approval shall include documentation
illustrating compliance with all of the standards for planned residential
development as set forth in this article, and where necessary, the Board
of Supervisors or Planning Commission shall order such additional
documentation as they may deem necessary to aid them in their review.
C. Required documentation shall include, but not be limited to, documents
illustrating the following:
(1) The location and size of the area involved and adjoining areas; and
the nature of the landowner's interest in the planned residential
development;
(2) Areas of land proposed for development and uses thereon and the
net residential and commercial density of each proposed land use;
(3) The location, function, size, ownership and manner of maintenance
of the common open space;
(4) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures;
(5) Location and size of all lots;
(6) Information showing the feasibility of proposals for off-site water
and off-site sewer service;
(7) Utility systems;
§ 195-57 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-58
1:578
(8) The substances of covenants, grants of easements or other
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, on either common
open space or within privately deeded parcels, buildings and
structures, including proposed grants and/or easement for public
utilities;
(9) The provision for parking of vehicles and the location of said
parking areas, rights-of-way and cartway widths of proposed
streets and public ways;
(10) In the case of plans which call for the development in stages, a
schedule showing the time within which applications for final
approval of all parts of the planned residential development are
intended to be filed and which shall be updated annually on the
anniversary of submission for tentative approval.
(11) The application shall, insofar as possible, indicate compliance with
the provisions set forth herein, governing the requirements for
final approval.
D. Application for tentative approval shall include but not be limited to the
following documents:
(1) Plans at one inch equals 100 feet or larger of existing natural
features of the land, including topography, vegetation, drainage
and soils;
(2) A site plan showing approximate locations of lots, buildings, roads,
parking areas at one inch equals 100 feet;
(3) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating common open space,
indicating area, facilities to be provided, structures, if any, and
uses;
(4) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating approximate
locations of street types, rights-of-way and cartway widths;
(5) A site plan illustrating phasing; including a time schedule for all onsite
and off-site improvements to be dedicated for public use, which
may be modified from time to time by the Board of Supervisors;
(6) A plan illustrating connection to public utilities, streets and rightsof-
way accompanied by documentation and comment from the
Brighton Township Municipal Authority and Brighton Township
Sewer Authority as to the impact of the proposed development on
said public utilities, streets and rights-of-way;
(7) A plan illustrating the relation of the proposed planned residential
development to the Township's General Development Plan
accompanied by documentation indicating the social and economic
impact of the development on the Township.
§ 195-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-58
1:579
§ 195-59. Public hearing.
E. Said application shall also include a written statement by the landowner
setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the planned residential
development would be in the public interest and would be consistent
with the Township's General Development Plan while achieving
recognized planning objectives.
F. The application shall submit 15 copies of all information required for
tentative approval to the Township Secretary.
G. One copy of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission for study and recommendation.
H. A number of, as determined from time to time by the Beaver County
Planning Commission, copies of every application for tentative approval
received by the Township shall be promptly forwarded to the Beaver
County Planning Commission for study and recommendation. The
County Planning Commission shall review and report within 45 days of
referral.
I. One copy of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township's
Engineer and/or Planning Consultant for technical study and
recommendation. The Township Engineer and/or Planning Consultant
shall review and report to the Township Planning Commission within 30
days of referral.
J. One copy of the reports of all respective review agencies shall be
furnished to the applicant not less than five days prior to the appointed
time of the public hearing provided for in § 195-59.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of a completed application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this article,
a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be
held by the Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed in Article
XVIII, Zoning Hearing Board. The Chairman or, in his absence, the
Acting Chairman of the Board of Supervisors or its designated agency
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing shall be given under oath, and
every party of record at a hearing shall have the right to cross-examine
adverse witnesses.
B. A stenographic record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board of Supervisors, and the appearance fee for the stenographer
shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board of Supervisors.
Costs for transcriptions shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of
Article XVIII, Zoning Hearing Board. All exhibits accepted in evidence
shall be identified and duly preserved or, if not accepted in evidence,
§ 195-58 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-59
1:580
§ 195-60. Report of findings on application for tentative approval.
shall be properly identified and the reason for the exclusion clearly
noted in the record.
C. The public hearing shall be concluded no more than 60 days after the
date of the first public hearing. The Board of Supervisors may authorize
the use of mediation as a method of resolving issues raised during the
public hearing, pursuant to the provisions of Article XVIII, Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. The Board of Supervisors, within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing provided for in § 195-59, shall, by official written
communication to the landowner, either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval of the development plan.
B. Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event,
however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the
landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the Board of Supervisors, notify said Board of
Supervisors of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case,
the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have denied tentative
approval of the development plan. In the event that the landowner does
not, within said period, notify the Board of Supervisors of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan,
with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
C. The grant or denial of tentative approval by the Board of Supervisors
shall include not only conclusions but also findings of fact related to the
specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or
without conditions, or for the denial, and said communication shall set
forth with particularity in which respects the development plan would
or would not be in the public interest, including but not limited to
findings of fact and conclusions on the following:
(1) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the Township of
Brighton;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from subdivision
and zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to minimum lot sizes, overall
density, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are or
are not deemed to be in the public interest;
§ 195-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-60
1:581
§ 195-61. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment; and
(5) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
D. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Board of Supervisors may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application for
final approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of
each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval
and on application for final approval shall not be less than three
months, and in case of developments over a period of years, the time
between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be
not less than 12 months.
A. The official written communication provided for in § 195-60 of this
article shall be certified by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors
and shall be filed in its office and a certified copy shall be mailed to the
landowner.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted or which has
been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval)
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the
Township pending an application or applications for final approval,
without the consent of the landowner, provided that an application for
final approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of
years, provided that applications are filed within the periods of time
§ 195-60 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-61
1:582
§ 195-62. Application for final approval.
An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a
section thereof. Said application shall be filed with the Township Secretary
and within the time or times specified by the official written communication
granting tentative approval. If the application for final approval is in
compliance with the development plan given tentative approval, with any
specified conditions attached thereto, a public hearing need not be held.
§ 195-63. Specifications for application for final approval.
The application for final approval shall contain the following data and be
submitted using the following format:
specified in the official written communication granting tentative
approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan, the landowner shall so notify the Board
of Supervisors, in writing, or in the event that the landowner shall fail to
file application of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative
approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not been
given shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article.
A. Shall be drawn on reproducible material and shall be on sheets of at
least 17 inches by 22 inches with a border of 1/2 inch on all sides except
the binding edge which shall be one inch. More than one sheet may be
used for larger tracts and all sheets must be indexed. Individual sheet
size shall not exceed 34 inches by 44 inches.
B. Shall be drawn with waterproof black ink and all records, data, entries,
statements, etc., thereon shall also be made with the same type of ink or
reproducible typing.
C. Shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger.
D. Shall contain a title block in the lower right corner with the following:
(1) Name under which the development is to be recorded.
(2) Date of plat, graphic scale, North arrow and location of
development.
(3) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and signed certification of
ownership including deed book number and page.
(4) Name, address and seal of the registered engineer or the surveyor
preparing the plat.
E. Shall be drawn according to the following drafting instructions:
§ 195-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-63
1:583
(1) Outside of the perimeter of the final plan area:
(a) Streets and other rights-of-way by medium solid lines.
(b) Property lines of adjacent subdivision by medium dashed and
two dotted lines.
(c) Lot lines by light dotted lines.
(d) Restriction lines, easements and other reserved areas by light
dashed lines.
(e) The total perimeter of the land included for final approval by a
heavy solid line.
(2) Within the perimeter of the final plan area:
(a) Streets or rights-of-way by heavy solid lines.
(b) Lot lines by medium solid lines.
(c) Restriction lines by medium dashed lines.
(d) Easements and other reserved areas by light dotted lines.
F. Primary control points approved by the Engineer or description and ties
to which all dimension, angles, bearings and similar data shall be
referred.
G. Tract perimeter lines, street rights-of-way, easements and other
reserved areas and property lines of residential lots and other sites with
accurate dimensions, areas, bearing or deflection angles, radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves.
H. Name and right-of-way and cartway width of each street, roadway or
right-of-way.
I. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
J. Number to identify each lot or site.
K. Purpose for which sites other than residential are to be dedicated.
L. Building line on all lots and sites.
M. Location and description of all monuments shall be solid steel pins,
which shall be no less than 1/2 inch in diameter and 30 inches long.
N. Names, deed book number and page of recorded owners of adjoining
land.
O. Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
P. Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and sites for
public use.
§ 195-63 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-63
1:584
§ 195-64. Completion of improvements guaranty.
Q. Protective covenants in form suitable for recording.
R. Tract closures and block closures shall have an error of closure of no
less than 1:10,000. [Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
S. A final grading plan with contours at vertical intervals of two feet if the
general slope of the site is more than 2% and at vertical intervals of one
foot if the general slope is less than 2%.
T. All elevations shall be on the USGS Datum. [Amended 10-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 125]
U. Bench marks as established by the United States Geological Survey or
permanent monuments as established by a registered surveyor
authorized to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
V. Watercourses, culverts, bridges, drains and areas subject to inundation
of a fifty-year and one-hundred-year frequency basis.
W. Sewers, water mains and fire hydrants.
X. Utilities, existing and planned, together with possible connections
thereto.
Y. Subsurface soil, geological and hydrologic condition of the tract.
Z. Sidewalks and crosswalks.
AA. Typical cross sections and profiles of roadways and sidewalks.
BB. Lot lines with bearings and dimensions.
CC. General drainage plan for stormwater in relation to natural channels
with capacity to accommodate fifty-year and one-hundred-year
frequency flood.
DD. A plan to the proposed water distribution system including the sizes of
water pipes and the location of valves and fire hydrants.
EE. A plan of the proposed sanitary sewage collection system.
FF. Location and size of all structures.
GG. Architectural sketches or elevations of all major structures (i.e.,
commercial buildings and multifamily dwellings).
HH. A landscaping plan with bufferyard B (moderate) identified along the
tract boundary as specified, as defined in § 195-137.1. [Amended
11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119; 10-14-2002 by Ord. No. 125]
II. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may
be required in the enforcement of this article.
§ 195-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-64
1:585
A. Completion guaranty.
(1) No application for final approval shall receive said final approval
unless the streets, roads, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streetlights,
water systems, fire hydrants, sewer systems, shade trees, storm
drains and other improvements as may be required by or under this
article have been installed in accordance with these provisions or
the applicable regulations in effect at the time of tentative
approval. In lieu of the completion of said improvements, a
corporate bond or other security approved by the Board of
Supervisors in the amount sufficient to cover the costs of those
improvements not completed, but required, shall be deposited with
the Township. Said bond or other security shall provide for and
secure to the public the completion of all improvements required
within the period fixed as part of the final approval for such
completion. In the case of staged development, it shall be
necessary to provide for all improvements required within the
stage or other improvements which the Board of Supervisors finds
essential for the protection or proper overall development of any
section of the planned residential development given final
approval.
(2) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township of Brighton, upon the recommendation of
the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for
good cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township
of Brighton are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the
estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in the commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township of Brighton and the applicant or
developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the
event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township of Brighton and the
applicant or developer.
B. Release from improvement bond.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of
Supervisors by certified or registered mail of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days
after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Township
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The
Township Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with
the Board of Supervisors and shall promptly mail a copy of the
§ 195-64 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-64
1:586
same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report
shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board
of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate
approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in
part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof shall not
be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said
report shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer within 10 days
of receipt of the Township Engineer's report, in writing by certified
or registered mail, of their action with relation thereto.
(3) If the Township fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved and the developer shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other security
agreement.
(4) If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed
to complete the same, and upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
C. The Township of Brighton may prescribe that the applicant shall
reimburse the Township of Brighton for the reasonable and necessary
expense incurred for the inspection of improvements. Such
reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule established by
ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the
Township Engineer or consultant for work performed for similar
services in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate
or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Township when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
applicant shall, within 10 working days of billing, notify the
Township of Brighton that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not
delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township of Brighton
and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which
are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township
of Brighton shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
§ 195-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-64
1:587
§ 195-65. Action on final plan.
Pennsylvania to review said expenses and make a determination as
to the amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Township is located (or if at the time there is no President Judge,
then the senior active Judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or
performed services for the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof and as required by this article and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Township shall, within 45
days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.
B. One copy of all final plans shall be transmitted forthwith upon
submission by the developer to the Township Planning Commission for
review and comment within the forty-five-day review period.
C. In the event that the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Board of
Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days
from the filing of the application and final approval, so advise the
landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
§ 195-64 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-65
1:588
§ 195-66. Recording and effect thereof.
A development plan or any part thereof which has been given final approval
for development in the R-1 or R-2 District shall be so certified without delay
by the Township Secretary as directed by the Board of Supervisors and shall
be filed forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Beaver County
before any development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon
the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and subdivision
ordinances otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall
cease to apply thereto.
§ 195-67. Abandonment of development.
In the event that a development plan or a section thereof is given final
approval and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such plan or the
section thereof that has been given final approval and shall so notify the
Board of Supervisors in writing or in the event that the landowner shall
fail to commence and carry out the planned residential development within
such reasonable period of time as may be fixed by this article after final
approval has been granted, future development on the property included
in the development plan shall cease until the property is resubdivided in
accordance with the rules and regulations of Chapter 180, Subdivision and
Land Development, and applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-68. Administration.
(2) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it hold a
public hearing on his application for final approval. If the
landowner wishes to take either such alternate action, he may do so
at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval or within 30 additional days if the time for applying for
final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance. In the event that the landowner shall fail to
take either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be
deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such public
hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after
the request for the hearing is made by the landowner and the
hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this article
for public hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within
30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of
Supervisors shall by official written communication either grant
final approval to the development plan or deny final approval. The
grant or denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in
cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the
findings required for an application for tentative approval set forth
in this article.
§ 195-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-68
1:589
§ 195-69. Appeals.
Any decision of the Board of Supervisors granting or denying tentative or
final approval of a development plan for a planned residential development
shall be subject to review and appeal as provided for in Article X-A of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247), as amended.128
§ 195-70. Remedies.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Brighton or any officer of
the Township authorized by the Board of Supervisors, in addition to other
remedies, may institute in the name of the Township of Brighton any
appropriate action or civil proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
in or about premises proposed, intended, declared or approved as a planned
residential development any act, business, use, construction, sale or
disposal in contravention of the provisions of this Article or in advance of
any approval first required to be obtained.
A. Issuance of permits and all matters pertaining to administration of the
plan as given final approval shall be the responsibility of the Township
Zoning Officer.
B. Upon application of the landowner showing compliance with the
requirements of final approval, the Zoning Officer shall issue permits
for construction pursuant to the plan or any section thereof.
C. The provisions of this article, as amended, governing administration
shall be fully applicable to the plan as given final approval insofar as the
provisions thereof are consistent with the approval. The Zoning Officer
shall review the progress and status and construction of the plan and
submit semiannual reports thereon to the Board of Supervisors in order
to assure compliance with the provisions of this article and the
conditions of final approval.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-68 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-70
1:590
ARTICLE IX
HC-1 Health Care Service District
§ 195-71. Purpose.
The purpose of the HC-1 Health Care Service District is to provide a suitable
land area for development in an organized arrangement of buildings,
health-care related uses with adequate access to public highways, utilities
and municipal services, adequate parking areas, safe on-site circulation of
traffic and sufficient open space for the facilities specified in this article.
§ 195-72. Permitted uses.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Hospital.
(2) Nursing home.
(3) Human health care service agencies.
(4) Professional office for diagnosis, treatment and care of humans.
(5) Schools, public.
(6) Residential units owned, maintained and operated by government
agencies.
(7) Public uses, as defined.
(8) 129Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; amended 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(9) Continuing care retirement community. [Added 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 119]
(10) Forestry. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(11) Day-care center. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(12) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
B. Accessory uses. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(1) Accessory uses customarily incidental to those uses listed in
Subsection A of this section.
129. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(8), which listed senior housing as a principal use, was
repealed 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsection A(9) through (13) as Subsection A(8) through (12), respectively.
§ 195-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-72
1:591
§ 195-73. Required information.
In order to assure satisfactory development within the HC-1 Health Care
Service District, all applications for land development approvals shall be
prepared and submitted to the Board of Supervisors and shall include the
following.
§ 195-74. Conditional uses.
A lot or parcel may be used and buildings or structures may be erected
and used for any of the following purposes in the HC-1 Health Care Service
District, subject to the granting of a conditional use by the Township of
Brighton Board of Supervisors under the regulations and procedures
established by Article XX of this chapter for conditional uses.
(2) No-impact home-based business.
(3) Accessory WECS. (See § 195-137.8A.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
A. Proposed development layout with preliminary architectural sketches,
location and types of establishment and floor areas.
B. Previous zoning.
C. Proposed parking facilities.
D. All adjacent highways and streets, showing traffic flow patterns,
present and anticipated.
E. All easements or rights-of-way.
F. Elevations and engineering plans showing proposed methods of water
runoff control.
G. Type of sewage treatment or disposal and source of water supply.
H. Such additional information as may be requested by the Township's
review agencies.
I. A traffic impact analysis in accordance with § 195-137.2, Traffic
impacts. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
A. Accessory uses. Where such uses are conducted within the confines of
the structure housing the principal use:
(1) Retail sales.
(2) Restaurants.
(3) Personal service establishments.
(4) Gift shops.
(5) Financial services.
§ 195-72 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-74
1:592
§ 195-75. Area and lot width regulations.
Subject to the requirements of § 195-76, no minimum lot size or width
is specified. The size and width shall be adequate for the use proposed
and shall be subject to the approval of the Supervisors during the review
process or in accordance with the conditional use proceedings.
§ 195-76. Yard regulations. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119;
11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
(6) Professional offices.
B. Institutional, government and public uses (not otherwise authorized as
a principal use), including but not limited to rehabilitation or
correctional facilities and judicial facilities, in accordance with the
following: [Amended 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 98]
(1) A project narrative identifying all aspects of the proposed use shall
be submitted.
(2) Copies of all required federal, commonwealth and county licenses
for operation of said facility shall be submitted to the Township.
(3) A traffic impact analysis in accordance with § 195-137.2, Traffic
impacts. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
C. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public rightsof-
way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Amended 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
107; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
D. Cemeteries. (See § 195-137.7.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
E. Oil and gas wells. See § 195-137.12. [Added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
158; amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
F. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
G. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
H. Controlled substance dispensation facility. [Added 3-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 210]
I. Senior housing. See § 195-137.17. [Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No.
210]
§ 195-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-76
1:593
§ 195-77. Height regulations. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No.
162]
The maximum height for buildings or structures in the HC-1 District shall
not exceed six stories or 72 feet, whichever is less.
§ 195-78. Off-street parking, loading and unloading regulations.
Off-street parking, loading and unloading shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of Article XIII, Off-Street Parking, Loading and
Unloading Regulations.
A. Front yard for permitted and conditional uses: minimum 50 feet from all
highway or street rights-of-way within which a buffer yard A (minor)
shall be provided.
B. Side yard for permitted and conditional uses:
(1) Minimum 15 feet per yard within which a buffer yard A (minor)
shall be provided. However, in the event the building height
exceeds 30 feet, the minimum side yard requirement shall increase
one foot for each foot in building height over 30 feet to a maximum
of 50 feet.
(2) Adjoining a residential district: No building or structure shall be
located within 75 feet of a residential district boundary line, and
further, a buffer yard C (major) shall be provided and maintained
along the perimeter of said district boundary line.
C. Rear yard for permitted and conditional uses:
(1) Minimum 100 feet from the property line when adjoining a
residential district or use or other dissimilar use within which a
buffer yard C (major) shall be provided.
(2) Minimum rear yard depth of not less than 25 feet from a similar use
within which a buffer yard B (moderate) shall be provided.
However, in the event the building height exceeds 30 feet, the
minimum rear yard requirement shall increase one foot for each
foot in building height over 30 feet to a maximum of 50 feet.
§ 195-76 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-78
1:594
ARTICLE X
SC-1 Special Conservation District
§ 195-79. Purpose.
The purpose of the SC-1 Special Conservation District is to preserve those
land areas within the Township where topography and existing natural
amenities will require special planning techniques for development and
use. Special consideration is required to ensure that this district's natural
amenities and environmental uniqueness will be protected. Erosion,
sedimentation and siltation are to be prevented and safeguards are
established for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of persons
from flooding, mudslides, landslides and other natural dangers to life and
property.
§ 195-80. Uses.
A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure may be erected and
used for any of the following purposes, subject to the granting of a use by
the Township of Brighton Board of Supervisors.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Agricultural uses for pasturage and forestry and support facilities.
(2) One single-family detached dwelling per lot. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
(3) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
[Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; amended 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(4) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(5) Public uses, as defined herein. (See § 195-10.) [Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No. 204]
(6) Public (noncommercial) recreation uses and facilities, utilizing the
natural environment with a minimum amount of alteration of the
natural conditions of the site, as defined herein. See § 195-10.
[Added 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204]
B. Conditional uses.
(1) 130Composting facility.
130. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), regarding recreational uses and facilities, and
Subsection B(2), regarding public uses, were repealed 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204, which
ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B(3) through (9) as Subsections B(1)
through (7), respectively. See also now Subsection A(5) and (6).
§ 195-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-80
1:595
(a) Said facility shall be a recognized element of a local or
countywide waste disposal plan.
(b) Said facility shall be certified to operate by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(c) A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted prior to approval
which demonstrates the following:
[1] The number of vehicle trips expected to be generated.
[2] The type of vehicles used to deliver the organic material.
[3] The routes (roadways) used to reach the facility.
(2) Commercial WECS. (See § 195-137.8B.) [Added 10-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 154]
(3) Oil and gas wells. See § 195-137.12. [Added 4-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 158; amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 191]
(4) Mineral extraction. See § 195-131. [Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
(5) Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198]
(6) Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 198]
(7) Tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 198]
C. 131Accessory uses.
(1) Private garage or private parking area (accessory to a single-family
detached residential dwelling).
(2) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal or
conditional use including private swimming pools.
(3) Signs as provided for in § 195-87 of this article.
(4) Antenna support structures. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107;
amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the extraction of oil or natural gas, was
repealed 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 178. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation
of former Subsection D as Subsection C.
§ 195-80 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-80
1:596
§ 195-81. Review procedures. [Amended 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204]
§ 195-82. Lot area and lot width regulations.
§ 195-83. Yard regulations.
(5) No-impact home-based business. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
129]
(6) Home occupation. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(7) Accessory WECS. (See § 195-137.8A.) [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord.
No. 154]
(8) Private dog kennels (see § 195-137.9A). [Added 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 171]
(9) The keeping of chickens. (See § 195-137.11.) [Added 10-13-2014
by Ord. No. 189]
(10) Private stable located on a minimum lot of five acres and a
minimum of 200 linear feet from any dwelling unit and 100 feet
from the closest property line. The pasture area shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from the closest property line, unless the
adjacent property closest to the subject property has been
established for agricultural or pasturage use or is forested in a
natural state or undeveloped, in which case no fifty-foot separation
shall be required. [Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No. 189]
A. In order to assure the preservation of land areas within the SC-1
Special Conservation District, all land development applications and
building permits shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Township.
B. Existing site topography by two-foot contours and all existing drainage
patterns. Final site grading plans shall show proposed finished grade
elevations with two-foot contours, methods of soil and erosion control
as per Township ordinance requirements and any existing or proposed
stormwater drainage facilities.
A. Minimum lot area requirements.
(1) Permitted uses: two acres per dwelling unit.
(2) Conditional uses: five acres per unit or use.
(3) Special exceptions: five acres.
B. Minimum lot width requirements.
(1) Single-family detached residential dwelling: 200 feet.
(2) Other principal conditional uses: 300 feet.
§ 195-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-83
1:597
§ 195-84. Lot coverage regulations.
The total area of all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover
more than 20% of the total lot area.
§ 195-85. Height regulations.
The maximum building height for uses, building and structures, are as
follows:
§ 195-86. Off-street parking requirements.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
provided in accordance with Article XIII, Off-Street Parking, Loading and
Unloading Regulations. All parking requirements for principal uses listed in
this article shall conform to requirements listed in Article XIII.
§ 195-87. Signs.
A. Front yard requirements for permitted uses. [Amended 5-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 129]
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Minimum 40 feet from the right-of-way line of collector or
arterial roadways.
(b) Minimum 30 feet from the right-of-way line of local streets.
(2) Conditional uses: 50 feet from the right-of-way line of roadways.
B. Minimum side yard requirements.
(1) Permitted residential dwelling: 20 feet per side yard.
(2) Conditional uses: 25 feet per side yard.
(3) Accessory uses: 10 feet.
C. Minimum rear yard requirements.
(1) Permitted uses: 30 feet.
(2) Conditional uses: 40 feet.
(3) Accessory uses: 10 feet.
D. Uses by special exception. Minimum yards shall be determined by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Permitted and conditional uses: 35 feet.
B. Accessory uses: 20 feet.
§ 195-83 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-87
1:598
A. Signs may be erected and maintained in an SC-1 Special Conservation
District in accordance with the provisions of Article XIV, Signs, for
those uses specified.
B. Signs for conditional uses in the SC-1 District shall conform to the
provisions for permitted signs in the R-2 Agricultural Residential
District (see Article XIV).
§ 195-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-87
1:599

ARTICLE XI
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
§ 195-88. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District is to provide
for an organized arrangement of buildings, service and parking areas with
adequate access and interior circulation, which results in an efficient, safe,
convenient and attractive shopping area serving local neighborhood
shopping needs.
§ 195-89. Permitted uses.
A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure may be erected and
used for the following purposes:
A. Principal uses. The following uses are permitted provided all uses and
activities shall be with a completely enclosed building: [Amended
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119;
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198; 2-11-2019
by Ord. No. 219]
(1) Retail sales for local or neighborhood needs, including but not
limited to the following: furniture and furnishings; hardware;
appliances; paint; leather and luggage; musical instruments; drugs
and cosmetics; hobby equipment; jewelry; office supplies; cameras;
grocery; electronics and telephones; books; and flowers, gardens
and nursery centers.
(2) Convenience stores with a maximum of four fueling stations.
(3) Restaurants, coffee shops, and cafeterias.
(4) Personal service establishments, including but not limited to the
following: barbershops and beauty shops; nail salons; tanning
salons; custom tailor shops; laundromats and self-service laundries;
shoe repair; dry-cleaning shops; post offices; photographic sales
and services; and printing and copying services.
(5) Indoor theaters and indoor commercial recreation uses, such as
bowling alleys, pools, skateboard parks, and skating rinks.
(6) Banks and financial institutions, with or without drive-throughs,
provided drive-through services have no more than three outside
customer lanes.
(7) Public parking lots and parking garages.
(8) Professional offices, including but not limited to medical, dental,
legal, insurance, accounting, financial advisors, and real estate.
(9) Fraternal clubs, lodges and social and recreational clubs.
§ 195-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-89
1:601
(10) Animal hospital or veterinary clinic, and provided that no such use
shall be located closer than 150 feet to a residential district. Pet
crematories are not permitted.
(11) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
(12) Non-tower wireless communications facilities outside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135.
(13) Forestry.
(14) Mixed-use buildings. Residential and nonresidential uses may
occupy the same building, provided no residential uses may occupy
any first floor or basement; and provided each floor has either all
residential or all nonresidential uses:
(a) The following uses are permitted on the first floor of a mixeduse
building:
[1] Banks/financial services.
[2] Professional offices, including but not limited to medical,
dental, legal, insurance, accounting, financial advisors,
and real estate.
[3] Personal services, including but not limited to the
following: barbershops and beauty shops; nail salons;
tanning salons; custom tailor shops; laundromats and selfservice
laundries; shoe repair; dry-cleaning shops; post
offices; photographic sales and services; and printing and
copying services.
[4] Restaurants, coffee shops, and cafeterias.
[5] Retail sales for local or neighborhood needs, including but
not limited to the following: furniture and furnishings;
hardware; appliances; paint; leather and luggage; musical
instruments; drugs and cosmetics; hobby equipment;
jewelry; office supplies; cameras; grocery; electronics and
telephones; books; and flowers, gardens and nursery
centers.
(b) The following uses are permitted on the floor(s) above the first
floor of a mixed use building: residential; garden apartment;
professional offices.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use listed in
Subsection A of this section.
(2) Signs as provided for in Article XIV.
§ 195-89 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-89
1:602
§ 195-90. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District subject to compliance with all regulations made a part of this
chapter and review and approval by the Board of Supervisors under the
procedures outlined in Article XX:
(3) No-impact home-based business. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
129]
(4) Home occupation. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
A. Automotive service stations, repair garages and washing uses, provided
that: [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
(1) No use, principal or accessory, is accommodated in a structure
located less than 50 feet from a residential zoning district boundary
line and all activity is conducted within an enclosed structure with
the exception of fuel pumps.
(2) No street entrance or exit for vehicles and no portion or equipment
of such service station or other drive-in uses shall be located within
75 feet of the closest lot line of a residential zoning district as
established by this Code. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 161]
B. Public uses, as defined in § 195-10.
C. Schools, public and private, as defined in § 195-10.
D. Essential services facilities.
E. Nursing home, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be six acres.
(2) No use, principal or accessory, shall be accommodated in a
structure located less than a minimum of two feet for every one foot
in building height to a residential zoning district boundary line,
provided that in no event will the setback be less than 40 feet.
(3) No parking area or interior access driveway or roadway shall be
located closer than 25 feet at its closest point to a residential
zoning district boundary line.
(4) All state licenses required to operate a nursing home facility of the
category proposed shall be submitted to the Township annually.
F. 132Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside the public
rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Oil and gas wells, added 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 158, as
amended, which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 219. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections G through I as Subsections
F through H.
§ 195-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-90
1:603
§ 195-91. Area and lot width regulations.
A lot in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District shall be of such size and
dimensions as shall be necessary to properly accommodate the intended
use or structure, including parking areas and required site improvements,
in accordance with all applicable regulations of this chapter and other
commonwealth and local ordinances.
§ 195-92. Coverage regulations.
Lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall not cover
more than 60% of the lot.
§ 195-93. Yard regulations. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
The following yard regulations shall apply to uses in the C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial District:
Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 198]
G. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
198]
H. Banquet facility. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
A. Front yard for permitted and conditional uses.
(1) Minimum 50 feet from the right-of-way line of all major and minor
arterial highways.
(2) Minimum 30 feet from the right-of-way line of all collector roads
and local streets.
(3) A buffer yard A (minor) shall be provided within the front yard
specified, as defined in § 195-137.1.
B. Side yard for permitted and conditional uses.
(1) A side yard depth of 30 feet per side is required. Where a series of
adjoining structures on lots of single or separate ownership abut,
an unobstructed passage of at least 30 feet in width shall be
provided at grade level at intervals not less than every 400 feet of
developed area. However, in the event the building height exceeds
30 feet, the minimum side yard requirement, and the unobstructed
passage, shall increase one foot for each foot in building height
over 30 feet. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
(2) A buffer yard B (moderate) shall be provided within the side yard
specified, as defined in § 195-137.1.
C. Rear yard for permitted and conditional uses.
§ 195-90 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-93
1:604
§ 195-94. Buffer area.
A planted buffer area having a minimum width of 10 feet from the rightof-
way line of the abutting street or roadway shall be maintained on all
properties in this zone. Said planting area shall extend the entire width
of the lot except for those areas properly defined and surfaced for ingress
and egress from said property. Said planting area shall be planted and
maintained with a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees not greater than
10 feet on center and shall not be used for parking of vehicles.
§ 195-95. Height regulations. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
The maximum building height for all uses shall be three stories or 36 feet,
whichever is less.
§ 195-96. Off-street parking regulations.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIII.
(1) A minimum of 30 feet in depth is required. However, in the event
the building height exceeds 30 feet, the minimum rear yard
requirement shall increase one foot for each foot in building height
over 30 feet. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
(2) A buffer yard C (major) shall be provided as defined in § 195-137.1
§ 195-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-96
1:605

ARTICLE XII
C-2 Mixed Use District
[Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 103; 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 108; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119; 5-12-2003
by Ord. No. 129; 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 147; 10-8-2007 by Ord. No.
154; 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 158; 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162;
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191; 8-10-2015 by
Ord. No. 198; 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No.
206]
§ 195-97. Purpose.
The purpose of the C-2 Mixed Use District is as follows:
A. Build on the Township's current rural character and bedroom
community development to allow for higher density, mixed-use
development in a well-planned manner.
B. Encourage development that will present the Township in a welcoming
and attractive manner at the community's primary entrance point.
C. Create an integrated and connected (physically by streets and in
character by design) mixed-use development within the district with a
land use pattern generally reflective of the proposed land use plan for
the district.
D. Encourage residential and nonresidential development and
redevelopment that takes advantage of a mixed-use form of
development so that demand for a variety of uses can be realized in a
cohesive neighborhood form that encourages:
(1) Connectivity between parcels and uses such that the development
patterns have a cohesiveness and relationship to one another, while
encouraging unique innovation in individual development design
and character;
(2) Accessibility throughout the district to allow for the ease of
movement of goods and people between and among the individual
parcels within the district, such that multimodal transportation is a
priority; and
(3) Uniformity in character and overall layout such that the collection
of uses developed within the district create a sense of place that is
unique and welcoming, while allowing for flexibility and innovation
in design.
E. Create opportunities for a mix of housing choices and easy access to
goods, services, and employment opportunities for current and future
residents of Brighton Township.
§ 195-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-97
1:607
§ 195-98. Permitted land uses.
F. Foster a sense of place and community by providing a setting that
encourages the natural intermingling of everyday uses and activities
within a recognizable neighborhood.
G. Permit higher density development that includes green spaces and
attractive public spaces.
H. Require innovation in development design and function that results in
development at a key transportation interchange, unlike common
interchange development areas in the region.
A. Uses by right. A lot or parcel may be used and a building or structure
may be erected and used for the following purposes, and no other,
except as provided in § 195-98B:
(1) Animal hospital or veterinary clinic.
(a) Shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building.
(b) Shall not be located closer than 150 feet to a residential
district.
(c) Shall have the following setbacks:
[1] One hundred feet from the nearest property line and all
rights-of-way;
[2] Five hundred feet from the nearest dwelling;
[3] A buffer yard A is required.
(d) The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of
by discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility
for biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or
biological waste shall be within a building, within enclosed
containers, pending removal to or disposal at an approved
facility. A plan for management of such wastes shall be
submitted for municipal review.
(e) There shall be no outdoor boarding of animals.
(2) Banks/financial services.
(3) Banquet facility.
(4) Bar/tavern. See § 195-137.16.
(5) Commercial recreation and entertainment uses, including, but not
limited to, golf driving ranges, movie theaters, bowling alleys, deck
hockey, batting cages, miniature golf and skating rinks.
(6) Essential service facilities.
§ 195-97 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-98
1:608
(7) Forestry.
(8) Funeral homes and mortuaries.
(9) Hotels and motels.
(10) Medical offices and clinics.
(11) Nightclub. See § 195-137.15.
(12) Non-tower wireless communications facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.133 See
§ 195-135.
(13) Non-tower wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Amended
3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
(14) Office parks, general office buildings, and professional offices.
(15) Personal service establishments, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) Barbershops and beauty shops.
(b) Custom tailor shops.
(c) Laundromats and self-service laundries.
(d) Shoe repair.
(e) Dry-cleaning shops.
(f) Post offices.
(g) Photographic sales and services.
(h) Printing and copying.
(16) Public uses.
(17) Restaurants.
(18) Retail sales, provided that no single retail tenant exceeds 50,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(19) Residential uses, permitted as part of a mixed-use development
only.
(a) Garden apartment.
(b) Senior housing. See § 195-137.17. [Amended 3-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 210]
133. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 195-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-98
1:609
(c) Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex, triplex, or
quadraplex).
(d) Townhouse.
B. Conditional uses. A lot or parcel may be used and buildings or
structures may be erected and used for any of the following purposes in
the C-2 Mixed Use District, subject to the granting of a conditional use
by the Township of Brighton Board of Supervisors under the regulations
and procedures established by Article XX of this chapter for conditional
uses.
(1) Assisted living facility.
(2) Automotive and truck sales, up to 40,000 square feet of building
and outdoor vehicle display area; if over 40,000 square feet, as part
of a mixed-use development only.
(3) Automotive service stations with or without convenience retail
space.
(4) Crematory:
(a) Shall have an area of not less than three acres.
(b) Shall not be located closer than 750 feet from an existing
residence.
(c) Any crematorium/crematory use will only be approved as part
of a funeral home application and may not exist as a separate
use.
(d) The owner or operator shall conduct initial performance
testing to demonstrate compliance of the installed system with
DEP emission standards within 60 days of startup and annually
thereafter.
(e) Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(f) The owner or operator shall provide all necessary certifications
to operate the crematory, provide the required annual
compliance certificate, and keep the Township informed with
annually updated in-case-of-emergency contact information.
(g) Compliance with § 195-137.13 is required.
(5) Distribution and warehousing, up to 30,000 square feet of building
area; if over 30,000 square feet, as part of a mixed-use
development only.
(6) Heavy industrial, up to 30,000 square feet of building area; if over
30,000 square feet, as part of a mixed-use development only. See
§ 195-137.13.
§ 195-98 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-98
1:610
(7) Light industrial, up to 30,000 square feet of building area; if over
30,000 square feet, as part of a mixed-use development only. See
§ 195-137.13.
(8) Medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor, subject to the specific criteria listed in § 195-137.3.
(9) Natural gas compressor station. See § 195-137.12.
(10) Natural gas processing plant. See § 195-137.12.
(11) Non-tower wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania
Wireless Broadband Collocation Act. See § 195-135. [Added
3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210134]
(12) Outdoor advertising device. See § 195-137.6.
(13) Park and ride facilities.
(14) Pet crematory.
(a) Shall have an area of not less than three acres.
(b) Shall not be located closer than 750 feet from an existing
residence.
(c) Any pet crematorium/crematory use will only be approved as
part of a veterinary clinic application and may not exist as a
separate use.
(d) The owner or operator shall conduct initial performance
testing to demonstrate compliance of the installed system with
DEP emission standards within 60 days of startup and annually
thereafter.
(e) Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(f) The owner or operator shall provide all necessary certifications
to operate the pet crematory, provide the required annual
compliance certificate, and keep the Township informed with
annually updated in-case-of-emergency contact information.
(g) Compliance with § 195-137.13 is required.
(15) Research and development facilities.
(16) Retail sales, where a single retail tenant exceeds 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area, as part of a mixed-use development only.
(17) Self-storage/mini-warehouse:
134. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(11) through (19) as
Subsection B(12) through (20), respectively.
§ 195-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-98
1:611
§ 195-99. Mixed-use development.
(a) Shall have an area of not less than three acres.
(b) Off-street parking, one space for each 10 compartments.
(c) A landscaping strip 20 feet in width shall be provided around
the entire perimeter, in addition to the buffer yard
requirements of § 195-137.1, where applicable.
(d) All buildings shall be separated by 35 feet for fire lanes.
(e) Fencing shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the
parcel with ornamental fencing located adjacent to all rightsof-
way, consistent with the provisions of § 195-137.1.
(f) No outdoor storage will be permitted.
(g) If over 20,000 square feet, as part of a mixed-use development
only.
(18) Sexually oriented business operations, as part of a mixed-use
development only. See § 195-136.
(19) Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135.
(20) Tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way. See § 195-135.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted
uses.
(2) Accessory WECS. See § 195-137.8A.
(3) Automotive washing facilities.
(4) Home occupation.
(5) No-impact home-based business.
(6) Signs. See Article XIV.
(7) Storage buildings less than 1,000 square feet.
A. Permitted residential land uses are only approved for development
when included within a mixed-use development plan that includes
nonresidential uses.
B. Any proposed mixed-use development shall have a minimum gross land
area of 25 acres, except where only a mixed-use building is proposed. A
minimum of 70% of the gross land area shall be occupied by
nonresidential land uses and their support facilities, such as: access
§ 195-98 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-99
1:612
driveways and roads, parking lots, stormwater facilities, buffer yards,
open spaces, court yards and similar facilities. Similar support facilities
that are provided for the residential component of the mixed-use
development shall not be included within the calculation for the
minimum gross land area required for nonresidential uses.
C. Mixed-use buildings. Permitted residential and nonresidential land uses
may occupy the same building; however, no residential uses are
permitted to occupy any first floor or basement.
(1) The gross land area associated with a mixed-use building shall be
considered nonresidential for the purpose of calculating the
required land use mix.
(2) The following uses are permitted on the first floor of a mixed-use
building:
(a) Banks/financial services.
(b) Bar/tavern.
(c) General office buildings.
(d) Medical offices and clinics.
(e) Personal services.
(f) Restaurants.
(g) Retail sales.
(3) The following uses are permitted on the floor(s) above the first floor
of a mixed-use building, provided each floor has either all
residential or all nonresidential uses:
(a) Garden apartment.
(b) General office buildings.
(c) Medical offices and clinics.
D. Phasing. Within a mixed-use development, the nonresidential and
residential uses are intended to mutually support the needs of each
other. However, it is not the intent of these regulations to permit the
development of residential uses without the nonresidential uses being
developed simultaneously. Therefore, excepting those units in a mixeduse
building, the percentage of approved residential units, as
determined by building permits issued, shall not exceed the percentage
of approved nonresidential square footage, as determined by building
permits issued, within a mixed-use development in any calendar year.
§ 195-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-100
1:613
§ 195-100. Form and character.
All land development within this zoning district shall meet the following
form and character of design requirements:
A. Development plans must be high quality development that is in strict
compliance with the architectural and design elements found in this
section. The proposed development must meet or exceed these
standards in all aspects of the development.
B. Pedestrian scale. Site design shall promote pedestrian access and
activity among buildings. Design elements used to promote pedestrian
activity include, but are not limited to, shared parking facilities, a
common build-to line, side yard, sidewalks, street trees, planters,
pedestrian-scale lighting, and a public square or fountain.
C. Buildings.
(1) Residential buildings.
(a) A variety (three or more) of building styles or variations
thereof within a proposed residential development shall be
utilized.
(b) Porches, porticos and stoops oriented to the street shall be
provided.
(c) A variety of rooflines, architectural features and materials shall
be provided to create diversity.
(d) All townhouses shall provide vehicular access (driveway and
garage) at the rear of the structure.
(e) All garden apartments, senior housing, and single-family
semidetached dwellings (duplex, triplex, or quadraplex) having
garage doors facing a street shall have a minimum setback of
25 feet from the nearest edge of the sidewalk along the street.
(2) Nonresidential buildings.
(a) No building shall have a flat roof, unless a parapet wall is
provided.
(b) Screening of rooftop building mechanicals shall be
accomplished through the use of parapet walls.
(c) Minimum building height: two stories or 20 feet.
[1] For buildings with a first floor footprint of 30,000 square
feet or more, up to 50% of the building may be one story or
12 feet in height.
(d) Maximum building height: four stories.
§ 195-100 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-100
1:614
(e) To deemphasize the horizontality of larger buildings, recesses
or projections to buildings shall be provided through pilasters,
piers, columns, or other like architectural treatments
whenever a building facade exceeds 20 feet. Facade recesses
and projections shall be in the range of one to five feet.
(f) To promote a greater sense of character and pedestrian scale,
buildings shall be functionally or through design elements
broken into smaller storefronts, through the use of windows,
doors, pilasters, piers, columns, arches, porches, porticos,
colonnades and the like.
(3) Large buildings.
(a) Buildings in excess of 25,000 square feet of first floor gross
area, whether nonresidential or multifamily residential, shall
be designed to avoid a stark, big-box appearance. The careful
design and articulation of a larger-footprint building, the front
yard, the parking lot, and the overall landscape, is intended to
result in a more attractive and pedestrian-friendly
environment. Such building and site design elements of a bigbox
development shall include:
[1] Varied building materials;
[2] Roofline variation and projections;
[3] Varied colors;
[4] Complementary landscaping; and
[5] Pedestrian features, including ample sidewalks,
crosswalks, lighting and vegetation.
(4) Building materials.
(a) Exterior facade colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors. For exterior walls with a main
entry, street frontage, or fronting a parking area for public use,
two or more materials shall be used. Exterior walls shall be
constructed of the following materials (NOTE: Comparable
materials may be accepted by the Planning Commission and
approved by the Board of Supervisors.):
[1] Brick, stone, cast stone, rock, marble, granite, glass block,
tile;
[2] Stucco or plaster;
[3] Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS);
[4] Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornaments);
§ 195-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-100
1:615
[5] Glass with reflectance of less than 20% (However, only a
maximum of 50% of the total area of the building may be
constructed in glass.);
[6] Split face concrete block, poured-in-place concrete, and
tilt-wall concrete. Any use of concrete products shall have
integrated color and be textured or patterned. Tilt-wall
concrete structures shall have reveals, punch-outs, or
similar surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at
least 10% of each facade; or
[7] Sheet metal or vinyl siding shall not extend to grade and is
recommended only above the ground floor.
(b) The following building facade materials are not permitted:
[1] Vinyl siding (no more than 50% of building exterior of
residential buildings and no more than 25% of building
exterior of nonresidential and mixed-use buildings).
[2] Exposed concrete block.
D. Streetscape.
(1) Goal. Improve pedestrian access and build attractive streetscapes
that functionally provide interconnections throughout the district
and build a consistent sense of place and community character.
(2) Context-sensitive off-street parking.
(a) Provide off-street parking designed and maintained to be
subordinate to the building architecture and streetscape.
Streetscape elements shall be designed to define the
streetscape and deemphasize parking areas through screening
and provide buffering between pedestrian ways and parking.
(b) Off-street parking areas that are adjacent to streets shall be
screened with low street walls or fencing (three feet to four
feet in height). Solid masonry walls or brick piers with
decorative metal fencing and shrubs shall comprise the
screening, at a minimum.
(3) Sidewalks and crosswalks.
(a) Provide and maintain a network system of sidewalks,
crosswalks, pathways and trails to strengthen the pedestrianoriented
environment. Sidewalks along the street shall have
direct connections to buildings.
(b) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide within
nonresidential or mixed-use development and shall be a
minimum of four feet wide within residential development.
Sidewalks shall be installed and maintained to be safe and
§ 195-100 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-100
1:616
accessible along both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall
connect to all buildings at the main building entrance location.
(c) Crosswalks shall be at least six feet in width, striped with a sixinch-
wide painted white strip on both sides. Enhanced
markings may be installed and shall be in conformance with
PennDOT specifications.
(4) Bicyclist accessibility.
(a) Bicycle lanes will provide safe and accessible travel routes for
cyclists throughout the neighborhood and to nearby regional
destinations.
(b) Bicycle lanes shall be provided, in both directions, a minimum
of five feet in width, along collector streets to create a looping,
interconnecting system. The lanes shall be marked with a
minimum of eight-inch-wide white striping.
[1] Along property lines where there is not a building facing
the street, the bicycle lanes may instead be constructed as
off-road multipurpose trails a minimum of 10 feet wide.
(c) Bicycle racks provide an effective opportunity for bicycle
security and encourage multimodal transportation, creating an
environment that is welcoming to bicyclists.
(d) Bicycle racks shall be installed and maintained at each
building, nearest to the building entrance as possible, using
concrete footing. The bike racks shall be black in color.
(5) Benches and waste receptacles.
(a) Easily accessible seating is intended to provide a needed street
furnishing for rest and relaxation.
(b) Install and maintain one bench, black in color, along the
sidewalk for each 300 feet of street frontage, at each corner,
and at pedestrian pockets and plazas, one per every 300
square feet.
(c) Waste receptacles are to be black in color and attractive street
furnishings that provide needed repositories for trash along
sidewalks and in public spaces.
(d) Install, anchor and service the typical waste receptacle, as
defined below or an approved alternative, at street
intersections, at pedestrian pockets and plazas and at threehundred-
foot intervals along streets.
(6) Street trees and landscaping.
(a) Street trees provide shade and screening for pedestrians,
aesthetic purposes, and add a softening component to the
§ 195-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-100
1:617
streetscape. When placed and maintained in uniform
alignment along a streetscape, the street trees form an alley
effect.
(b) Street trees shall be installed and maintained along both sides
of all streets. One street tree shall be provided at an average
interval of every 35 feet of linear frontage along a street. Deeprooted,
street-tolerant street tree species shall be carefully
selected and utilized.
(c) Trees, shrubs and perennials shall be selected for visual
appeal, climate hardiness, and appropriateness for the specific
conditions of the chosen location. Plants shall be pruned to
maintain visibility and clearance along the streetscape for
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
(d) Street trees shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches caliper in size at
the time of planting, and the tree species shall be selected from
the recommended street tree planting list in the Township
Zoning Ordinance. See § 197.137.1J.
(7) Lighting.
(a) Install and maintain human-scaled light fixtures and poles to
provide a safe, secure and attractive streetscape along both
sides of all streets. Streetlights shall be installed and
maintained at an average interval of 100 feet along all streets.
(b) The lights shall be black and installed at a total height of 20
feet from finished grade, and the light support footer shall be
minimally visible. Lights shall emit minimal glare and spillover.
(c) Lighting shall be provided at the rear of all residential
buildings that have rear vehicular access.
(8) Public spaces and gathering places.
(a) Each development shall include a combination of a variety of
outdoor room elements to form the streetscape, including
building facades, trees and shrubs, decorative pavers,
benches, civic art, waste receptacles, human-scaled
streetlights, fountains, sculptures and the like.
(b) Each development shall provide pedestrian pockets as
gathering places by integrating visible opportunities for
pedestrians to rest and relax along the streetscapes, for
example, small plazas as street corners and neighborhood
gateway features that integrate seating areas. These spaces
are to be viable additions to the building environment that
celebrate the public realm of the district.
(c) Each development shall provide pedestrian pockets with
benches, sitting walls, shade trees, landscaping and lighting,
§ 195-100 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-100
1:618
which shall be installed and maintained on a minimum of one
street corner at all intersections and at midblock locations
where 1,000 feet or more separates street intersections.
(d) A minimum of one plaza shall be installed within a proposed
mixed-use development and shall be a minimum of 1,500
square feet with unrestricted public access. Private outdoor
dining areas adjacent to a plaza will complement the plaza but
cannot be used to reduce the required minimum square
footage.
(e) Public spaces and gathering places shall be maintained to
provide year-round attractiveness.
E. Bulk and area regulations. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Front setbacks (measured from the edge of road right-of-way):
[1] Residential buildings: 15 feet within which area a buffer
yard A (minor) shall be provided.
[2] Commercial buildings:
[a] Buildings one to two stories in height: 35 feet
minimum/85 feet maximum.
[b] Buildings three to four stories in height: 50 feet
minimum/85 feet maximum.
[c] Commercial buildings may be set back more than 85
feet but in no case more than 150 feet provided that
any such deviation shall comply with the following
criteria: The development or use shall incorporate
enhanced pedestrian spaces and amenities within the
setback area. Enhanced pedestrian spaces and
amenities consist of a combination of features such as
plazas, fountains, courtyards, arcaded pedestrian
walkways, outdoor seating, widened sidewalks or
pedestrian pathways, benches, shelters, street
furniture, playgrounds, gazebos, public art or kiosks.
[d] A buffer yard A (minor) shall be provided.
(b) Side and rear yard setbacks: permitted uses.
[1] Adjoining a residential district: No nonresidential building
or structure shall be located within 75 feet of a residential
district boundary line within which area a buffer yard C
(major) shall be provided, consistent with § 195-137.1. In
the event the building height exceeds 30 feet, the
§ 195-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-100
1:619
minimum side or rear yard requirement shall increase one
foot for each foot in building height over 30 feet.
[2] Adjoining other commercial uses: A side yard depth of 30
feet per side is required. Where a series of adjoining
structures on lots of single or separate ownership abut, an
unobstructed passage of at least 30 feet in width shall be
provided at grade level at intervals not less than every 400
feet of developed area. However, in the event the building
height exceeds 30 feet, the minimum side or rear yard
requirement, and the unobstructed passage, shall increase
one foot for each foot in building height over 30 feet. A
buffer yard A (minor) shall be provided.
(c) Side and rear yard setbacks: conditional uses.
[1] Adjoining a residential district: No nonresidential building
or structure shall be located within 100 feet of a
residential district boundary line within which area a
buffer yard C (major) shall be provided, consistent with
§ 195-137.1. In the event the building height exceeds 30
feet, the minimum side or rear yard requirement shall
increase one foot for each foot in building height over 30
feet.
[2] Adjoining other commercial uses: minimum 30 feet within
which area a buffer yard A (minor), consistent with
§ 95-137.1, shall be provided. However, in the event the
building height exceeds 30 feet, the minimum side or rear
yard requirement shall increase one foot for each foot in
building height over 30 feet.
F. Layout.
(1) Drive throughs.
(a) Drive-throughs are permitted where located on a lot with an
associated permitted principal land use/structure.
(b) A maximum of two drive-through windows are permitted on a
lot.
(c) Location. Drive-through establishments shall locate the drivethrough
and stacking to the side or rear of the building and
shall not located them along the primary facade that faces a
street.
(d) Setbacks from residential uses. All drive-through window and
stacking lanes shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
building occupied by a residential use, including any mixed-use
building.
§ 195-100 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-100
1:620
(e) Screening. All drive-through windows and associated stacking
lanes shall be screened with vegetation and fencing,
constructed of commercially manufactured wood panels or
similar materials (No wire fencing materials are permitted.), or
a decorative masonry wall consistent in design with the
principal building. Any fencing or wall shall be a minimum of
four feet and a maximum of five feet in height, with any opaque
construction limited to a maximum portion of the screen up to
three feet in height. The remaining portion of the screen must
have a minimum transparency of 50%.
(f) Vehicle stacking. A minimum of three vehicle stacking places,
including the space at the drive-through window, shall be
provided for each drive-through lane.
(g) Bypass lane. A dedicated bypass lane shall be provided to allow
for a vehicle to completely bypass a drive-through window and
associated vehicle stacking area.
(2) Fueling stations location. All fueling stations associated with any
automotive service station use shall be located to the side or rear of
the principal structure.
(3) Building orientation. Commercial and multifamily residential
buildings shall be oriented such that the front building facade faces
and is adjacent to a public street. Where multiple buildings are
proposed as part of a development plan and the plan is proposed to
be accessed internally by private streets and/or driveways,
placement of the buildings shall be such that the portion(s) of the
development abutting public streets shall have buildings oriented
along the streets to frame the street wall.
G. Streets, sidewalks and interconnectivity.
(1) Interconnected streets form the blocks of the district which serve
as the backbone for development. All streets within the district
shall interconnect and cul-de-sac streets shall be permitted only by
modification of this requirement where such modification is
supported by evidence provided by the applicant.
(2) Sidewalks, pathways, trails and crosswalks shall be installed and
maintained throughout the district in a manner consistent with the
district's streetscape requirements. Buildings, lots and
neighborhoods within the district shall be linked through
pedestrian and bicyclist connections.
(3) All residential uses shall have access to a street designed to
Township standards.
(4) To the greatest extent possible, proposed development plans shall
provide for two or more vehicular access points to public streets
and/or adjacent existing or proposed development.
§ 195-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-100
1:621
§ 195-101. through § 195-103. (Reserved)
(5) Driveways/curb cuts.
(a) Shared driveway entrances. In order to reduce pedestrian and
vehicular conflict, shared driveway entrances and access
drives are encouraged.
(b) Number of driveway entrances. The number of driveway
entrances is limited to two per lot, unless a Township-approved
traffic study recommends otherwise.
(c) Vehicular access to lots shall be through arterial or collector
streets or access drives.
(d) Township standard details. Driveways, access drives and curb
cuts shall comply with the Township standard details.135
(e) Alignment. Driveways, access drives and curb cuts shall have
direct alignment with driveways, access drives and curb cuts
on opposing lots.
H. Buffer yards. See § 195-137.1.
I. Open spaces.
(1) Open spaces, in the form of pedestrian pockets (along the
streetscape), plazas, parks and greens shall be provided at rate of a
minimum area equivalent to 5% of the gross land area of the
development. The open space may be provided in a location
integral to the proposed development site or within a common open
space area, under common ownership and/or control within the
district.
(2) Open spaces shall be positioned on each development within the
district to provide a variety and diversity of opportunities for public
enjoyment. The open spaces shall be usable and attractive places
for people to gather and shall have topographic slopes of
approximately 5% or less.
J. Public utilities. All new residential uses, except those in mixed-use
buildings, must be served by public sanitary sewage and public water.
135. Editor's Note: Said standard details are included at the end of Ch. 180, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 195-100 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-101
1:622
ARTICLE XIII
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Unloading Regulations
§ 195-104. General regulations.
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities shall be provided to
lessen congestion in the streets. The facilities required herein shall be
available throughout the hours of operation of the particular business
or use for which such facilities are provided. As used herein, the term
"parking space" includes either covered garage space or uncovered
parking lot space located off or beyond the public right-of-way.
B. Each parking space shall consist of not less than an average of 270
square feet of useable area for each motor vehicle, including the
interior driveways and driveways connecting the garage or parking
space with a street or alley. Parking spaces must comply with the
requirements of Detail SD-13136 of the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details. Notwithstanding the above, all parking spaces
shall be ample in size for the vehicles' intended use. Parking spaces
shall not be less than 10 feet wide and 20 feet long. Exterior parking
spaces and the approaches thereto for residential uses of more than
four spaces per lot shall be paved. For all other uses, the required
parking spaces shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or a material
approved by the Township Engineer. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
135; 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
C. A garage or carport may be located wholly or partly inside the walls of
the principal building or attached to the outer walls. If separated from
the principal building, the garage shall conform to all accessory
building requirements. The garage may be constructed under a yard or
court. The space above an underground garage shall be deemed to be
part of the open space of the lot on which it is located.
D. Parking spaces may be located on a lot other than that containing the
principal use with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
E. Surfacing. Any off-street parking area required for a nonresidential use
shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, such as asphalt or concrete
surface, and shall be so arranged as to provide for orderly and safe
parking and storage of vehicles.
F. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises and public right-of-way.
G. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking
and loading spaces designed for use by employees, customers, delivery
services, sales people and/or the general public right-of-way or private
136. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 195-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-104
1:623
§ 195-105. Parking and lighting. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
alley or easement of access, and there shall be provided an access drive
of not less than 12 feet in width per directional lane of traffic and not
less than 18 feet in width in all cases where the access is to storage
areas or loading and unloading spaces required hereunder.
H. All parking areas shall have lined spaces and bumper blocks, where
appropriate.
I. Where required, adequate parking for handicapped persons shall be
provided in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
A. Lighting. All exterior parking lots, driveways, vehicular access aisles,
pedestrian access areas and loading spaces shall be sufficiently
illuminated so as to provide safe movements on site.
(1) Illumination shall be by sharp cutoff fixture types with flushmounted
lens cap only.
(2) Fixtures shall be mounted parallel to the ground surface. Lighting
for the purpose of highlighting a structure or landscape feature
shall be exempt from this requirement, provided that the source of
such light shall not be visible beyond the property lines or public
right-of-way.
(3) Illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle abutting residential
property boundaries and 1.0 footcandle at all other property
boundaries.
(4) There shall be no direct sky-reflected glare, whether from
floodlights or from high-temperature processes (for example,
combustion or welding), so as to be visible from within any
residential district.
B. Table of Minimum Required Parking. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 129; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179;
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204;
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206; 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
Type of Land Use Required Spaces
Bank with drive-in and walk in
facilities
At least one parking space per 150
square deet of building area
Bar/tavern At least one parking space for each
five square feet of net floor area
devoted to seating on stools or
standing area, plus one parking
space for each 50 square feet of net
floor area devoted to seating at
tables with chairs
§ 195-104 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-105
1:624
Type of Land Use Required Spaces
Bowling alleys Five parking spaces for each alley
Convenience store At least one parking space per 150
square feet of gross leaseable area
(GLA)
Controlled substance
dispensation facility
At least one parking space for each
60 square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest
shift and a service area for mobile
equipment, such as ambulances
Correction facilities One space for each two staff on the
largest shift, plus one space per five
inmates
Fast food restaurant (without
drive-up window)
At least one parking space per 60
square feet of gross leaseable area
(GLA)
Food markets and grocery
stores
One parking space for each 200
square feet of net floor area for
public use
Firing range One parking space per every firing
position, plus one additional parking
space per every five firing positions
or fraction thereof
Funeral homes, mortuaries and
crematories
At least one parking space for each
60 square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest
shift and a service area for mobile or
modular equipment, such as hearses
and ambulances
Golf driving ranges At least one parking space for each
tee provided or one space for each
three persons accommodated at
peak usage
Hardware/paint/home
improvement store
At least five parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of building area
High-rise apartment At least one parking space per
dwelling
Home occupations At least two parking spaces for the
resident, one parking space for each
nonresident employee and two
parking spaces for patron use
§ 195-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-105
1:625
Type of Land Use Required Spaces
Hospitals and sanitariums At least one parking space for each
three beds. Such spaces shall be in
addition to those necessary for
doctors, administrative personnel
and other regular employees. One
parking space shall be provided for
each employee on the largest shift.
Hotel/motel At least one parking space per
sleeping room, plus additional
parking as required by other uses on
premises
Industrial and manufacturing
establishments
1 parking space for each two
employees on the combined major
and next largest shift, plus visitor
parking at a ratio of one space per
400 square feet of office area.
Low-rise apartments At least two parking spaces per
dwelling unit
Medical-dental clinic/office At least one parking space for each
60 square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest
shift and a service area for mobile
equipment, such as ambulances
Medical marijuana dispensary At least one parking space for each
200 square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest
shift
Medical marijuana grower/
processor
At least one parking space for each
500 square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one parking space
for each employee on the largest
shift
Miniature golf At least one parking space for each
tee
Nightclub At least one parking space for each
five square feet of net floor area
devoted to seating on stools or
standing area, plus one parking
space for each 50 square feet of net
floor area devoted to seating at
tables with chairs
§ 195-105 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-105
1:626
Type of Land Use Required Spaces
Nursing homes, intermediate
care, assisted living and
personal care facilities
1 space for each 4 beds plus 1 space
for each 2 staff on the largest shift
Office buildings At least 1 parking space for each
250 square feet of net floor area or
fraction thereof
Office park At least one parking space per 300
square feet of building area
Places of worship 1 space per each three and one-half
seats in the meeting hall or worship
area, whichever seats the greatest
number of persons
Public garages, automotive
service stations
At least 1 parking space for each
200 square feet of net floor area or
fraction thereof, devoted to repair or
service facilities or retail sales and
one parking space for each
employee on the largest shift. (This
shall be in addition to the space
allocated for the normal storage of
motor vehicles.)
Public uses 1 space per 300 feet of gross floor
area
Residential condominium At least two parking spaces per
dwelling unit
Residential units 2 off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit
Restaurants, delicatessens and
cafeterias
One parking space for each 100
square feet of net floor area for
public use, plus one space for each
two employees on the largest shift
Retail stores and other places
for trade or business
1 parking space for each 200 square
feet of net floor area for public use
Schools, public For elementary and middle schools,
1 space per classroom and all other
rooms used by students; for high
schools, three spaces per classroom
and all other rooms used by
students
Schools, private 1 space for each classroom and all
other rooms used by students
§ 195-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-105
1:627
§ 195-106. Loading and unloading space.
§ 195-107. Access to off-street parking and loading areas.
Access to and from all off-street parking, loading and vehicle service areas
along public right-of-ways shall consist of well-defined separate or common
entrances and exits and shall comply with the following provisions:
Type of Land Use Required Spaces
Senior housing (residential
health care)
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1
space for each 10 units for visitor
parking
Shopping center At least five parking spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leaseable
area (GLA)
Skating rinks (roller or ice),
clubs, lodges and similar places
At least one parking space for each
200 square feet of net floor area.
Swimming pools (commercial
recreation)
At least one space for each three
persons for whom facilities for
dressing are provided, or at least
one parking space for every 12
square feet of water surface,
including areas for swimming,
wading and diving, whichever
requirement is the greater.
Theaters, auditoriums,
stadiums, banquet facilities or
any other places of public or
private assembly
At least one parking space for each
3 1/2 seats provided for public or
private assembly
Truck terminals and wholesale
warehouses
One parking space for each two
employees on the combined major
and next shift
A. In addition to the off-street parking space required herein, any building
erected, converted or enlarged in any appropriate district for
commercial, office building, manufacturing, wholesale, hospital or
similar uses shall provide adequate off-street areas for loading and
unloading of vehicles. The minimum sized load space shall be 60 feet in
depth, 12 feet in width, with an overhead clearance of 14 feet.
B. All commercial and industrial establishments shall provide loading and
unloading and commercial vehicle storage space adequate for their
needs. This required space will be provided in addition to established
requirements for patron and employee parking.
C. In no case where a building is erected, converted or enlarged for
commercial, manufacturing or business purposes shall the public rightof-
way be used for loading or unloading of materials.
§ 195-105 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-107
1:628
§ 195-108. Parking and loading area setbacks. [Amended 5-12-2003
by Ord. No. 129; 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
All nonresidential parking and loading areas and parallel circulation and
service lanes shall be separated from the right-of-way line of a public
thoroughfare or adjoining property line as follows, except as otherwise
specified, unless the adjoining owners have mutually agreed to shared
parking:
A. Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way:
(1) Within 80 feet of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting
public street or highway.
(2) Unless adequate sight distance at driveways shall conform to
PENNDOT latest Publication 282 (Highway Occupancy Permit
Handbook) and Pennsylvania Code Title 67 Transportation,
Chapter 441 (Access to Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and
Local Roads). [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135]
B. No access drive entering onto a commonwealth highway where vehicles
must back out shall be approved as part of a land development plan by
the Township unless and until a commonwealth highway occupancy
permit has been applied for.
A. By a planting strip at least 20 feet in depth, where a buffer yard A is
required;
B. By a planting strip at least 30 feet in depth, where a buffer yard B is
required; and
C. By a planting strip at least 40 feet in depth, where a buffer yard C is
required.
§ 195-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-108
1:629

ARTICLE XIV
Signs
[Amended 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 147]
§ 195-109. Purposes.
The purposes of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use
of signs as a means of identification and communication; to maintain and
enhance the aesthetic environment of the Township; to enhance pedestrian
and vehicular safety; to minimize adverse effect of signs on nearby public
and private property; to promote and protect the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the Township; to avoid excessive competition
for large or multiple signs so that permitted signs provide adequate
identification and direction while minimizing clutter, unsightliness and
confusion; and to promote signs which are designed utilizing clear, crisp
lettering and uncomplicated symbols which identify the intended message
efficiently.
§ 195-110. Classification of signs by structural types; definitions.
A. Building signs:
CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to the soffit or fascia of a canopy,
covered entrance or walkway, or to a permanent awning or marquee
and not projecting beyond the edges of same.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign attached to an outside building wall and
which projects at a ninety-degree angle therefrom.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over
the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and extending
vertically above the top walk or edge of a flat roof, the eaves line of a
building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof or the deck line of a building
with a mansard roof.
WALL OR PANEL SIGN — A sign integral with the face of an exterior
building wall or mansard roof, or attached to and parallel with the wall
or roof.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign painted, attached or affixed to the surface of
windows or doors of a building.
B. Freestanding signs:
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign which has a supporting base
designed as an integral part of the sign resting totally or primarily
on the ground and which is independent from any building or other
structure.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DEVICE — Any off-premises outdoor sign,
display, light, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster,
billboard or any other thing which is designed, intended or used to
advertise or inform, except as otherwise provided herein. See
§ 195-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-110
1:631
§ 195-111. Design standards.
Signs, as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be professionally
designed, constructed and installed so as to be compatible in character with
regard to the architecture of the building on which they are located and
to the materials, color and size of signs designed or located on the same
building and on adjoining buildings in order to produce an overall unified
effect in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
§ 195-137.6.[Added 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156; amended
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
C. Vehicular sign:
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any sign displayed on a parked vehicle, where
the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product or business
or to direct people to a business or activity during all or part of the
day. Vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification, or
advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business purposes.
D. Other definitions:
ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN — Any sign or part of a sign that
changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or
rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or
rotation.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with
alphanumeric text or illustrations, including electronic or digital, that
can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of
the sign. With the exception of the signs for public uses, the content of
changeable copy signs shall relate to the parcel upon which the sign has
been installed, unless otherwise permitted herein. Stationary photos
are permitted, provided the photo comprises no more than 50% of the
sign area.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162; 5-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 163; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204]
DIGITAL MESSAGE DISPLAY — A sign incorporating LCD, LED,
plasma, CRT, pixelized lights, and other photo or videolike
displays.[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
A. Placement:
(1) Wall or panel signs. Wall or panel signs shall not project more than
12 inches from the building wall to which they are attached and
shall be set back from the end of a building or party wall line for a
distance of at least three feet and shall not project above the
building wall or coping of a mansard roof.
(2) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall not extend more than three
feet from the face of a building and the lowest portion of such sign
shall not be less than eight feet above the finished grade of a
sidewalk or other pedestrianway.
§ 195-110 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-111
1:632
§ 195-112. Permits and fees for erection of signs.
Signs may be erected and maintained only in compliance with the provisions
of this article, other articles of the Township Code and any and all
regulations of the Township of Brighton relating in any way to the erection,
location, size, height, use, number, lighting, operation, alteration or
(3) Relation to openings. Signs shall not project over or obstruct the
windows or doors of any building.
(4) Relation to traffic devices. Signs shall not be erected so as to
obstruct sight lines along any public way, traffic control lights,
street name signs at intersections or street sight lines. Signs visible
from the sight lines along a street shall not contain an arrow or
words such as "stop," "go," "slow," etc.; and the movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination shall not resemble traffic control
signs or lights.
(5) Continuity. Signs and their placement shall be considered in
relation to their surroundings and, if seen as a series on a building
wall, shall have a continuity of design with respect to shape,
materials and color.
B. Height and size dimensions:
(1) Sign height. The maximum height of freestanding signs shall be in
accordance with the height limitations as specified in these zoning
regulations.
(2) Vertical dimension. The lowest member of all signs which are
supported or suspended from a building shall not be less than eight
feet above the finished grade of a sidewalk or other pedestrianway.
If located over a pavement used for vehicular traffic or within 18
inches of the vertical projection of the edges of such pavement, the
lowest member of the sign shall not be less than 15 feet above the
finished pavement.
C. Design standards:
(1) Style and color. The style (or design) of signs shall be consistent
throughout a particular building; the colors of signs shall be
compatible with the color of the building facade and other existing
and proposed signs.
(2) Graphics. The lettering on a sign shall be clearly legible and in
scale with the sign surface upon which it is placed. Changeable
copy signs are only permitted where specifically authorized.
(3) Materials. Signs shall be constructed of materials which are of
appropriate quality and durability and which are compatible with
the materials of the building upon which the signs are placed.
§ 195-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-112
1:633
maintenance of signs, outdoor advertising devices, banners and other
similar advertising devices, as defined.
§ 195-113. Exemptions.
The following signs shall be regulated by the Brighton Township Zoning
Code but are exempt from the permitting requirements of this article.
A. A permit shall be required for the construction or erection of all signs,
except that no permit shall be required for signs that meet the
requirements of § 195-113, Exemptions. The applicant shall submit the
application for a sign permit on a form furnished by the Township for
that purpose, submitting all information and plans as may be required.
B. The applicant shall submit with the sign application a fee payable to the
Township of Brighton in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by
the Board of Township Supervisors to defray or help defray the cost of
issuing the permit and inspecting the sign when erected to determine
that it conforms to the provisions of this article.
C. All applications for land development filed pursuant to Brighton
Township Code, Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, shall
include a master sign plan. No permit shall be issued for an individual
sign that requires zoning approval unless and until a master sign plan
for the land development has been submitted to the Zoning Officer and
approved as conforming with this article. The master sign plan shall be
submitted in duplicate, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 50 feet or less and shall contain the following:
(1) Lighting.
(2) Location of each existing and proposed building or freestanding
sign.
(3) Materials.
(4) Color schemes.
(5) Lettering or graphic style.
(6) Landscaping.
(7) Computation of maximum total sign area, the maximum area for
each individual sign and the height of signs.
A. Agricultural-related uses in conjunction with the seasonal sale of
products grown or raised on the premises. Signs not exceeding 12
square feet may be displayed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. Signs shall be displayed only when such products are on sale. No
more than two such signs shall be erected on each property. The sign
may be mounted to the structure housing products for sale or
freestanding outside of existing rights-of-way. For the sale of Christmas
trees grown on the property, the following shall apply:
§ 195-112 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-113
1:634
(1) Two signs may be erected and displayed for a period not to exceed
30 days.
(2) Signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area nor shall signs be
more than eight feet in height above ground grade.
(3) Signs may be illuminated as described in § 195-117D.
B. Residential real estate signs advertising the sale, auction or rental of
the premises upon which they are erected may be erected and
maintained by a broker or other person interested in the sale or rental
of such premises, provided that:
(1) The size of such sign is not in excess of six square feet in area and
the sign shall be located behind the right-of-way line of any street.
(2) No more than one sign shall be placed upon any property unless the
property fronts upon more than one street, in which event one sign
may be erected on each street frontage.
(3) No such signs shall be illuminated.
(4) Signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale or lease of the
premises.
(5) Directional real estate signs will be permitted, subject to the
following:
(a) One off-site directional sign for each property for sale only.
(b) Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. only.
(c) Permission must be obtained in advance from the property
owner where the sign is to be placed.
(d) Signs shall not exceed four square feet in area.
C. Signs indicating the location and direction of sites in process of
development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed
thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or agent, may be
erected and maintained, provided that:
(1) No more than two such signs shall be erected within a mile radius
of the site available for or in the process of development. The size
of any such sign shall not be in excess of four square feet in area.
(2) No more than two such signs shall be erected beyond the mile
radius of the site available for or in the process of development.
The size of any such sign shall not be in excess of two square feet in
area.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
§ 195-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-113
1:635
(4) Due to the complexity and nature of the public road system, the
Board of Supervisors may increase the number of signs permitted
under Subsection C(1) and (2). For any sign authorized hereunder,
the Board shall determine permitted square footage, method of
mounting and the length of time during which such sign may be
erected.
D. Nonresidential real estate signs advertising the sale or rental of the
premises upon which they are erected may be erected and maintained
by a broker or other person interested in the sale or rental of such
premises, provided that:
(1) The size of such sign is not in excess of 24 square feet in area and is
located behind the right-of-way line of any street. The maximum
height shall be six feet in height above ground grade.
(2) No more than one sign shall be placed upon any property or site,
unless the property fronts upon more than one street, in which
event one sign may be erected on each frontage, or if the total
street frontage exceeds 300 lineal feet, in which event two signs
may be erected along the street frontage.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(4) Signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale or lease of the
premises.
E. Nameplate signs may be erected and maintained by the occupant of a
premises indicating the name, address and occupation of a home
occupation or no-impact home-based business that has been approved
under the provisions of this article, provided that:
(1) The sign shall be mounted on the face of the structure upon which
entrance is gained.
(2) The size of the sign shall not be in excess of 1 1/2 square feet in
area, indicating the name, profession or activity of the occupant of
the residence.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
F. Political signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. No such sign
shall be illuminated.
G. While work is being conducted on site, a temporary sign not exceeding
12 square feet may be erected which identifies the contractor, engineer,
architect or funding agencies and related information regarding the
development work on site. No such sign shall be illuminated.137
137. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, concerning municipal signs, was repealed 11-10-2008
by Ord. No. 162. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
I and J as Subsections H and I, respectively.
§ 195-113 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-113
1:636
§ 195-114. Accessory use for residential purposes in residential
districts.
H. Directional/incidental signs that are generally informational and have a
purpose that is only secondary to the primary use of the lot on which
they are located. These signs include "No Parking," "Entrance," "Exit,"
"One Way," "Loading Only," "Telephone" and other similar directives.
These signs shall provide no commercial message and shall not exceed
four square feet in area. They shall be located only in conjunction with
site drive entrances and/or internal traffic drive aisles.
I. Signs giving notice of public or community events, charitable fundraising
events or any similar activity of the general public interest may
be erected, subject to the following:
(1) Signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(2) No such sign may be illuminated.
(3) Signs shall be limited to two in number and may be erected off site.
(4) Signs shall be erected no more than 15 days prior to the event and
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the event.
A. In addition to exempt signs permitted under this article, signs may be
erected as an accessory use for residential purposes in the R-1 Rural
Residential District, R-2 Agricultural Residential District, UD Unified
Development District and the SC-1 Special Conservation District,
subject to the granting of a permit, for the following:
(1) Signs advertising the sale and development of the premises upon
which they are erected may be erected and maintained in
connection with the development of the premises by a builder,
contractor, developer or other person interested in such sale or
development, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign is not in excess of 24 square feet in
area and is located not less than five feet from the right-of-way
line of any street and 15 feet from any side property line.
(b) No sign used for development purposes may be illuminated nor
shall it exceed eight feet in total height above the ground
grade.
(c) No more than one sign shall be placed upon any property
unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in
which event one sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(2) One freestanding or wall-mounted sign for an information or sales
center in a development, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area.
§ 195-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-114
1:637
§ 195-115. Accessory use for nonresidential purposes in residential
districts.
(b) Signs may be illuminated in accordance with § 195-117D.
B. Freestanding signs identifying mobile or modular home parks, planned
residential developments or conventional subdivisions, provided that:
(1) There shall not be more than two signs at each primary point of
access.
(2) Signs shall not to exceed 16 square feet in area.
(3) Signs shall not exceed six feet in height above ground grade.
(4) Signs may be illuminated in accordance with § 195-117D.
A. In addition to exempt signs permitted under this chapter, signs may be
erected as an accessory use for nonresidential purposes in the R-1
Rural Residential District, R-2 Agricultural Residential District, UD
Unified Development District and the SC-1 Special Conservation
District, subject to the granting of a permit, for the following:
(1) A wall or panel sign and/or a ground sign which serves only to tell
the name or use may be erected and maintained, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign is not in excess of:
[1] Nine square feet in area for the following permitted or
conditional uses: farm, public stable, horticultural use,
kennel, bed-and-breakfast establishment, cemetery or
crematorium. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
[2] Sixteen square feet in area for the following permitted or
conditional uses: sanitary landfill, automotive recycling/
salvage yard premises, campground, firing range or firing
range complex, mineral extraction location or composting
facility. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
[3] The maximum square footage of permitted signs for the
following permitted or conditional uses shall be
determined in accordance with § 195-116: public use,
school (public or private), place of worship, or public or
private recreational use, 50% of which may be used as a
changeable letter format for messages or announcements
on ground-mounted signs, provided that only one
changeable copy sign shall be permitted per lot.
[Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
[4] The maximum square footage of permitted signs for the
following permitted or conditional uses shall be
determined in accordance with § 195-116: general
business office, restaurant, hotel or convention center.
§ 195-114 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-115
1:638
§ 195-116. Accessory use for nonresidential purposes in
nonresidential districts.
(b) Ground signs:
[1] Shall be located not less than 10 feet from the street rightof-
way line.
[2] Shall be located not less than 30 feet from any side
property line.
[3] The total height of such sign shall not exceed six feet in
height above the established adjacent grade level for uses
specified in § 195-115A(1)(a)[1] and § 195-115A(1)(a)[2].
The total height of such sign shall not exceed eight feet in
height above the established adjacent grade level for uses
specified in § 195-115A(1)(a)[3] and § 195-115A(1)(a)[4].
[4] The sign shall be erected in connection with, or mounted
on, a permanent base, decorative in design and
landscaped with permanent shrubs. A landscape plan shall
be submitted with the application for sign approval.
[5] May be illuminated in accordance with § 195-117D.
(c) Wall or panel signs:
[1] Shall be affixed to or displayed on the face of a building.
[2] May be illuminated in accordance with § 195-117D.
A. In addition to exempt signs permitted under this chapter, signs may be
erected as an accessory use for nonresidential purposes in the C-1
Neighborhood Commercial District, C-2 Highway Commercial District,
HC-1 Health Care Service District, and UD Unified Development
District. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 158]
(1) Use types and structural types permitted. Accessory signs to
permitted and conditional uses shall be designed, erected, altered,
moved and maintained, in whole or in part, in accordance with the
following regulations.
(a) Structural types permitted:
[1] Canopy.
[2] Ground.
[3] Projecting.
[4] Wall or panel.
[5] Window.
(b) Measurement standards:
§ 195-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-116
1:639
[1] The size of signs identifying a permitted or conditional use
shall be regulated by relating the total area of all signs to
the size of the building or building unit to which the signs
are accessory.
[2] The maximum sign face area permitted for a building or
use shall include all the surfaces of a single face sign or
signs and one surface of a double faced sign. The area of a
sign shall be measured as the minimum area which can be
enclosed by a square, rectangle or triangle, or any
combination thereof, the sides of which make contact with
the extreme points or edges of the sign or signs, excluding
the supporting structure if such structure does not form a
part of the advertising portion of the sign.
[a] Street address numbers appearing on a sign face are
excluded in the calculation of permitted sign face
area.
[b] The area of a sign composed of characters or words
attached directly to a building wall or mansard roof
surface shall be the smallest square, rectangle or
triangle which encloses the entire group.
[3] The maximum sign face area of signs shall be related to
the size of the building or building unit as follows:
[a] The "frontage of a building" shall be the width of the
building facade which faces the principal street or the
facade containing the main entrance of a building. For
a building located on a corner lot, 40% of the building
depth facing the secondary street may be included in
the frontage width factor for that specific use when an
entrance and/or exit is provided on the secondary
street.
[b] "Building unit" refers to a space occupying a portion of
the ground floor of a building, containing its own
entrance and separated from other such spaces by a
party wall or walls. Building unit width shall be the
width of the unit as measured from party wall center
lines along the building frontage.
[4] A retail business and/or service use within a building
having frontage on a second street and a secondary public
entrance to a parking area may be permitted an additional
sign along such secondary frontage or entrance which
shall, however, not exceed 20% of the area of the signs
permitted along the main building facade.
§ 195-116 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-116
1:640
[5] Service entrances to a retail business and service use may
be identified by a nameplate on the building not exceeding
two square feet in single-face sign area.
(c) Maximum area permitted. The maximum sign face area of all
permitted retail business and service use signs for each
building or unit of a building shall be related to the width (or
frontage) of the building or building unit thereof. Maximum
sign face area shall be determined as follows:138 [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
[1] Wall or panel signs. The maximum sign face area for a wall
or panel sign for a business use or building unit shall be
determined by the formula:
Business Use or Building Unit frontage x 0.75 (up to
maximum 75 square feet) — See Details SD-22 and SD-23
of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details.
[2] Ground sign. The total maximum sign face area for a
ground sign of a business building shall be determined by
the formula:
Building width x 0.35 (up to maximum 50 square feet) —
See Details SD-22 and SD-23 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details.
(d) Number, location and area regulations.
[1] Wall signs. One identification wall sign may be permitted
for each separate business use. The maximum sign face
area of a single wall sign shall be determined by the
formula in paragraph (c)[2] hereof. However, a single wall
sign shall not exceed 75 square feet in sign face area and
three feet in vertical dimension.
[2] Ground signs. Business uses may be permitted one ground
identification sign in accordance with the other provisions
of this section.
[a] Ground signs shall be not less than 25 feet from
another business lot and not less than 50 feet from any
residential district line. A ground sign shall be set
back a minimum of five feet from the street right-ofway
line.
[b] The maximum single face sign area shall not exceed
50 square feet for any ground sign.
138. Editor's Note: The following details are included as attachments to Ch. 180, Subdivision
and Land Development.
§ 195-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-116
1:641
[c] The maximum height of a ground sign shall be 10 feet.
[3] Projecting signs. In addition to a permitted wall or panel
sign, one projecting identification sign may be attached to
the building wall of each business use. Projecting signs
shall be set back from the end of a building and party wall
line for a distance of at least 10 feet. The maximum single
face sign area of any projecting sign shall not exceed nine
square feet. The lowest member of any projecting sign
shall be not less than eight feet above the sidewalk grade.
[4] Canopy or covered walk signs. In addition to a permitted
wall or panel sign, one canopy or covered walk
identification sign may be attached to the soffit or fascia of
a canopy or roof over a walkway structural member of
each business use. However, the vertical dimension of
such signs shall not exceed 18 inches and the lowest
member shall be not less than eight feet above the
sidewalk grade. The maximum single face sign area of any
canopy sign shall not exceed five square feet.
[5] Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall only
be permitted for theaters, convention centers, schools,
banquet facilities, hospitals, time and temperature at
banks, pricing at gas stations, and as set forth in § 195-115
above. Changeable copy signs shall also be permitted in
the UD Unified Development District, provided that there
will be no off-site advertising except for related subsidiary
uses, and community service announcements. A maximum
of two changeable copy signs are permitted per lot of 10
acres or more for properties having two distinct entrances
on separate streets. Only one such sign is permitted per
entrance. Otherwise, only one changeable copy sign shall
be permitted per lot. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
163; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204; 2-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 219]
[6] Directional ground signs. Directional ground signs
indicating traffic routes may be permitted in addition to
the other limitations of this chapter, provided that no such
sign exceeds three square feet in a single face sign area or
is closer than 15 feet to any side lot line or 10 feet to any
street right-of-way line, and provided that no directional
sign exceeds three feet in height.
[7] Business park identification sign. In a business,
professional or recreational/commercial/residential area
containing more than one building, designed and
developed as a coordinated unit, or where a business
building contains more than one business unit, individual
store or business identification shall be limited to wall or
§ 195-116 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-116
1:642
§ 195-117. Additional sign requirements.
panel signs attached to the building or unit thereof.
However, for an office park, industrial park, or
recreational/commercial/residential area of three or more
buildings, where serviced by a common access road, one
permanent ground sign is permitted indicating the name
and/or address of the office park, industrial park, or
recreational/commercial/residential area only.
[a] The maximum single face sign area shall not exceed
75 square feet. The sign shall be located at the
vehicular entrance to the location of the office park,
industrial park, or recreational/commercial/
residential area and shall be set back a minimum of 35
feet from any side lot line, 50 feet from any residential
district line, and 15 feet from the street right-of-way.
A. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, every sign
referred to in this article must be constructed of durable materials,
must be kept in good condition and repair and not allowed to become
dilapidated, and shall be constructed pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code.
B. Each sign shall be removed when the circumstances leading to its
erection no longer apply.
C. The construction or erection of any sign, except as herein specified,
within the right-of-way lines of a public highway or street is hereby
prohibited, except as a permanent sign built in conjunction with an
ornamental entrance to a development stating only the name of such
development of plan. Upon approval of the agency responsible for road
maintenance, temporary directional signs may be erected.
D. No signs shall be constructed, altered or illuminated in any way to
confuse, blind, distract or hinder the view of pedestrians and operators
of motor vehicles on the highways or street adjacent to such signs.
(1) No artificial light or reflecting device shall be used as a part of a
sign where such light or device interferes with, competes for
attention with or may be mistaken for a traffic signal.
(2) Floodlighting shall be arranged so that the source of light is not
visible from any point off the lot and that only the sign is directly
illuminated thereby.
(3) Signs may be illuminated internally, provided that the source of
reflected light is not directly visible or glaring.
(4) No sign may be illuminated red, green or yellow, or any
combination thereof, if such sign will interfere with the effective
§ 195-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-117
1:643
visibility of a traffic signal or is to be located adjacent to a roadway
so as to give the appearance or impression of a traffic signal.
(5) There shall be no appearance of visual dissolve or fading, in which
any part of one electronic message appears simultaneously with
any part of a second electronic message. [Amended 11-10-2008
by Ord. No. 162]
(6) Any illumination, intensity or contrast of light level shall remain
constant. [Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
(7) Electronic or digital changeable copy signs, except as provided in
§ 195-117L below, shall use instantaneous transitions from one
message display cycle to the next with no blackouts, scrolling,
streaming, zooming, flashing, sudden bursts of light, change in
intensity or any other animated effect. The minimum time between
messages shall be five seconds. [Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No.
162; amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
(8) Digital message display illumination. Brightness of digital message
displays shall be no greater than 7,000 nits during daylight hours,
and no greater than 500 nits during nighttime hours. However,
regardless of luminance, no digital message displays shall be
illuminated in such a manner that creates glare conditions on
adjacent properties or adjacent streets, impairs the vision of a
motor vehicle driver, interferes with a motor vehicle driver's
operation of a vehicle, or interferes with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, device, or signal. All digital message displays
shall be equipped with a dimmer control and photo cell which
constantly keeps track of ambient light conditions and adjusts the
sign brightness accordingly. A written certification is required from
the sign manufacturer stating that the light intensity has been
preset not to exceed the illumination levels established herein, and
that the preset intensity level is protected from end-user
manipulation by password-protected software. [Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No. 204
E. A nonconforming sign or similar device, located on a street or public
highway, which is not kept in good repair or which creates a public
nuisance or hazard shall be removed by the owners of said sign at such
time that they are so notified by the Board of Township Supervisors.
F. No sign shall be placed in such a location or at such height that it will
cause danger to traffic on a street or highway by obstructing the sight
distance or view, nor shall it interfere with the clear site triangle.
G. Signs, where permitted in C-1 and C-2 Districts, shall be erected or
placed in conformity with the side and rear yard requirements of the
district in which located, except no sign shall be erected or placed
closer than 50 feet to any R District boundary line, unless otherwise
specifically permitted by this chapter.
§ 195-117 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-117
1:644
H. The following signs as herein defined are strictly prohibited: flashing
signs, moving signs, or signboards and any sign which makes use of the
words "stop," "look," "listen," "slow," "danger" or any other word,
phrase, symbol or character so as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
I. A fourteen-day temporary sign permit may be issued for business or
commercial signs to be used for advertising, on the premises, such
events that are considered to be necessary for the conduct of business
beyond the normal day-to-day operations, such as grand openings,
special sales or special events, subject to the following:
(1) Sign shall not exceed nine square feet in area.
(2) Signs will be permitted on site only.
(3) Signs will be limited to one in number.
(4) Signs shall not exceed six feet in height above ground grade.
(5) Signs shall not be illuminated.
(6) Advertising devices, such as large, inflated signs or tethered
balloons, searchlights and banners erected across public streets,
are prohibited.
J. No sign shall be erected, placed or constructed in any district on a
movable or portable base, sled, trailer vehicle or device of any type.
K. All signs not expressly authorized under this chapter or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous sections are
prohibited in the Township. Prohibited signs shall include, but are not
limited to: Advertising devices such as large, inflated signs or tethered
balloons, searchlights and banners erected across public streets;
image-projecting signs; any sign or sign structure that constitutes a
hazard to public safety or health; signs painted on, attached to or
supported by a tree, utility pole, stone, cliff or other natural object; roof
signs; vehicular signs; and changeable copy signs except for pricing
signs for gas stations and where specifically authorized.
L. Digital message displays, and changeable copy signs with the
appearance of visual dissolve or fading, varying illumination, intensity
and contrast of light, blankouts, scrolling, streaming, zooming, flashing,
sudden bursts of light or change in intensity, otherwise prohibited in
§ 195-117D(5), (6), and (7) above, shall only be permitted as buildingmounted
signs in county parks. [Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162;
amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
M. The content of all signs shall relate to the parcel upon which the sign
has been installed. Off-site advertising is prohibited. [Added
11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
§ 195-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-117
1:645
N. Township signs are exempt from the provisions of §§ 195-109 to
195-117. [Added 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
§ 195-117 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-117
1:646
ARTICLE XV
Supplemental Regulations
§ 195-118. Applicability.
The provision of this chapter shall be subject to such exceptions, additions
or modifications as herein provided by the following supplemental
regulations.
§ 195-119. Height regulation exceptions.
§ 195-120. Yard requirements.
A. Public, semipublic or public service buildings, including hospitals,
institutional uses, churches, temples or schools, when permitted in a
zoning district, may be erected to a height not exceeding either five
stories or 60 feet. However, in the event the height regulations for a
specific zoning district permit structures to a greater height, those
regulations shall prevail. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
B. Special industrial structures such as cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, tanks and water towers which require a greater
height than provided in the district may be erected to a greater height
than permitted, provided that:
(1) The structure shall not occupy more than 25% of the lot area; and
(2) The yard requirements of the district in which the structure is
erected shall be increased by one foot for each foot of height over
the maximum height permitted.
A. All yards required to be provided under this chapter shall be open to the
sky and unobstructed by any building or structure except for accessory
buildings in the rear yard and fences.
B. The following may project into the required yards as established in this
chapter:
(1) Stoops not exceeding 32 square feet, excluding steps. [Amended
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 204]
(2) Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways
and balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projection
of chimneys and flues into the rear or side yard not exceeding 3 1/2
feet in width and placed so as not to obstruct light or ventilation.
(3) Sills, eaves, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not
exceeding two feet in width.
C. The front yard requirements heretofore established shall be adjusted as
follows: Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have
an observed (with a variation of five feet or less) front yard greater in
§ 195-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-120
1:647
§ 195-121. Reduction in lot area.
No lot area, though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record,
shall be reduced in area so that the yard lot area per family, lot width,
building area or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained.
§ 195-122. Fences or hedges. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 163]
Subject to the following conditions, fences may be erected along the
boundaries of a lot:
depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to
the street than the front yard so established by the existing buildings.
D. Irregular lots. Where any main wall of a structure located on an
irregularly shaped lot does not parallel the lot line which the wall faces,
the yard or minimum distance to the lot line at every point shall be at
least equal to the minimum dimension required for the yard or distance
to the lot line.
E. Where dwelling units are attached horizontally in a multifamily
structure, no minimum side yard shall be required for the interior units.
A. On any corner lot, no wall, fence, sign or other structure shall be
erected or altered and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be
permitted which may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring
the view.
B. No solid hedge or growth shall be planted or permitted to grow higher
than three feet in height on any property line so that the sight distance
from any adjacent drive onto a public highway or sidewalk is restricted.
C. The maximum height for a residential fence shall be eight feet.
D. The finished side of the fence shall be directed out towards the adjacent
property or street, with the locations of supporting poles or posts to the
inside of the fence.
E. The following restrictions shall apply to any fence between the front
and side building lines and any street:
(1) No solid fence or wall shall exceed three feet in height in a front
yard.
(2) No solid fence or wall shall exceed three feet in height in a side
yard on a corner lot from the building front line to the right-of-way
line.
(3) An ornamental fence may be erected to a maximum height of six
feet, provided that the ratio of solid portion of the fence to the open
portion shall not exceed the open portion of the fence.
§ 195-120 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-122.1
1:648
§ 195-122.1. Private swimming pools (temporary). [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
Temporary, aboveground private swimming pools shall comply with the
following conditions and requirements:
§ 195-123. Private swimming pools. [Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No.
135]
Private swimming pools, either in-ground or above ground, in districts
where permitted, as accessory uses, shall comply with the following
conditions and requirements:
A. The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the residence of the property on which it is located and
their invited guests.
B. It may be located only in the rear yard or side yard of the property on
which it is an accessory use.
C. It may not be located closer than 10 feet to any side yard property line
or 20 feet to any rear yard property line.
D. The swimming pool area shall be so walled or fenced or otherwise
protected as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street
or from adjacent properties. Said barrier can be temporary in nature,
but shall not be less than four feet in height and maintained in good
condition. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to assure
that unauthorized access is restricted properly.
A. The pool is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the
principal use of the property on which it is located and their invited
guests.
B. It may be located only in the rear yard or side yard of the property on
which it is an accessory use.
C. It may not be located, including any walls or paved areas or accessory
structures adjacent thereto, closer than 20 feet to any property line of
the property on which located.
D. For an in-ground pool the swimming pool area or the entire property on
which it is located shall be so walled or fenced or otherwise protected
as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from
adjacent properties. The wall or fence shall not be less than four feet in
height and maintained in good condition. When a fence is used, it shall
not have any openings greater than four inches in width, except for
necessary gates; and when said fence is formed of metal or wire, such
metal or wire shall be not less than number nine gauge.
E. For an aboveground pool, regardless of the height of the swimming pool
walls, the swimming pool area or the entire property on which it is
located shall be so walled or fenced or otherwise protected as to
§ 195-122.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-123
1:649
§ 195-123.1. Enclosures for dogs. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No.
119]
All fences designed or intended to confine an unsecured dog to the premises
of the owner shall conform to the following conditions and requirements:
§ 195-124. Recreational vehicles and recreational equipment.
Trailers, as defined within the terms of this chapter and including travel
trailers, pickup coaches, motorized homes and boat trailers, may be parked
or stored subject to the following requirements:
prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from
adjacent properties. The wall or fence shall not be less than four feet
in height and maintained in good condition. When a fence is used, it
shall not have any openings greater than four inches in width, except
for necessary gates; and when said fence is formed of metal or wire,
such metal or wire shall be not less than number nine gauge. In lieu of
the specified fencing, an aboveground pool may utilize a railing system
around the top of the swimming pool walls, or a combination rail and
deck system to prohibit unauthorized access to the swimming pool. The
railing around the top of the pool shall not be less than 18 inches in
height, or less than a total of four feet above ground grade, with a
fold-up locking or removable ladder. Railings around pool decking shall
comply with applicable building code standards.139 All stairs to pool
decks shall be protected with a gate.
F. All gates shall be of a self-closing nature.
A. No enclosure fence shall be erected closer than 10 feet to any property
line of the property on which it is erected.
B. The enclosure fence shall be so constructed that it will prevent any dog
kept upon the premises from digging under or from climbing through it
and from climbing or leaping over it.
(1) The enclosure fence shall be of a height not less than the reach of
the dog for which it was erected, when that dog is standing, fully
extended, upon his hind legs.
(2) Any gate to such enclosure fence must remain securely closed and
locked at all times.
C. No person maintaining any dog enclosure shall permit the enclosed
area to become unsightly, to become the source of offensive odors, nor
become a nuisance to the neighbors.
A. Mobile or modular homes shall be temporarily parked and stored or
permanently parked and stored in mobile or modular home parks only.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 195-123 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-124
1:650
§ 195-125. Structure on nonconforming lot of record.
Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provisions of this
chapter, the Zoning Officer may permit the erection of a structure where the
use is permitted on any lot of record separately owned or under contract of
sale and containing, at the time of the passage of this chapter, an area or
a width less than that required. Where minimum yard requirements cannot
be met, a variance as per the provisions of § 195-157 shall be secured by
the owner prior to issuance of a building permit.
§ 195-126. Clear sight triangle requirements.
In order to prevent the creation of a traffic hazard by limiting visibility
at a street intersection, no structure, building, earthen bank or vegetation
exceeding 3 1/2 feet in height above the finished paved area at the center of
the roadway shall be allowed within the clear sight triangle on corner lots.
§ 195-127. Essential service facilities.
Essential service facilities, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted
as a conditional use in all districts, subject to the recommendation of
the Planning Commission and approval of the Board of Supervisors. All
essential service facilities shall be located on a lot containing not less than
1/2 acre.
§ 195-128. General storage.
No lot or premises shall be used as a storage area for junk automobiles,
appliances or the storage or collection of any other miscellaneous items
except as herein provided. Also, no lot or premises, with the exception of
active farms, shall be used as a garbage dump or a dead animal rendering
plant nor may manure, rubbish or miscellaneous refuse be stored in the
open within any district where the same may be construed as a hazard to
the public health or safety. No other exceptions shall be made except by
official action of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 195-129. Temporary uses and temporary outdoor activities.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 168]
B. At no time shall parked or stored camping and recreational equipment
be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
A. Terms for temporary uses.
(1) The following temporary uses are permitted without permit as
temporary uses on an extended or semiannual basis, provided such
uses are on site:
(a) Seasonal sale of locally grown produce.
(b) Sidewalk sales or special sales events.
§ 195-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-129
1:651
(c) Multifamily, multiday yard or garage sales (in residentially
zoned districts) for no more than three consecutive days, or
two consecutive weekends.
(d) Grand openings for commercial uses.
(e) Sales offices in residential subdivisions either in a modular unit
or in a model home during the period of construction.
(f) Construction trailers used for material storage during the
period of on-site construction.
(g) Christmas tree sales.
(2) The following temporary uses require a permit pursuant to
Subsection B herein:
(a) Carnivals, circuses and street fairs, for a period of up to two
weeks (14 days) per month for not more than four months in
any one calendar year.
(b) Construction and material storage sites, for a period of up to
four months, which may be renewed for one additional period
of four months within a calendar year, provided compliance
with the provisions of Chapter 148 of the Township Code is
demonstrated:
B. Permit application.
(1) Application. Application for a temporary use permit shall be made
to the Zoning Officer on a form provided by the Township and shall
be accompanied by the prevailing filing fee as established by
resolution by the Township Board of Supervisors. The Zoning
Officer will make a decision and notify the applicant and land
owner in writing within 15 calendar days of the date the application
is received.
(2) Scope. In cases where the Zoning Officer considers the application
not within the scope of the temporary use criteria, the application
will be denied.
(3) Time limit. All temporary use permits shall be valid for the period
stated thereon, in accordance with this section.
(4) Voiding of permit. The Zoning Officer may void any temporary use
permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this chapter
(time limitations and Chapter 148). Revocation may take place at
any time prior to the expiration date of the permit. If the permit is
revoked or is not renewed, it becomes null and void, and said use
shall be terminated.
§ 195-129 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-129
1:652
§ 195-130. Automotive recycling and material salvage yards.
[Amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
All automotive recycling and material storage yards, where permitted, shall
comply with the industrial and development performance standards set
forth in § 195-137.13 and the following provisions:
(5) Inspection. Applicants and land owners shall permit a reasonable
inspection of the premises by the Zoning Officer to determine
compliance with this chapter.
(6) Renewal. Temporary use permits may be renewed only in
accordance with this section. Requests for renewals shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer in writing, accompanied by the
prevailing renewal fee, as established by the Township Board of
Supervisors by resolution, at least two weeks prior to expiration of
the permit.
A. The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
B. Application for site plan approval shall be made in accordance with
requirements of Brighton Township Code, Chapter 180, Subdivision and
Land Development.
C. Vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials shall be stored in piles not
exceeding eight feet in height.
D. Vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials shall not be stored on slopes
in excess of 5%, within an one-hundred-year floodplain, within a
wetland area nor within 150 feet of a stream or body of water.
E. A minimum of two points of entry/exit to the automotive recycling or
material salvage yard shall be provided to a public street. The proposed
layout of the automotive recycling or material salvage yard, including
points of access, access aisles and access drives, shall be indicated on
the site plan submitted with the application and shall comply with
Detail SD-19140 of the Township Minimum Construction Standards and
Details. Access roads shall provide the primary access to and within the
site. At a minimum, an access road shall be constructed around the
perimeter of the site and shall have a minimum separation on the
interior of the automotive recycling or material salvage yard as set forth
on automotive recycling or material salvage yard. [Amended
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
F. The manner of storage of vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials shall
be arranged in such a fashion that there shall be a minimum separation
of 25 feet between the rows of vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials
separated by an access aisle and a minimum separation of 40 feet
between rows of vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials separated by
140. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 195-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-130
1:653
an access road. No row of vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials
shall exceed a length of 250 feet or a width of 50 feet. No access
aisle or access road shall have a dead end. Each access aisle shall
be connected on each end to an access road. The access aisles and
access roads shall be laid out and maintained in such a manner that
fire and emergency equipment and vehicles will have adequate room
to turn and move about. See Detail SD-20141 of the Township Minimum
Construction Standards and Details. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 203]
G. For the purposes of this section, access aisles shall be a minimum width
of 16 feet. They shall be excavated to a depth of six inches below
finished grade and shall have a crown of no less than 1/2 inch per foot.
PA DOT Type 4 Geo-Textile shall be placed on the subgrade. A minimum
of six inches of PA DOT. No. 2A or 2A modified course aggregate shall be
placed. Care should be taken that the construction equipment creates
no ruts in the subgrade. The course aggregate shall be graded to have a
crown of no less than 1/2 inch per foot, after which the course
aggregate shall be compacted using a vibratory roller to 90% modified
proctor. See Figure SD-20142 in the Township Minimum Construction
Standards and Details. For the purposes of this section, access roads
shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and shall comply with
construction standards set forth in Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land
Development Code, § 180-95. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
H. No vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials, buildings or yard
operating equipment shall be stored or accumulated, nor any structure
located, within 75 feet of the right-of-way line.
I. No vehicles, junk, salvage or other materials, buildings or yard
operating equipment shall be located within 500 feet of a residential
dwelling, church or school on adjoining properties or adjoining
residential zoning district boundary.
J. The site shall be maintained so as not to constitute a public or private
nuisance or a menace to public health and safety. The site shall be
designed and laid out to prohibit the accumulation of stagnant water.
The site shall not cause any offensive or noxious sounds or odors, nor
cause the breeding or harboring of rats, flies, mosquitoes or other
vermin. The Board of Supervisors may impose restrictions on access to
the facility, storage of vehicles or materials on the premises, hours of
operation and other such matters as they deem necessary to insure that
there is not adverse impact upon the residential function of the district
or upon adjacent properties.
K. No garbage, organic waste, petroleum products, batteries, coolant,
hydraulic fluids or hazardous waste shall be stored, buried or disposed
141. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land
Development.
142. Editor's Note: Said detail is included as an attachment to Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 195-130 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-130
1:654
§ 195-131. Mineral extraction. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
158; 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 176; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 178;
2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
of on the site. Tires shall not be stored or stockpiled on site. Before a
vehicle is placed in the automotive recycling or material salvage yard,
the operator of the automotive recycling or material salvage yard shall
remove all gas tanks, batteries, oil, oil filters, coolant and hydraulic
fluid, refrigerants and tires. The removal, recycling and disposal of all
refrigerants shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of
the PA DEP. The operator/owner of the automotive recycling or salvage
yard shall at all times keep written records available on site for their
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer for review. Records shall
include the date the vehicle, identified by its vehicle identification
number, entered the automotive recycling or material salvage yard.
All gas tanks, batteries, oil, coolant, hydraulic fluids and tires shall be
removed from the automotive recycling or material salvage yard every
30 days.
L. No open burning or incineration or the disposal of materials or fluids on
site shall be permitted.
M. No shredding or crushing machines used in the automotive recycling or
material storage yard shall emit any dust.
N. The site shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence not less than eight
feet in height supported on steel posts with solid vinyl slats and a selflatching
gate. The fence shall be placed no closer than the required
setback line established under Subsection H above. There shall be a
minimum ten-foot separation between the fence and interior access
road(s). No storage outside of the fenced area is permitted. A buffer
yard C (major) shall be required around the perimeter of the site in
accordance with § 195-137.1 which shall be maintained in a sound and
attractive manner.
O. Parking and lighting shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 195-104 through 195-108 of the Brighton Township Zoning Code.
P. The automotive recycling or material salvage yard shall be graded so
that all stormwater runoff is collected, conveyed and stored at a
stormwater management basin in accordance with § 180-91. All
discharge from the stormwater management basin, with the exception
of the emergency spillway, shall pass through an oily water
separator(s). The operator of the automotive recycling or material
salvage yard shall install, operate and report laboratory analysis of
discharges along with all required tests and reports. The operator shall
maintain, repair and replace as needed the oily water separator(s) in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the PA DEP.
A. Purpose: to provide for the health and safety of the residents of
Brighton Township, to preserve the character of residential
§ 195-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-131
1:655
neighborhoods, and to encourage beneficial and compatible land uses
with regard to extraction of minerals, excluding oil and gas operations.
B. Permit requirement.
(1) No mineral extraction operation, or an addition to an existing
mineral extraction operation, shall be constructed or located in
Brighton Township unless a permit has been issued by the
Township to the operator providing the construction or preparation
of the site for the mineral extraction operation.
(2) The permit application, and any amended permit application, shall
be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors of Brighton Township.
(3) Any modification to an existing and permitted mineral extraction
operation that materially alters the size, location, or accessory
equipment or structures shall require a modification of the permit
under this section. Like-kind replacements shall not require a
permit modification.
C. Application requirements. Application for site plan approval shall be
made in accordance with the requirements of Brighton Township Code,
Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development. A zoning permit shall
be required to extract minerals. The operator shall submit the items
listed in Subsection B(1) through (3) above and the following to the
Zoning Officer:
(1) An operation plan, which shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Ownership and acreage of the land proposed for use.
(b) Type of resources to be extracted or quarried.
(c) Estimated depth of the proposed operation.
(d) Location map, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, which
shall show:
[1] The land area to be excavated or quarried, with
dimensions of the total property.
[2] Private access roads and abutting streets and highways.
[3] Abutting and/or adjacent districts and land uses.
[4] Existing watercourses and proposed alterations to assure
stream quality and quantity.
[5] Fencing and buffer planting.
[6] Title, scale, North arrow and date.
[7] Ownership.
§ 195-131 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-131
1:656
(2) A rehabilitation-reclamation plan, which shall set forth the
following information:
(a) An engineering drawing showing ownership, existing and
future topography, streams, existing roads, buildings,
boundaries, and metes and bounds description of the tract.
(b) A description of the location, type, extent, method and time
schedule for the operation proposed.
(c) A drawing showing the location and/or proposed relocation of
land, trees, buildings, structures, public roads, streams,
drainage facilities and utility lines on the tract or adjacent
tracts as may require protection, repairs, clearance,
demolition, or restoration, either during or following
completion of the operations proposed.
(d) A statement describing methods for handling operations, plus
any drainage, air pollution, soil erosion or other environmental
problems created during the operations, including production,
transportation, processing, stockpiling, storage and disposal of
by-products and waste.
(e) A plan for reuse of the land after completion of the operations,
which shall permit the carrying out of the purpose of this
chapter and appropriately provide for any rehabilitation,
restoration, reclamation, reforestation or other correction
work deemed necessary.
D. Emergency, preparedness, prevention and contingency plan. Prior to
any mineral extraction, the operator shall provide to the Township's
first responders, including the Police Department, Fire Department,
and Zoning Officer, a copy of its emergency, preparedness, prevention
and contingency plan. The operator shall make available, at its sole cost
and expense, an appropriate site orientation for first responders. Such
site orientation shall be made available at least annually during the
period when the operator anticipates extraction and related activities in
the Township. The emergency, preparedness, prevention and
contingency plan shall be updated at least annually, or upon changes
occurring, and shall include provisions regarding the following:
(1) Spill containment.
(2) Vandalism.
(3) Potential contamination between the excavation site and the public
water supply.
(4) Emergency contact telephone numbers.
(5) Fire response plan.
§ 195-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-131
1:657
(6) Plan for the location and rescue of trapped employees in the event
of a mining disaster.
E. Site preparation, site planning, traffic control and hours of operation.
(1) The operator shall strive to consider location of its temporary and
permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to
minimize interference with Township residents' enjoyment of their
property and future Township development activities, to preserve
the character of residential neighborhoods, and to encourage
beneficial and compatible land uses.
(2) The operator shall not clear or dispose of brush or trees by way of
burning and shall dispose of all brush and trees by chipping and
grinding from properties it clears for development purposes.
(3) Prior to securing a permit pursuant to Subsection B above, the
operator shall obtain a grading permit and comply with the
provisions of the Grading and Excavating Code, Chapter 104.
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
(4) The operator shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the
safety of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or
adjacent to roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or
school transportation). Where there is anticipated heaving or
frequent vehicle traffic associated with development, the operator
will provide flagmen to ensure the safety of children and other
persons at or near schools, school bus stops, public buildings, and
parks, and include adequate signs and/or other warning measures
for truck traffic and vehicular traffic.
F. Fencing and landscaping.
(1) During site construction for a mineral extraction operation, the
installation of temporary safety fencing at least six feet in height is
required around any open excavation site, including mineral
quarries and strip mines.
(2) Once initial site construction is complete, mineral quarries, storage
basins, and appurtenances (including all materials, tanks,
equipment and apparatus), whether producing or abandoned, and
all entrances to mines shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high
chain-link fence with locked gate, which shall be screened from
view by a buffer yard Type C.
(3) The operator shall keep the fence and gate in good repair at all
times, and all landscaping shall be maintained and in good
condition.
(4) All outdoor supplies, equipment, materials and apparatus shall be
concealed at all times.
§ 195-131 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-131
1:658
G. Access drives. An access drive shall be provided along and from the
street to the extraction area in compliance with the following:
(1) The access drive shall be installed prior to the arrival of any
equipment to the site and shall be maintained in good condition.
(2) The access drive shall be of such design and material so as to keep
vehicular traffic exiting the site from carrying mud or dirt onto a
public road. No operator shall allow mud or dirt to be carried onto
the public road from the site.
(3) The operator shall cause the access drive to a site to be reasonably
clear of snow, ice, mud, garbage, trash, abandoned vehicles and
debris as long as the site is active, or in a state of development or
production, to enable emergency access.
(4) An off-street area for construction, maintenance, and site vehicles
to stand while gaining entrance to the access road shall be
provided that does not disrupt the normal flow of traffic on the
public street.
(5) Driveways and access roads connecting directly to state roads shall
require Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
highway occupancy permit approval. Prior to initiating any work at
a drill site, the operator shall provide the Township a copy of its
highway occupancy permit.
H. Setback requirements for mineral extraction.
(1) The open excavation or quarrying of minerals, and stockpiles,
waste piles, and processing and manufacturing equipment, shall be
located a minimum of 500 feet from a residential boundary line or
any existing building or structure.
(2) The open excavation or quarrying of minerals, and stockpiles,
waste piles, and processing and manufacturing equipment, shall be
located a minimum of 500 feet from the right-of-way line of a public
street.
I. Restoration/abandonment/rehabilitation-reclamation. The excavation
site and surrounding area shall be rehabilitated as follows:
(1) Time period. Within three years after the termination of operations,
the area must be rehabilitated to conform with the rehabilitation
plan as approved.
(2) Standard. In the rehabilitation of the area, the following standards
must be met:
(a) The entire area disturbed by excavating, quarrying, mining and
other natural production use shall be planted in such a manner
as to control soil erosion.
§ 195-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-131
1:659
§ 195-132. Sanitary landfill. [Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
Sanitary landfills shall be regulated by the applicable laws of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and shall comply
with the industrial and development performance standards set forth in
§ 195-137.13.
§ 195-133. Logging.
(b) The entire area shall be graded wherever necessary to provide
for the conveyance of stormwater. Finished grade shall not
have a slope of less than 2% so as to provide for natural
drainage.
(c) Overburden shall be replaced, and stockpiles, refuse, plant
facilities or equipment shall be removed immediately upon the
termination of operation. In no case shall removal exceed one
year.
J. Protection of water resources regarding mineral extraction.
(1) In no case shall any mineral extraction impede the flow of natural
watercourses.
(2) All uses of land or processes which pollute natural watercourses
shall be prohibited.
(3) All uses of land shall be conducted in a manner which will not allow
water to collect and permit stagnant water to remain in quarries or
excavations.
K. Operators shall comply with requirements for lighting, noise, dust
control, overweight vehicles, on-site bunkhousing, signs, and site
development hours of operation as set forth in the industrial and
development performance standards in § 195-137.13.
A. Every landowner on whose land timber harvesting is to occur shall
prepare a written logging plan in the form specified in this section. No
timber harvesting shall occur until the plan has been approved. The
provisions of the plan shall be followed throughout the operation. The
plan shall be available at the harvest site at all times during the
operation and shall be provided to the Township Zoning Officer for
approval. The Zoning Officer shall refer the logging plan to the Beaver
County Conservation District for review.
B. For all timber harvesting operations, the landowner shall notify the
Township Zoning Officer at least five business days before the operation
commences and within two business days before the operation is
complete. No timber harvesting shall occur until the notice has been
provided. Notification shall be in writing and shall specify the land on
which the harvesting will occur, the expected size of the harvest areas
§ 195-131 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-133
1:660
and, as applicable, starting or completion date of the operation.
[Amended 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
C. The landowner and the operator shall be jointly and severally
responsible for complying with the terms of the logging plan.
(1) Minimum requirements. As a minimum, the logging plan shall
include the following:
(a) Design, construction and maintenance of the access system,
including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and landings;
(b) Design, construction and maintenance of water control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips,
filter strips and water bars;
(c) Design, construction and maintenance of stream and wetland
crossings; and
(d) The general location of the proposed operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including any accesses to those
highways.
(2) Map. Each logging plan shall include a site map containing the
following information:
(a) Site location and boundaries, including both the boundaries of
the property on which the timber harvest will take place and
the boundaries of the proposed harvest area within that
property;
(b) Significant topographic features related to potential
environmental problems;
(c) Location of all earth disturbance activities such as roads,
landings and water control measures and structures;
(d) Location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth; and
(e) The general location of the proposed operation to municipal
and state highways, including any accesses to those highways.
(3) Compliance with state law. The logging plan shall address and
comply with the requirements of all applicable state laws and
regulations, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in 25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, promulgated pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.);
(b) Stream crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105, promulgated
pursuant to the Dam Safety Encroachments Act (32 P.S. § 680.1
et. seq.); and
§ 195-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-133
1:661
(c) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act (32 P.S. § 680.1
et seq.).
(4) Relationship of state laws, regulations and permits to the logging
plan. Any permits required by state laws and regulations shall be
attached to and become part of the logging plan. An erosion and
sedimentation pollution control plan that satisfies the requirements
of 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, shall also satisfy the
minimum requirements for the logging plan and associated map
specified in Subsection C(3)(a) and (b) of this section, provided that
all information required by these paragraphs is included or
attached.
D. The following requirements shall apply to all timber harvesting
operations in the Township:
(1) Dragging felled trees on or across any public thoroughfare is
prohibited without the express written consent of the Township or
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is
responsible for maintenance of the roadway.
(2) No tops or debris shall be left within 25 feet of any public
thoroughfare or private roadway providing access to adjoining
residential property.
(3) No tops or debris shall be left on or across the boundary of any
property adjoining the operation without the consent of the owner
thereof.
(4) Litter resulting from a timber harvesting operation shall be
removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.
E. The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing the
damage to Township roadways caused by traffic associated with the
timber harvesting operation to the extent the damage is in excess of
that caused by normal traffic. Pursuant to 67 Pennsylvania Code,
Chapter 189, the Township may require the landowner or operator to
furnish a bond to guarantee the repair of such damages.
F. The Township Zoning Officer may go upon the site of any timber
harvesting operation before, during or after active logging to:
(1) Review the logging plan or any other required documents for
compliance with the provisions of this section; and
(2) Inspect the operation for compliance with the logging plan and
other on-site requirements of these regulations.
G. Upon finding that a timber harvesting operation is in violation of any
provisions of this section, the Township Zoning Officer shall issue the
operator and the landowner a written notice of violation describing
§ 195-133 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-133
1:662
§ 195-134. Mobile homes.
Mobile homes on individual lots subject to the following standards:
§ 195-135. Wireless communications facilities. [Amended 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 107; 10-9-2000 by Ord. No. 115; 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
170; 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 198]
each violation and specifying a date by which corrective action must be
taken, in accordance with the procedures outlined in Article XXI.
H. A permit fee, based on the acreage to be logged shall be established by
a resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall accompany all
applications for a timber harvesting permit. In addition, a 5%
administrative fee shall be required.
A. The lot on which the mobile home is installed shall conform with the
minimum lot size and width requirement of the district.
B. The mobile home shall be installed so as to conform with all front yard,
side yard and rear yard setback lines applicable to single-family
housing in the zoning district.
C. The mobile home shall be installed upon and securely fastened or
anchored to a permanent frost-free concrete foundation with steel
cables connected from the frame of the mobile home to concrete footers
which are poured in place.
D. An enclosure of compatible design and materials shall be erected
around the entire base of the mobile home. Such enclosure shall
provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the
structure, and the device to be used to provide such ventilation, if
screening, shall be not less than 16 mesh per inch.
E. The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a sketch
indicating the materials, location, size, dimension, number and design
features of the anchorage and enclosure proposed to be constructed.
F. The mobile home shall be connected to a potable water supply, a public
sewage system or an on-lot sewage disposal system meeting the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act 537, and any
amendments thereto.143
G. Any garage, utility shed or other accessory structure constructed on the
tract shall conform with the standards applicable to such structures as
contained in this chapter.
A. Purposes.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
143. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 195-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:663
communications facilities in Brighton Township. While the
Township recognizes the importance of wireless communications
facilities in providing high-quality communications service to its
residents and businesses, the Township also recognizes that it has
an obligation to protect public safety and to minimize the adverse
visual effects of such facilities through the standards set forth in
the following provisions.
(2) By enacting this section, the Township intends to:
(a) Promote the health, safety, and welfare of Township residents
and businesses with respect to wireless communications
facilities;
(b) Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Township residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(c) Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
Township, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
(d) Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable wifi,
and other wireless communications facilities;
(e) Encourage the co-location of wireless communications
facilities on existing structures rather than the construction of
new tower-based structures;
(f) Protect Township residents from potential adverse impacts of
wireless communications facilities and preserve, to the extent
permitted under law, the visual character of established
communities and the natural beauty of the landscape; and
(g) Update the Township's wireless facilities regulations to
incorporate changes in federal and state laws and regulations.
B. All wireless communications facilities shall be subject to the following:
(1) Standard of care. All WCFs shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safetyrelated
codes, including, but not limited to, the most-recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code.
Tower-based WCFs are also subject to the accepted and
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:664
Association of Tower Erectors. WCFs shall at all times be kept
and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
(2) Engineer certification. Prior to the Township's issuance of a permit
authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based WCF, the
applicant shall employ a structural engineer registered in
Pennsylvania to issue to the Township a written certification of the
proposed WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by
either the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association. Such engineer shall
certify the proper construction of the foundation and the erection
of the structure. This certification shall be provided during the
conditional use hearing or, at a minimum, be made as a condition
attached to any approval given such that the certification shall be
provided prior to issuance of any building permits. All plans and
drawings for a tower-based WCF shall contain a seal and signature
of a professional structural engineer, licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any applicant proposing nontower
WCFs to be mounted on an existing building or structure
shall submit evidence from a professional structural engineer,
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, certifying that the
proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the
building or structure and submit detailed construction and
elevation drawings indicating how the non-tower WCFs will be
mounted.
(3) Prohibited on certain structures. Non-tower WCFs shall not be
located on single-family detached dwellings, single-family
semidetached dwellings (duplex, triplex, quadraplex), townhouses,
or any accessory residential structure. No WCF may be located
upon any property or on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places, or
is listed on the Official Historic Structures and/or Historic Districts
List maintained by the Township, or has been designated by the
Township Historical Society to be of historical significance.
(4) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour,
and all WCF structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind according to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended).
(5) Aviation safety and lighting. WCFs shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety. No wireless
communications facility may be artificially lighted except as
provided for and required by the FAA.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:665
(6) Public safety communications. WCFs shall not interfere with public
safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
(7) Radio frequency emissions. No WCF may, by itself or in conjunction
with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions in excess of
the standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited
to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(8) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to
contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage
permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the FCC or any
other federal or state agency.
(9) Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of
the terms and conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF
applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Township
for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
(10) Non-tower WCFs — removal due to discontinuance of use. In the
event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued, the owner shall
provide written notice to the Township of its intent to discontinue
use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or
abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory facilities shall be
removed within two months of the cessation of operations at
the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Township.
(b) If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and/or
associated facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(11) Tower-based WCFs — removal of discontinued facilities. In the
event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to be discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Township of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Conditional use authorization automatically lapses after 12
continuous months of disuse or abandonment. Unused or
abandoned WCFs or portions of WCFs shall be removed as follows:
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:666
(a) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by
the Township.
(b) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Township, the WCF and
accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by the
Township and the cost of removal assessed against the owner
of the WCF.
(c) Any unused portions of tower-based WCFs, including antennas,
shall be removed within six months of the time of cessation of
operations. The Township must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
(12) Inspection. The applicant and owner of a wireless communications
facility shall provide an annual inspection report regarding the
structural integrity of the WCF to Brighton Township. The
Township reserves the right to inspect any tower-based WCF to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this section and any other
provisions found within the Township Code or state or federal law.
The Township and/or its agents shall have the authority to enter the
property upon which a WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(13) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Township financial security sufficient
to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
(14) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Township with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns
or operates a tower-based WCF or non-tower-based WCF 40 feet or
less in height shall provide the Township with a certificate of
insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering each tower-based WCF.
(15) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a WCF shall, at
his/her/its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials,
employees and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:667
personal injury, including death, and property damage arising in
whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or
omission of the person, its officers, agents, employees or
contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the WCF. Each
person that owns or operates a WCF shall defend any actions
or proceedings against the Township in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was caused by
the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of
WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees,
reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
C. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside and outside the
public rights-of-way that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. The following regulations apply to nontower
wireless communications facilities located inside and outside the
public rights-of-way (ROW) to which the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act does apply:
(1) Compliance with general provisions in § 195-135B above.
(2) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the Township Zoning
Office, the Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
Township shall make its final decision on whether to approve the
application and shall advise the applicant, in writing, of such
decision. If additional information was requested by the Township
Zoning Officer to complete an application, the time required by the
applicant to provide the information shall not be counted toward
the Township's ninety-day review period.
(3) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees as set forth in a Township Fee Resolution that are
directly related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and
processing the application for approval of a non-tower WCF or
$1,000, whichever is less.
D. Non-tower wireless communications facilities inside and outside the
public rights-of-way that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act. The following regulations apply to nontower
wireless communications facilities located inside and outside the
public rights-of-way (ROW) to which the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act does not apply. Applicants proposing the
construction of a new non-tower wireless communications facility shall
file evidence in support of the following requirements:
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:668
(1) Compliance with general provisions in § 195-135B above.
(2) Location. The proposed non-tower WCF shall be located as follows:
(a) Non-tower WCFs in the ROW. Non-tower WCFs in the ROW
shall be located on existing wireless support structures or
tower-based WCFs. If such location is not technologically
feasible, the applicant shall locate its non-tower WCFs on
existing utility poles.
(b) Location of non-tower WCFs outside the ROW. Proposed nontower
WCFs outside the ROW shall be located on existing
wireless support structures, water tanks, municipal towers,
buildings, or utility poles.
(3) Design requirements and standards. Non-tower WCFs shall be
subject to the following design requirements and standards:
(a) Size. WCF installations located above the surface grade in the
public ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights
and joint utility poles, may be permitted to have equipment
components that are no more than six feet in height and that
are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures upon
which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest
and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
(b) Stealth design requirement. Non-tower WCFs and all support
equipment shall be treated to match the supporting structure.
Non-tower WCFs and accompanying equipment shall be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the
support structure upon which they are mounted. The stealth
design chosen by the applicant must be approved by the
Township.
(c) Related equipment. Ground-mounted or roof-mounted related
equipment greater than three cubic feet shall not be located
within 50 feet of a residential use or a lot zoned residential.
(d) Security fence. A security fence with a minimum height of
eight feet shall surround any separate communications
equipment building. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulation on the site for the principal use.
(4) Related equipment location for non-tower WCFs. Non-tower WCFs
and accessory equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists,
or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW, as
determined by the Township. In addition:
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:669
(a) When the non-tower WCF is located in the ROW, in no case
shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping be
located within 18 inches of the face of the curb or within an
easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the
use of landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Township Planning Commission.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the facility or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer
prior to the issuance of any permit.
(5) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the facility in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents.
(c) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the
best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(6) Permit fees for non-tower facilities in the ROW. The Township may
assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees as set forth in a
Township Fee Resolution that are directly related to the Township's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a non-tower WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs.
(7) Relocation or removal of facilities in the ROW as required by the
Township. Within 60 days following written notice from the
Township, or such longer period as the Township determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of a
communications emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall,
at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any WCF when the Township,
consistent with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:670
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) A communications emergency as determined by the Township.
(8) Time, place and manner for non-tower WCFs in the ROW. The
Township shall determine the time, place and manner of
construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all non-tower
WCFs in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management,
physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(9) Timing of approval. Within 60 days of the date that a conditional
use application is filed for use within the ROW, the Board of
Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing, and it shall render its
decision within 45 days of the conclusion of the hearing as provided
in §§ 195-163 and 195-164.
E. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located inside the
public rights-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to towerbased
wireless communications facilities located in the public rights-ofway.
Applicants proposing the construction of new tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way shall file
evidence in support of the following requirements:
(1) Compliance with general provisions in § 195-135B above.
(2) Demonstration of need. The WCF application shall demonstrate the
following:
(a) The WCF applicant shall prove to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Board that the WCF applicant cannot adequately extend or
infill its communications system by the use of equipment such
as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their
appurtenances, and other available tall structures. The WCF
applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed towerbased
WCF must be located where it is proposed in order to
serve the WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:671
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a propagation study
evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other
communication facilities and equipment, a description of the
number of installations that are needed to fill the coverage or
capacity gap, a description of the type and manufacturer of the
proposed equipment, and any relevant related tests conducted
by the WCF applicant in determining the need for the proposed
site and installation.
(3) Development and location regulations.
(a) Height. Tower-based WCFs in the public ROW shall not exceed
40 feet in height.
(b) Placement. Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall not be located
in the front facade area of any structure and shall not be
located within five feet from the road surface.
(c) Location. Tower-based WCFs in the ROW shall be permitted
along the following roads:
[1] I-376.
[2] Brighton Road, also known as State Route 4035.
[3] Tuscarawas Road, also known as State Route 4028.
[4] Dutch Ridge Road, also known as State Routes 4018, 4020,
and 4028.
(4) Design regulations. The following design regulations shall apply to
tower-based WCFs in the ROW:
(a) The WCF shall employ the most-current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
(b) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Township and shall not increase the
overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 40 feet.
(c) Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future
users.
(5) Equipment location. Tower-based WCFs and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise
create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists, or to
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:672
otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW, as determined by
the Township. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within five feet of the face of the curb
or within an easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(b) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be undergrounded
shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the
use of landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Township Planning Commission.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
Township.
(d) Any graffiti on the facility or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 10
business days of notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCFs
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer
prior to the issuance of any permit.
(6) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building or
sited on municipal land owned by Brighton Township. The Board of
Supervisors may deny an application to construct a new towerbased
WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a good-faith effort to
mount its antenna(s) on an existing structure. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a one-fourth-mile radius of the site
proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers, and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
(a) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:673
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(7) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF which substantially
changes the height of such WCF shall first obtain a building permit
from the Township. Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited
without a permit.
(8) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists and that the type of WCF being proposed is the leastintrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. Such
gap in coverage must be evidenced by actual customer complaints
and other empirical data, in accordance with federal case law. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in the Township's decision on an application for approval of a
tower-based WCF.
(9) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCFs where technically and
economically feasible. To the extent permissible under state and
federal law, the owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any
additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of
the Township.
(10) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of such tower-based WCF, and the Township shall advise the WCF
applicant, in writing, of its decision. If additional information was
requested by the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(11) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of a communications emergency, an owner of a tower-based
WCF in the ROW shall, at his/her/its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
WCF when the Township, consistent with its police powers and
applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:674
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) A communications emergency as determined by the Township.
(12) Permit and use fees for tower-based WCFs in the ROW. The
Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees as set
forth in a Township Fee Resolution that are directly related to the
Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application
for approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and related costs. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Township's actual ROW management costs, including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Township. The owner of each towerbased
WCF shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate
the Township for the Township's costs incurred in connection with
the activities described above. The annual ROW management fee
for tower-based WCFs shall be determined by the Township and
authorized by resolution of the Township Board and shall be based
on the Township's actual ROW management costs as applied to
such tower-based WCF.
(13) Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCFs in the ROW based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Township and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(14) The applicant shall provide a copy of its PennDOT highway
occupancy permit to the Township.
F. Tower-based wireless communications facilities located outside the
public rights-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to towerbased
wireless communications facilities located outside the rights-ofway.
Applicants proposing the construction of new tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the public rights-of-way shall
file evidence in support of the following requirements:
(1) Compliance with general provisions in § 195-135B above.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:675
(2) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCFs are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and at a
height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF applicant's
wireless communications system. No WCF applicant shall have the
right under these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum
height specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for
such height. The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower/pole for the tower-based WCF is the minimum
height necessary for the service area.
(a) The WCF applicant shall prove to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Board that the WCF applicant cannot adequately extend or
infill its communications system by the use of equipment such
as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s) and other similar equipment
installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their
appurtenances, and other available tall structures. The WCF
applicant shall further demonstrate that the proposed towerbased
WCF must be located where it is proposed in order to
serve the WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by a propagation study
evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other
communications facilities and equipment, a description of the
type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/radio
equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to
the WCF applicant, the power in watts at which the WCF
applicant transmits, and any relevant related tests conducted
by the WCF applicant in determining the need for the proposed
site and installation.
(c) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation that the owner of the property has granted an
easement for the proposed WCF and that vehicular access will
be provided to the facility.
(3) Development regulations. The following development regulations
shall apply to tower-based WCFs outside the public ROW:
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
(a) Location. Tower-based WCFs shall not be located in an area in
which all utilities are underground, except as permitted by this
section. Tower-based WCFs shall not be located within 75 feet
of an area in which all utilities are underground.
(b) Sole use/combined use on a lot. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted as a sole use on a lot, provided that the lot meets the
minimum lots requirements in the underlying zoning district. A
tower-based WCF may be permitted on a property with an
existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with another
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:676
use. The existing use of the lot may be any permitted use in the
applicable district.
(c) Lot area and setbacks.
[1] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall comply with
the requirements for the applicable district and shall be
the area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF
and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
in height.
[2] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
and street right-of-way line shall be equal to 110% of the
total height of the tower-based WCF or the minimum
setback of the underlying zoning district, whichever is
greater. Where the site on which a tower-based WCF is
proposed to be located is contiguous to an educational use,
child day-care facility, or agriculture or residential use, the
minimum distance between the base of a tower-based
WCF and any such adjoining uses shall equal 250 feet,
regardless of the height of the tower-based WCF. Minimum
setbacks are required unless it is demonstrated to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that in the event of
failure, the WCF is designed to collapse upon itself within
a setback area less than the required minimum setback
without endangering such adjoining uses and their
occupants.
(4) Design regulations. The following design regulations shall apply to
tower-based WCFs outside the ROW:
(a) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based
WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height and shall not exceed 200 feet
vertically from the base of the WCF to the top of the original
wireless support structure.
(c) Stealth technology. The WCF shall employ the most-current
stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately blend
into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. Application of the stealth technology chosen by the
WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:677
(d) Height extension. To the extent permissible by law, any height
extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require prior
approval of the Township.
(e) Future users. Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be
designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
(f) Anticlimbing device. Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in
height shall be equipped with an anticlimbing device, as
approved by the manufacturer.
(5) Surrounding environs.
(a) The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(b) The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Township
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(6) Fence/screen.
(a) A security fence with a minimum height of eight feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF greater than 40
feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing
WCF equipment.
(b) Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed tower-based WCF as possible. The Board of
Supervisors may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping if, in the discretion of the
Board, they achieve the same degree of screening. Existing
vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(c) An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The
screen can either be a hedge (planted three feet from center
maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on
center maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum
height of six feet at planting and shall be grown to a minimum
of 15 feet at maturity.
(7) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based WCFs
shall employ stealth technology, which may include the tower
portion being painted silver or another color approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based
WCFs and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:678
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and
shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible. The Board of Supervisors shall consider whether its
decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious
and orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing
in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a
negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community;
preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest
possible extent; and encourage sound engineering and land
development design and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
(8) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCFs, the WCF applicant shall provide the Township with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on the tower-based WCF where technically and
economically feasible. To the extent permissible under state and
federal law, the owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any
additional antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of
the Township.
(9) Related equipment.
(a) Location. Either one single-story wireless communications
equipment building not exceeding 500 square feet in area or
up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding
10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and
transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna space on the tower-based wireless communications
facility.
(b) Equipment screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall
be screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Township Design Review Board. Any graffiti
on the facility or on any accessory equipment shall be removed
at the sole expense of the owner within 10 business days of
notice of the existence of the graffiti.
(c) Utility buildings. All utility buildings and accessory structures
shall be architecturally designed to blend into the environment
in which they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements for principal structures of the underlying zoning
district. The architectural design chosen by the WCF applicant
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Design Review
Board.
(10) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-135
1:679
the tower-based WCF. The access road shall be a dust-free, allweather
surface for its entire length. Maximum use of existing
roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and minimize soil erosion.
Where applicable, the WCF owner shall present documentation to
the Township that the property owner has granted an easement for
the proposed facility.
(11) Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(12) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building or
sited on municipal land owned by Brighton Township. The Board of
Supervisors may deny an application to construct a new towerbased
WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a good-faith effort to
mount its antennas on an existing structure. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a two-mile radius of the site proposed,
sought permission to install an antenna on those structures,
buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the following
reasons:
(a) The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(13) Noise. Tower-based WCFs shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Township Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only. See
§ 195-137.13.
(14) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
§ 195-135 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-135
1:680
§ 195-136. Sexually oriented business operations. [Added 1-12-1998
by Ord. No. 103]
modification of an existing tower-based WCF which substantially
changes the height of such WCF shall first obtain a permit from the
Township. Nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without a
permit.
(15) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists and that the type of WCF being proposed is the leastintrusive
means by which to fill that gap in wireless coverage. Such
gap in coverage must be evidenced by actual customer complaints
and/or other empirical data, in accordance with federal law. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage shall be a
factor in the Township's decision on an application for approval of a
tower-based WCF.
(16) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
(a) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(b) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
Township's residents and utilize the best available technology
for preventing failures and accidents.
(17)FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC
license, including the name, address, and emergency telephone
number for the operator of the facility.
(18) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the Township, the
Township shall notify the WCF applicant, in writing, of any
information that may be required to complete such application. All
applications for tower-based WCFs shall be acted upon within 150
days of the receipt of a fully completed application for the approval
of such tower-based WCF, and the Township shall advise the WCF
applicant, in writing, of its decision. If additional information was
requested by the Township to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review period.
(19) Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees as set forth in a Township Fee Resolution directly
related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and processing
the application for approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as
related inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
§ 195-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-136
1:681
A. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented business within the Township. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purposes nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades.
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
(3) Adult cabarets.
(4) Adult motels.
(5) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(6) Adult theater.
(7) Escort agencies.
(8) Nude model studios.
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
C. Permit required.
(1) Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a
valid permit issued by the Township is guilty of a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
(2) An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
must be made on a form provided by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer of the Township. The application must be accompanied by a
sketch or diagram showing the floor plan and plot plan
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to
any accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(3) The applicant must comply with the provisions of this chapter and
the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the law by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
§ 195-136 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-136
1:682
(4) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has 10% or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business,
each individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or
greater in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.
(5) The fact that a person possesses other types of Township permits
does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
D. Issuance of permit. [Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 169]
(1) Conditional use approval shall be obtained prior to the issuance of
any permit.
(2) Once conditional use approval is obtained, the Township Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit, provided the terms of the
conditional use decision and the provisions of § 195-136 are met,
unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
(a) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(b) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment
to the Township of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually
oriented business.
(c) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(d) An applicant is residing with a person who had been denied a
permit by the Township to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person
whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(e) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business
have been reviewed and have been disapproved by either the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Police Chief as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(f) The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(g) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-136
1:683
(h) An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or
indirect interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant or
any of the officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the
manager or other person in charge of the operation of the
applicant's business, has or have been convicted of an offense
involving sexual misconduct within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including but not limited to prostitution,
obscenity and possession of child pornography, or convicted of
any offense in any jurisdiction other than the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that would have constituted an offense involving
sexual misconduct if committed within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied pursuant to
this subsection, the person or persons' convictions or release
in connection with the sexual misconduct offense must have
occurred within two years of the date of application in the
event of a misdemeanor and within five years of the date of
application in the event of a felony.
(3) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the
address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(4) The Zoning Enforcement Officer and Police Chief shall complete
their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in
compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. The certification shall be promptly
presented to the applicant.
E. Fees. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit will be
established by resolution by the Supervisors of Brighton Township.
F. Inspection. A permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Chief, Zoning Enforcement Officer or other Township
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any
time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for
business.
G. Expiration of permit.
(1) Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in
Subsection C. Application for renewal should be made at least 30
days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days
before the expiration date, the pendency of the application will not
prevent the expiration of the permit.
§ 195-136 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-136
1:684
(2) If the Township Zoning Enforcement Officer denies renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued a permit for one year from
the date of denial, except that after 90 days have elapsed since the
date of denial, the applicant may be granted a permit if the Zoning
Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
permit has been corrected or abated.
H. Suspension of permit. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a
permittee or employee of a permittee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the premises as authorized by this
chapter;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the premises; or
(5) Failed to staff managers' stations and/or maintain viewing rooms as
set forth in Subsection L.
I. Revocation of permit.
(1) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall revoke a permit if a cause of
suspension set forth in Subsection H occurs and the permit has
been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(2) The Zoning Enforcement officer shall revoke a permit if he
determines that:
(a) A permittee or any of the persons specified in Subsection
D(1)(h) is or has been convicted of the offenses specified in
Subsection D(1)(h);
(b) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the Township during the application
process;
(c) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the
premises;
(d) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed prostitution on the premises;
(e) A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated
the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
§ 195-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-136
1:685
(f) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly
allowed any specific sexual activities to occur in or on the
permitted premises; or
(g) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Township or state
of any taxes or fees related to his businesses.
(3) When the Zoning Enforcement Officer revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not
be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the
date the revocation became effective, except that if the revocation
is pursuant to Subsection I(2)(a) above, the revocation shall be
effective for two years in the event of a misdemeanor or five years
in the case of a felony.
J. Transfer of permit. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another
person. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
K. Location and operation of sexually oriented business.
(1) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the
district in which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. No
sexually oriented business shall be located outside a district in
which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. Sexually
oriented businesses, as defined herein, shall be permitted in the
C-2 Zoning District of Brighton Township as a conditional use.
(2) No person may operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business within 1,000 feet of:
(a) A church.
(b) A public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school.
(c) A public library.
(d) A child-care facility or nursery school.
(e) A public park.
(f) A nursing home.
(g) A sanitarium.
(h) A retirement or convalescent home.
(i) A group home.
(j) A personal care home.
§ 195-136 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-136
1:686
(k) An establishment which is licensed to and does sell alcoholic
beverages.
(l) Other sexually oriented businesses.
(m) A residential boundary (R-1 Zoning District).
(n) Property boundary of residential dwelling.
(3) A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if he causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof.
(4) For the purpose of the ordinance, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to
the nearest property line of the premises listed in Subsection
K(2)(a) to (n) above.
(5) For purposes of Subsection K(2)(l) of this section, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the closed exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
(6) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use
is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, to
those premises listed in Subsection K(2)(a) to (n) above within
1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies
only to the renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an
application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or
has been revoked.
(7) All activities pertaining to sexually oriented businesses shall be
conducted entirely within the confines of the building. No theater
which shows adult-related films shall project the film outside the
confines of a building. No music or sound emitting from the
business shall be audible to normal human hearing at any time at
any exterior property line of the business.
(8) The following hours of operation shall be adhered to by all sexually
oriented businesses:
(a) No sexually oriented business shall be open from 2:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m. daily.
(b) No sexually oriented business shall be open on Sunday and
holidays except that a sexually oriented business open on
Saturday may remain open until 2:00 a.m. on Sunday morning.
§ 195-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-136
1:687
(9) The maximum gross floor area of any building which is utilized for
an adult-related business shall be 5,000 square feet.
(10)No exterior sign which advertises any adult-related business shall
include any lewd or obscene work or any figure, picture or painting
which utilizes sexually explicit graphics. Other regulations
pertaining to commercial signs in this chapter shall also be adhered
to.
(11) To ensure that the regulations of this section are adhered to by the
applicant, the following information shall be provided with the
application for a conditional use:
(a) A site survey of the property and building proposed for the
sexually oriented business and a survey illustrating the
distance to the location, size and type of all buildings and uses
within 2,500 feet of the building proposed for the business.
Also, the zoning district classification within 2,500 feet of the
property and building proposed for the business shall be
illustrated on the site survey. The survey shall be prepared and
sealed by a surveyor licensed by the State of Pennsylvania and
shall be at a scale no less than one inch to 100 feet. The survey
shall indicate the scale, date drawn, North point, tax parcel
number of all parcels illustrated, the names of any roads or
highways illustrated and shall be on paper measuring no less
than 24 inches by 36 inches. Fifteen copies of the survey shall
be submitted with the application.
(b) The above-referenced site survey shall indicate the proposed
parking layout, landscaping, lighting, sign location, building
location and any other exterior improvements.
(12) In addition to a conditional use permit, a site plan shall be required
for the development of the site. Requirements for the site plan are
in Chapter 180, Subdivision and Land Development, and this
chapter.
(13) Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.
L. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or
live performances.
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which maintains on the
premises one or more viewing rooms for live performances, film or
videocassette or other video or other image production or
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented
business shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan
§ 195-136 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-136
1:688
diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying
the location of one or more managers' stations, the location
of all viewing rooms, partitions and doors and the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion
of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
managers' station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit
will be conspicuously posted if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architects
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions
of all interior areas of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may waive
the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
(b) The application should be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(c) No alteration in the configuration or location of a managers'
station may be made without the prior approval of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or his designee.
(d) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in
each managers' station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
(e) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a managers'
station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest
rooms may not contain video reproduction or viewing
equipment. If the premises has two or more managers' stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
from at least one of the managers' stations of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose. The view required in this subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the managers' station.
(f) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the
premises to ensure that the view area specified in Subsection
L(1)(e) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all
times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any
§ 195-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-136
1:689
area of the premises which has been designated as an area
in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection L(1)(a) of this section.
(g) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at
any time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing
room shall be permitted.
(h) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(i) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present in the
premises to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
(2) A person having a duty under Subsection L(1)(a) through (i) is
guilty of a violation of this chapter if he knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.
M. Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection C and
Subsection K that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
N. Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit or in violation of this chapter is
subject to an action in equity or suit for injunction as well as citations
for violations of this chapter.
§ 195-136 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137
1:690
§ 195-137. Campgrounds. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 107]
Any party proposing a campground shall present a site plan demonstrating
minimum compliance with the following requirements:
A. Permit required.
(1) Any person who operates a campground without a valid permit
issued by the Township is guilty of a violation of this chapter of the
Township.
(2) An application for a permit to operate a campground must be made
on a form provided by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the
Township. The operator/applicant must agree in his or her
application that a responsible attendant shall be in charge of the
management of the campground at all times. The application must
set forth the names of the management attendants to be in active
charge of the proposed campground and their hours of duties shall
be set forth. A site plan showing trees, roads, campsites, location of
one-hundred-year floodplain, if applicable, and facilities must be
submitted with the application. The operator/applicant shall also
submit a plan to control noise, litter, lighting, trespassing and
traffic. Any changes after the permit is granted shall be filed with
the Township Zoning Officer within five days from the date of
change.
(3) The operator/applicant must comply with the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the application, this chapter and the law by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer before a permit can be issued.
(4) The Township Zoning Enforcement Officer shall approve the
issuance of a permit to the operator/applicant within 30 days after
the date the conditional use is approved and all conditions are met
by the operator/applicant.
(5) The annual fee for a campground permit will be established by
resolution of the Supervisors of Brighton Township.
(6) An operator/applicant shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Chief, Zoning Enforcement Officer or other
Township departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the
campground on an ongoing basis for the purposes of ensuring
compliance with the law.
(7) Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in
Subsection A(2) and (3) above. The application for renewal should
be made at least 30 days before the expiration date and when made
less than 30 days before the expiration date, the pendency of the
application will not prevent the expiration of the permit.
§ 195-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137
1:691
(8) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall suspend a permit if he
determines that the operator has violated or is not in compliance
with any section of this chapter. During the suspension of the
permit, the campground shall be closed and shall remain closed.
After being advised by the campground operator that the violations
have been corrected, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have up
to seven days to inspect the premises for compliance with this
chapter. Upon compliance as determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the permit shall be reinstated for the
operation of the campground.
B. Campground requirements.
(1) Campgrounds shall be situated on a minimum of 10 contiguous
acres.
(2) All campsites shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property
line. This perimeter buffer strip shall be used for lawn and
screening purposes only, such as ornamental fencing or natural
growth. No part of any required buffer strip shall be used for any
other required area for a campground, service buildings, drives or
water and sewage facilities which are located above ground. Buffer
strips shall be a planted visual barrier or landscape screen and be
of shrubs and hedges planted at an initial height of not less than
two feet. The low-level screen shall be placed in alternating rows to
produce a more effective barrier.
(3) Campgrounds shall not be permitted to accommodate more than
four campsites per acre.
(4) A minimum of 20% of the gross area of the campground shall be
devoted to recreational facilities and common open spaces.
Recreational facilities shall not be located within 100 feet of any
property line.
(5) Recreational facilities and common open spaces shall be
distributed more or less equally throughout the campground
development in relationship to the campsites they are intended to
serve and consistent with good design principles. Open spaces
shall not be isolated in one corner of the campground, but shall be
accessible to all campsites within the campground.
(6) Environmental considerations.
(a) The developer shall take every precaution to preserve the
natural site amenities and to minimize the disturbance to the
natural environment.
(b) The development will be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving activity, erosion, tree clearance and the
destruction of natural amenities.
§ 195-137 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137
1:692
(c) Existing trees shall be preserved where possible. The location
of trees must be considered when planning the location of
common open spaces, service buildings, campsites,
underground services, walks, paved areas, playgrounds,
parking areas and finished grade levels.
(d) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to
stabilize topsoil.
(e) Erosion control measures such as minimizing the area of
exposed soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and
planting temporary ground cover shall be instituted as
necessary.
(f) In order to ensure the preservation of the natural
characteristics of the land, trees, ground cover, natural bodies
of water and other significant natural features, a detailed
landscaping plan and an erosion control and sedimentation
plan will be required at the time of initial plan submission.
(7) The campground shall have adequate access for automobiles,
travel trailers, motorized homes and fire-fighting equipment. All
access and interior drives shall be dust free. No structure shall be
permitted within 25 feet of the right of way of an access road and
interior road or within 20 feet of common parking.
(8) Each campsite shall have one parking space and the campground
shall have additional parking in a common area of one parking
space per five campsites.
(9) During operation, every campground shall have an office in which
shall be located the person responsible for the operation of the
campground. Such attendant shall supervise conduct on and in all
common areas and be responsible for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any other laws, ordinances or rules
which govern the operation of the campground.
(10) All water facilities and sewage collection, treatment and disposal
shall be approved and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP. Rest room and shower
facilities shall be sufficient to adequately service the campsites
proposed and shall be located in a central area.
(11) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the campground
shall be conducted so as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, air pollution or fire hazard. The
campground shall be kept free of all litter, rubbish and flammable
material at all times. All organic rubbish or storage shall be
contained in airtight verminproof containers, which shall also be
screened from the public view.
§ 195-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137
1:693
§ 195-137.1. Buffer yard requirements. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 119]
(12)No campsite or service buildings shall be permitted within a onehundred-
year floodplain.
(13) A campground may construct one freestanding or attached
identification sign containing no more than 32 square feet. Such
sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street right-of-way, at
least 100 feet from any residential zone and at least 25 feet from
adjoining lot lines. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so
that no glare or direct illumination shall be cast upon adjacent
properties or public streets.
(14)No accessory uses, other than provided herein, shall be permitted
at the campground.
(15) The boundaries of all camping and trail areas shall be marked to
prevent inadvertent trespassing.
A. Buffer yard type.
(1) Where required, buffer yards shall conform to the following
standards. New developments in Brighton Township shall provide
one of the following buffer yards, as specified in this section:
(a) Buffer yard A (minor): minimum buffer yard width 10 feet.
(b) Buffer yard B (moderate): minimum buffer yard width 15 feet.
(c) Buffer yard C (major): minimum buffer yard width 25 feet.
(2) All areas of a buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs shall be
seeded with grass unless a ground cover of mulch, bark or stone is
established and maintained.
(3) Evergreen (conifer) plant material shall be used in clusters, rather
than singly. [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
B. Buffer yard design and landscaping standards.
(1) Buffer yard A (minor): required plant units per 100 feet (at the
minimum width of 10 feet): [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
156]
§ 195-137 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:694
(2) Buffer yard B (moderate): required plant units per 100 feet (at
minimum width of 15 feet): [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
156]
(3) Buffer yard C (major): required plant units per 100 feet (at the
minimum width of 25 feet): [Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
156]
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:695
C. Applicability.
(1) In order to provide a level of flexibility, a developer/property owner
may choose from several widths and planting options within each
class of buffer yard as provided in this section.
(2) Buffer yard requirements are stated in terms of the width of the
buffer yard and the number of plant units required per 100 linear
feet of buffer yard. Recommended plant types are divided into four
categories: canopy trees, understory trees, evergreens, and shrubs.
Recommended plant species for each of these categories are found
at the end of this section. The requirements of a buffer yard may be
satisfied by any of the options illustrated, or, in the alternative, an
equivalent buffer yard may be provided.
(3) Each illustration depicts the total buffer yard required to be
erected by the higher intensity use when it is being located next to
the same or lower intensity use, except any residential use that is
proposed to be developed adjacent to a higher intensity use
existing as of the effective date of this section shall be required to
plant a minimum Level A buffer yard.
(4) Whenever a wall, fence, or berm is required within a buffer yard,
these are shown as "structure required" in the following
illustrations. Whenever a wall is required in addition to a berm, the
wall shall be located between the berm and the higher intensity
use, in order to provide maximum sound absorption.
(5) Buffer yard type. The type and extent of buffer yard plantings or
screening shall be a function of the degree of potential
incompatibility of the adjacent land uses as set forth in this section.
Except as otherwise specified, all new nonresidential developments
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:696
shall provide a level B moderate buffer yard, along non-right-ofway
boundary lines of parcels located on the perimeter of a zoning
district.
(a) Buffer yard A (minor): minimum buffer yard width 10 feet.
(b) Buffer yard B (moderate): minimum buffer yard width 15 feet.
(c) Buffer yard C (major): minimum buffer yard width 25 feet.
(6) Buffer yard width:
(a) Each buffer yard, A through C, has four width options. As width
increases, the number of plantings per one-hundred-foot
length decreases by a given factor referred to as the "plant unit
multiplier." A plant unit multiplier of one is used for the
minimum width of each buffer yard. The minimum width can be
reduced, in certain instances, by using berms or berm walls
within the buffer yard as illustrated in this section.
(b) Roadside setbacks and rights-of-way. When a parcel abuts a
road or street right-of-way, and where a minimum setback from
the road or street is specified in another section of this chapter,
that minimum setback must be followed and the required
buffer yard shall be planted along the property line adjacent to
the road right-of-way. Where no buffer yard standard is
specified, a buffer yard A (minor) is required.
(7) Minimum planting. All areas of a buffer yard not planted with trees
or shrubs shall be seeded with grass unless ground cover is to be
established and maintained. Evergreen (conifer) plant material
shall be used in clusters, rather than singly, in order to maximize
their chance of survival.
D. Buffer yard fences, berms and berm walls.
(1) Buffer yard B and C shall include the use of fences, berms or berm
walls as part of the buffer yard requirements. The specifications for
the permitted fences, berms and berm walls are as follows:
[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:697
(2) If a fence or wall has a decorative side, that side shall face the
public right-of-way, or in the case of a fence or wall separating
residential from business premises, the decorative side shall face
the residential property. It shall be the responsibility of the person
or corporation erecting the wall or fence and their successors and
assigns to maintain both sides of it in good repair for as long as it is
in place. All parts of a fence or wall including foundations shall be
entirely within the property on which it is located.
E. Buffer yard maintenance. Buffer yards shall be maintained by the owner
of the property on which they are located. Loss of 15% of the plant
material regardless of cause shall require the replacement of such
plantings by the owner.
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:698
F. Buffer yard use. A buffer yard may be used for passive recreation and
may contain pedestrian or bike trails, provided that:
(1) No plant material is eliminated or, if eliminated, is replaced in close
proximity elsewhere in the buffer yard;
(2) The total width of the buffer yard is maintained; and
(3) All other standards of this section are met.
G. Township landscaping standards. In addition to the buffer yard
landscaping requirements set forth herein, the following general
landscaping requirements shall apply as indicated:
(1) Residential landscaping requirements. Residential landscaping is
an important element in the Township's efforts to maintain and
enhance its rural and residential character. All residential lots shall
adhere to the following landscaping standards:
(a) All residential lots shall be planted with a minimum of three
shade trees with a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches DBH. Any
single-family detached lot shall have at least two of the
required shade trees located in the front yard, or, in the case of
a corner lot, in the front yard or the side yard facing the street.
Existing trees, of equal or larger DBH size, if properly
preserved, will satisfy this requirement. This standards shall
be met within 12 months of issuance of the building permit to
construct the dwelling.
(b) For any residential development containing attached dwellings
(townhouses) and/or multi-family dwelling buildings, one
shade tree with a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches diameter
breast high (DBH) shall be planted for each dwelling unit, one
on each individual townhouse lot if such lots are included in the
development, or within the open space area(s). Existing trees
of at least 2 1/2 inches caliper DBH and of a variety on the
canopy tree list, if in good health, will satisfy this requirement.
(2) Business and agricultural fencing requirements.
(a) For purposes of security, a business owner may surround that
portion of his/her property that requires protection with a
chain-link fence not more than 10 feet high, except that along
property boundaries abutting rights-of-way, ornamental
fencing shall be utilized. The base of the fence facing a public
road or residential property shall be planted on the outer side
with shrubs not more than three feet on center and not less
than 2 1/2 feet high when planted, maintained thereafter in
good health by the property owner.
(b) For purposes of containing farm animals or to prevent
trespassing, owners of agricultural properties may surround
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:699
their barnyards and/or other parts of their production lands
with barbed wire fencing.
(3) Open space landscaping requirements. Developments that include
required open space areas shall submit a landscaping plan as part
of an application for plan approval. This plan shall provide for
landscaping in the open space that defines space and circulation,
provides shade, provides natural wooded areas for passive
recreation and environmental needs, and provides screening for
active recreation areas, parking lots, and other incompatible uses
from residences. The quantity of trees allocated to common open
space shall not have the effect of eliminating the landscaping
devoted to individual lots. Open space areas within any
development model shall adhere to the following minimum
landscaping standards:
(a) Planting requirements: two shade trees with a minimum
caliper of 2 1/2 inches diameter breast high, or three
ornamental trees or evergreen trees selected from the list in
Subsection J below, shall be planted for each dwelling unit in
the development, within the open space area. Existing trees of
equal or greater caliper will, if in good health, satisfy this
requirement.
(b) Areas with no trees shall be seeded with grass or maintained
with ground cover, nonmowed grasses or wild flowers.
[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
(c) Agricultural use. While the open space is maintained in active
agricultural uses, the planting requirements are waived.
(4) Nonresidential landscaping requirements. In all institutional,
commercial and industrial developments, one shade tree with a
minimum 2 1/2 inches caliper diameter breast high when planted
for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, fractions excluded.
Existing trees of equal or greater caliper, if in good health, will
satisfy this requirement. Parking lot planting counts toward plant
list.
(5) Parking lot design/landscaping.
(a) All new parking lots and all existing parking lots that are
expanded by 20 or more parking spaces or increased in area by
50%, after the effective date of this section, shall comply with
the following parking lot landscaping requirements:
[1] Perimeter landscaping and screening. Parking lots shall be
screened around their entire perimeter (except on the side
directly adjacent to the building they serve) with a
landscaped buffer so as to prevent direct views of parked
vehicles from streets and sidewalks, decrease the amount
of spill-over light, glare, noise, or exhaust fumes onto
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:700
adjacent properties, and provide the parking area with a
reasonable measure of shade, when trees reach maturity.
Required buffer yards shall be considered the minimum
when provided, and no additional landscaping shall be
required.
[a] Required plantings. Where plant material is used as a
screen, it shall include at a minimum canopy or
ornamental trees planted at every 30 feet on center
with continuous evergreen shrubbery in between.
[b] Fences, berms and walls shall be selected from the
standards in this section.
H. Parking lot interior landscaping. The interior of any parking lot may be
landscaped to provide shade and visual relief by installing protected
planting islands or peninsulas within the perimeter of the parking lots,
as shown in the following diagrams:
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:701
I. General parking lot landscaping standards.
(1) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided where necessary and
appropriate.
(2) Shrubs in or at the edge of the parking lot shall be a minimum two
feet six inches in height and shall provide a year-round screen for
paved areas and cars. Shrub varieties should either be evergreen
or, if deciduous, have a dense, twiggy growth for winter screening
and an attractive year-round appearance.
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:702
(3) Plants (or other elements) that restrict visibility to pedestrians or
automobile operators, such as tall shrubs and low-branching trees,
shall be avoided. Plant materials at vehicular entrances shall be
located so as to maintain safe sight distances.
(4) Plant varieties should be selected that are moderate to slowgrowing,
require little maintenance, and tolerate such conditions
as sun, wind, drought, glare, reflected heat, salt and chemicals, and
small planting spaces.
J. Recommended plant list. Those plants marked with an asterisk (*) are
native plants. An emphasis on the use of native plants is desired.
[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 162]
(1) Canopy (shade/street) trees: minimum 2 1/2 inches caliper DBH.
(a) *Red sunset red maple or other red maple varieties.
(b) *Sugar maple varieties.
(c) Celebration maple.
(d) *Common hackberry.
(e) Katsura tree.
(f) Pyramidal European or *American hornbeam.
(g) Turkish filbert.
(h) European or *American beech.
(i) *Halka honeylocust.
(j) *Skyline honeylocust.
(k) *Sweet gum.
(l) London plane tree or *Sycamore.
(m) *Pin oak.
(n) *Red oak.
(o) *Littleleaf linden.
(p) Pioneer elm (or other disease-resistant elms).
(q) Zelkova.
(r) *Scarlet oak.
(2) Understory (ornamental) trees: 1 1/2 inches caliper DBH, eight feet
in height.
(a) Hedge maple.
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:703
(b) Japanese maple.
(c) *Serviceberry.
(d) *River birch.
(e) *Redbud.
(f) Fringe tree.
(g) *Florida dogwood or Chinese dogwood varieties.
(h) *Hawthorn (including native varieties).
(i) Magnolia varieties.
(j) Flowering crabapples (disease-resistant varieties).
(k) Redspire ornamental pear.
(l) Ornamental cherries (excluding weeping varieties).
(m) Amur maple.
(n) Tree lilac.
(o) *American yellowwood.
(3) Evergreen/conifer trees: five feet height minimum.
(a) White fir.
(b) *Canadian or eastern hemlock.
(c) *Eastern white pine.
(d) Austrian pine.
(e) Serbian spruce.
(f) *White spruce.
(g) *Colorado spruce.
(h) Pyramidal Japanese yew.
(i) Pyramidal arborvitae.
(j) Norway spruce.
(4) Shrubs: 24 inches height and spread minimum; 36 inches height for
screen plantings.
(a) *Chokeberry.
(b) Azalea varieties.
(c) Spirea.
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.1
1:704
(d) Quince.
(e) Dogwood (*including native varieties).
(f) Burningbush.
(g) Forsythia.
(h) *Witch hazel.
(i) Holly varieties (deciduous or evergreen; *including native
varieties).
(j) Magnolia.
(k) Rhododendron (*including native varieties).
(l) Shrub roses.
(m) Yews.
(n) Viburnum (*including native varieties).
(o) Cutleaf stephanandra.
(p) Lilac.
(q) Dwarf willow.
(r) Alpine currant.
(s) *Fragrant sumac.
(t) *Spicebush.
(u) Juniper.
(v) Hydrangea (*including native varieties).
(w) *Summersweet clethra.
(x) Boxwood.
(y) *New Jersey tea.
(z) *Eastern ninebark.
(5) Groundcovers: 15 inches spread; 2 1/4 inches peat pots or flats.
(a) Purpleleaf wintercreeper.
(b) Myrtle.
(c) Pachysandara.
(d) Cotoneaster varieties.
(e) *Bearberry.
§ 195-137.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.1
1:705
§ 195-137.2. Traffic impacts. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119;
amended 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 135]
(f) Juniper varieties.
(g) *Sweetfern.
(h) Evergreen and deciduous shrubs.
(6) Ornamental grasses and perennials: No. 2 container stock. There
are many appropriate varieties of ornamental grasses and
perennials, ferns, and daylilies appropriate for plantings.
A. A traffic access/impact analysis study shall be required when a
proposed land development or subdivision will generate 75 or more
new peak hour trips on the adjacent roadways. The estimated number
of trips shall be determined by an analysis of similar uses through data
collected by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or through
studies of similar uses acceptable by the Township. The Township may
require a traffic study for developments or changes in uses generating
less than 75 additional vehicles during peak hours in cases where
known traffic deficiencies exist in the area of the proposed development
or change in use. The Township may waive the study requirement for an
individual development or change in use, where said development or
change in use was incorporated as part of a previous traffic impact
study.
B. A traffic access/impact study shall be submitted as part of an
application for land development or subdivision approval. A scope of
work for the study shall first be submitted for Township approval. The
specific roadways and intersections to be studied shall be identified
along with the planned data collection and analysis procedures. The
study shall be performed by a qualified registered professional traffic
engineer. The study shall contain the following information, provided
that the Township may waive or add to the requirements on a case-bycase
basis:
(1) Description of the proposed project in terms of land use type and
magnitude.
(2) An inventory of existing conditions in the approved study area,
including:
(a) Roadway network and traffic control;
(b) Existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and average
daily traffic (ADT);
(c) Planned roadway improvements by others;
(d) Levels of service for all intersections;
(e) Roadway levels of service (where appropriate);
§ 195-137.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.2
1:706
(f) Other measures of roadway adequacy, i.e., lane widths, traffic
signal warrants, vehicle delay studies, etc.; and
(g) Crash data summary of study intersections.
(3) An analysis of existing traffic conditions, including:
(a) Levels of service for all intersections;
(b) Roadway levels of service (where appropriate);
(c) Other measures of roadway adequacy, i.e., lane widths, traffic
signal warrants, vehicle delay studies, etc.; and
(d) Sight distance adequacy per PENNDOT Chapter 441
requirements.
(4) Projected site-generated traffic volumes in terms of:
(a) Peak hours and ADT;
(b) Approach/departure distribution, including method of
determination;
(c) Site traffic volumes on roadways; and
(d) When a developer has made an application for a change of
zoning classification for a proposed development, the data
shall include a comparison of existing zoning to proposed site
generation.
(5) An analysis of future traffic conditions, including:
(a) Future design year, or years with phasing, (development fully
completed) combined volumes (site traffic plus future roadway
traffic);
(b) Intersection levels of service;
(c) Roadway levels of service (where appropriate);
(d) Other measures of roadway adequacy, i.e., lane widths, traffic
signal warrants, vehicle delay studies, etc.;
(e) A pavement analysis, using a method approved by the
Township, of roadways which are projected to experience
significant increases, as required by the scope of work in ADT
volumes off-site for compliance to the Township standards; and
(f) When access is onto a state road, the analysis of future
conditions shall be consistent with PENNDOT requirements.
(6) A description of future levels of service and their compliance with
standard for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways.
New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic capacity defined
§ 195-137.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.2
1:707
as follows: All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be as
defined by the Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209,
published by Transportation Research Board.
(a) Traffic capacity LOS shall be based upon a future design year
which coincides with completion of the development.
(b) Unsignalized intersection or driveways which intersect streets
shall be designed for LOS C or better for each traffic movement
unless otherwise specified by the Township.
(c) Signalized intersections shall be designed for LOS C or better.
Existing intersections impacted by development traffic shall
maintain a minimum LOS D or, if future base LOS is E or F,
then degradation in delays shall be mitigated. A future design
year analysis without development shall be completed for
comparison purposes.
(d) Streets shall be designed for a minimum LOS C.
(7) A description and analysis of the proposed access plan and site plan
including:
(a) Access plan including analysis of required sight distances
using PENNDOT criteria and description of access roadway,
location, geometric conditions and traffic control.
(b) On-site circulation plan showing parking locations and
dimension, loading access, circulation roadway and traffic
control.
(8) Traffic circulation mitigating action plan shall include:
(a) Project features relative to site access and on-site circulation
which could be modified to maximize positive impact or
minimize negative impact.
(b) Off-site improvement plan, depicting required roadway and
signal installation and signing improvements to meet the
minimum level of service requirements.
(c) Pedestrian circulations systems and related walkways shall be
included and insulated completely and as reasonably as
possible from the vehicular street system in order to provide
separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement. This shall
include, when deemed necessary by the Township, pedestrian
underpass or overpass in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds,
commercial areas and other uses which generate a
considerable amount of pedestrian traffic.
(d) The developer must submit proposed solutions to the problems
along with the cost estimates, and the proposed methods of
financing, and actions/approval required by the Township,
§ 195-137.2 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.2
1:708
§ 195-137.3. Medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
grower/processor. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119; amended
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
Beaver County or PENNDOT. A plan approved by the Township
Engineer for correcting or eliminating any identified street
capacity and/or safety problems shall be a condition of
approval for the application. The cost of all on-site traffic
improvements shall be borne by the developer.
(e) All entrance/exits to the site, and streets and driveways within
the site, shall comply with PENNDOT requirements ("Access to
and Occupancy of Highway by Driveways and Local Roads,"
67PA Code, Chapter 1) and applicable Township specifications.
If access is proposed from a state or county-owned road, a copy
of the required access permit must be submitted to the
Township prior to issuance of a building permit.
(f) Roadway design features for public streets which discourage
through traffic patterns and speeding by the use of traffic
calming design features shall be utilized. Features may include
traffic circles, medians, reduced tangent roadway segments or
other methods approved by the Township Engineer.
C. Fees for review costs. Based upon the scope of work for review and
determination of the complexity of the development project, the
Township may require the traffic impact study to be reviewed by a
traffic consultant selected by the Township. In such a case, the
applicant required to submit the traffic study shall be required to pay
for the cost of the consultant review, plus 5% administrative fees. No
permits for construction or occupancy of a site shall be issued until said
consultant fees are paid.
A. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall provide proof of registration with the Department of
Health or proof that registration has been sought and is pending
approval and shall at all times maintain a valid, accurate, and up-todate
registration with the Department of Health. Should registration be
denied or revoked at any time, any Township approval shall
immediately become void. In the event a site is abandoned, compliance
with the provisions of Chapter 148, Property Maintenance, is required.
A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same site as a
facility used for growing and processing medical marijuana.
B. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall at all times operate in compliance with all Department
of Health regulations pertaining to such facilities.
C. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor must be located on a lot containing not less than two acres.
§ 195-137.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.3
1:709
§ 195-137.4. Home occupations. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
D. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall not be operated or maintained on a parcel within 1,000
feet, measured by a straight line in all directions, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the
property line of a residentially zoned property or a parcel containing a
public, private or parochial school, day-care center, place of worship,
public park, or community center.
E. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor must operate entirely within an indoor, enclosed, and secure
facility. No exterior sales and no sidewalk displays shall be permitted.
No drive-through services shall be permitted. The use cannot be
advertised on radio or television.
F. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall be limited to the hours of operation not earlier than 9:00
a.m. and not later than 9:00 p.m.
G. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall submit a disposal plan to be reviewed and approved by
the Township. Medical marijuana remnants and by-products shall be
disposed of according to an approved plan and shall not be placed
within an exterior refuse container.
H. There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors or odors which can be
seen, smelled, or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot line for the
property where the medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
grower/processor is located.
I. No one under the age of 18 shall be permitted in a medical marijuana
dispensary, unless accompanied by a caregiver as required under
Section 506 of the Medical Marijuana Act.
J. No use of medical marijuana shall be permitted on the premises of a
medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/processor.
K. A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana grower/
processor shall submit a security plan to the Township. It shall
demonstrate how it will maintain effective security and control. The
security plan shall specify the type and manner of twenty-four-hour
security, tracking, recordkeeping, record retention, and surveillance
system to be utilized in the facility as required by Section 1102 of the
Medical Marijuana Act and as supplemented by regulations
promulgated by the Department of Health pursuant to the Medical
Marijuana Act.
A. Professional services.
(1) In addition to the permitted use as a no-impact home-based
business, where professional services are provided in the home, a
§ 195-137.3 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.4
1:710
permit for the home occupation will be issued, provided the
following requirements are demonstrated:
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) Services shall be provided on a one-to-one basis. Overlap of
clients shall not be permitted.
(c) The business shall employ no employees within the dwelling
other than family members residing in the dwelling.
Nonresident employees shall not use the residence as a
meeting location prior to traveling to another work site.
(d) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods.
(e) There shall be no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial
nature. Further, there shall be no outside stockpiling,
inventory or storage of other materials used by the occupant in
performance of the home occupation whether performed on
site or at another location.
(f) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including lights. Parking shall be in accordance with
§ 195-105B. No significant additional vehicular or pedestrian
traffic to the residence shall be created, nor shall the use
require delivery by tractor trailer trucks.
(g) The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
or electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(h) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge in volume or type which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(i) The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(j) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
(k) Signs shall be permitted in accordance with §§ 195-109
through 195-117.
(2) Permitted home occupations shall include, but not be limited to the
professions of engineer, architect, attorney, artist, clergyman,
musician, writer, teacher, data processor, draftsman, sales
representative, surveyor, accountant, secretary, and mechanical/
equipment/small appliance repair. Craft occupations, including
woodworking, construction, cooking and baking and sewing are
permitted.
§ 195-137.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.4
1:711
§ 195-137.5. Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
(3) Prohibited home occupations shall include, but not be limited to,
automotive repair and inspections, bakeries, licensed day-care
centers, butchers, morticians, health care facilities, and hair, nail
and tanning salons.
(4) Nothing in this section shall relate to the providing of in-home child
care.
B. Procedure.
(1) Application. Application for a home occupation or no-impact homebased
business permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer on a
form provided by the Township and shall be accompanied by the
prevailing filing fee as established by resolution by the Township
Board of Supervisors. The Zoning Officer will make a decision and
notify the applicant in writing within 15 calendar days of the date
the application is received.
(2) Scope. In cases where the Zoning Officer considers the application
not within the scope of the home occupation or no-impact homebased
business criteria, the application will be denied.
(3) Time limit. All home occupation and no-impact home-based
business permits shall be valid for a period of one year from initial
date of approval. The permit will be reissued on an annual year
thereafter, provided the applicant can demonstrate compliance
with this chapter.
(4) Voiding of permit. The Zoning Officer may void any home
occupation or no-impact home-based business permit for
noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this chapter.
Revocation may take place at any time prior to the expiration date
of the permit. If the permit is revoked or is not renewed, it becomes
null and void, and said use shall be terminated.
(5) Inspection. Applicants shall permit a reasonable inspection of the
premises by the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with this
chapter.
(6) Renewal. Home occupation and no-impact home-based Business
permits may be renewed annually provided there has not been any
violation of the provisions of this chapter. Requests for renewals
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in writing, accompanied by
the prevailing renewal fee, as established by the Township Board of
Supervisors resolution, one month prior to expiration of the permit.
A. The maximum number of sleeping rooms offered for use shall be eight.
B. The owner/operator shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling.
§ 195-137.4 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.5
1:712
§ 195-137.6. Outdoor advertising devices. [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 147]
C. No meals, other than breakfast, shall be served on the premises. Meals
shall not be served to customers who are not overnight guests.
D. Maximum lengths of stay for any guest shall be seven consecutive
overnight stays in any thirty-day period.
E. A placard mounted on the exterior wall of the dwelling, which shall not
exceed six square feet in area and which shall contain only the name
and address of the establishment and the proprietor's name, plus one
freestanding sign not to exceed 12 square feet, shall be permitted. Said
freestanding sign shall be placed at least five feet from the right-of-way
line.
F. One off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for each
sleeping room in addition to two required spaces. The parking area
shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a minimum
six-foot-high compact hedge or fence.
G. Public sanitary sewer and public water service shall be provided.
A. It is recognized that outdoor advertising devices are typically
freestanding signs of comparatively great size which are designed
specifically to attract the attention of the motoring public. Because
outdoor advertising devices differ in these aspects from other
freestanding signs, and because it is the express objective of this
section to limit nuisances and insure the safety of motorists and
pedestrians, the following regulations have been adopted.
B. Outdoor advertising devices shall be permitted as a principal use in the
C-2 Zoning District, subject to the following criteria:
(1) Number: No more than one outdoor advertising device shall be
erected on any one premises under single or separate ownership.
(2) Separation: No outdoor advertising device shall be located closer
than 3,000 feet from any other such outdoor advertising device.
(3) Lot size: No outdoor advertising device shall be erected on a lot
with an area less than 6,000 square feet, nor erected on a lot less
than 60 feet in width.
(4) Location: No outdoor advertising device shall be located within 100
feet of a residential property line, nor within 25 feet of a
nonresidential property line.
(5) Size: The area of the outdoor advertising device shall not exceed
300 square feet, and the height shall not exceed 35 feet.
[Amended 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
§ 195-137.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.6
1:713
§ 195-137.7. Cemeteries. [Added 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
(6) Owner identification: All outdoor advertising devices shall have the
identity of the name and address of the owner on such sign.
(7) Landscaping: Two flowering trees a minimum of six feet in height
shall be planted adjoining the supporting structure of the outdoor
advertising device. The rear side of a single-faced outdoor
advertising device shall be of one color and screened by the
existing or natural landscaping materials or by a planting of
evergreen trees at least six feet in height.
(8) Additional requirements: Outdoor advertising devices shall be
subject to the additional sign requirements of § 195-117. However,
in the event there is any conflict between § 195-117 and this
section, § 195-137.6, the provisions of this section shall govern.
(9) Orientation: Outdoor advertising devices shall be oriented only
toward Pennsylvania Route 60 and not toward any other street, and
shall comply with the Pennsylvania Outdoor Advertising Control
Act and accompanying federal and state regulations. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
A. Cemetery design criteria. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors
to insure that any cemetery approved as a conditional use be designed
to minimize alteration of natural drainage patterns, optimize recharge
of the groundwater reservoir and to fit into the characteristic landscape
of the Township.
(1) To demonstrate feasible compliance with the design criteria and to
facilitate design review, a conceptual plan of the entire tract under
common ownership with any area planned for cemetery
development shall be submitted at the time of the conditional use
application. Such plan shall establish generalized locations and
their respective limits for proposed development of burial grounds,
including areas where aboveground stones or monuments,
mausoleums and other structures will be permitted, accessways,
parking, visitor facilities, maintenance facilities, and accessory
development, as well as planned future development of such areas
and facilities not part of the application at hand.
(2) All conditional use applications for a cemetery shall be subject to
the applicable sections of the Subdivision and Land Development
Code of the Township of Brighton, §§ 180-1 through 180-140.
(3) A landscape plan shall be required with submission of preliminary
and final land development application. A sketch landscape plan
with narrative as needed must accompany the conditional use
application, indicating the general landscape design intended,
approximate amount and type of vegetation and be of sufficient
§ 195-137.6 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.7
1:714
detail to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
section.
(4) Pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation systems shall be
designed for safety and convenience.
(5) The applicant shall provide sufficient hydraulic and other
information to satisfy the Board of Supervisors that potential for
groundwater contamination from development of burial ground
shall not be hazardous to any neighboring water supply wells. The
Board may require, as a condition of approval, the installation of
monitoring wells where potential hazard to neighboring wells is
suspect.
(6) Setback requirements:
(a) There shall be a setback of at least 50 feet between any grave
site and any highway or street abutting a cemetery use. No
roadways, parking, or buildings shall be placed or located
within this setback except as may be necessary for ingress and
egress.
(b) There shall be a setback of at least 50 feet between any grave
site and/or any building or other structures and any stream,
wetland or one-hundred-year floodplain on or off the lot or
tract of ground to be used as a cemetery.
(7) A buffer yard A is required on the front yard and a buffer yard C is
required for the side and rear yards.
(8) All driveways shall be paved to a minimum width of 20 feet in order
to allow for parallel parking on one side.
(9) Clustered parking areas for between five and 10 automobiles shall
be provided on the site based on the ratio of five spaces per 100
graves. Parking for a chapel shall be provided at a ratio of one
space per five seats and shall be located within 200 feet of the
chapel.
B. Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in connection with cemetery
use shall be limited to:
(1) Memorial chapel.
(2) Facilities for maintenance equipment required by the cemetery
use.
(3) Administrative offices as required in support of the cemetery use.
(4) Signs.
(5) Columbariums.
(6) Mausoleums.
§ 195-137.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.7
1:715
§ 195-137.8. Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). [Added
10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 154]
The following regulations apply to all wind energy conversion systems
(WECS), equipment buildings, accessory buildings and structures.
C. Prohibited uses. The interment of the human bodies on residential lots
is prohibited.
A. Accessory WECS use: Accessory WECS for residential and agricultural
purposes must comply with the following requirements:
(1) One WECS is permitted on residential property.
(2) If the property is in excess of 10 acres in size, is in active
agricultural use, is to provide power or pumping of water for an
agricultural use or structure, and complies with all other criteria
established herein, an application may be made to the Township
Zoning Officer for additional WECS (a maximum of five), depending
on acreage, as follows:
Number of Acres Number of permitted WECS
10 to 25 2
Over 25 to 50 3
Over 50 to 75 4
Over 75 5
(3) The primary purpose of the WECS is to provide power or, in the
case of an active agricultural use, the pumping of water, for the
principal use of the property where the WECS is located and shall
not be for the generation of power for commercial purposes,
although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale
of excess power generated from time to time from a WECS
designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
(4) WECS shall be located within the rear or side yard area.
(5) The maximum height of the WECS shall be 36 feet. The height shall
be measured from the base of the support structure to the axis of
the shaft that the blades of the WECS revolve on.
(6) The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
rotor or blade system shall be 15 feet.
(7) All WECS structures shall be self-supporting. No guy wire
supported structures shall be permitted.
(8) The required setback from the base of the WECS support structure
to any property line shall be a minimum of 100 feet unless a greater
distance is needed based upon ice and blade throw calculations as
required in Subsections A(9) and (10) hereof.
§ 195-137.7 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.8
1:716
(9) To protect the safety and property of persons, the applicant shall
submit with his/her application ice throw calculations from a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that calculates the
maximum distance that ice from the turbine blades could be thrown
with the basis of the calculations and assumptions disclosed.
Should the calculations project the possibility that ice may be
thrown beyond the property lines of the property on which the
WECS is located, or that structures exist within the limits of the
projected possibility, then the WECS must be relocated to a
distance greater than the calculated ice throw. This calculation
shall not be used to reduce the minimum required setback
established in Subsection A(8) herein.
(10) To protect the safety and property of persons, the applicant shall
submit with his/her application blade throw calculations from a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that calculates the
maximum distance that pieces of the turbine blades could be
thrown with the basis of the calculations and assumptions
disclosed. Should the calculations project the possibility that a
blade may be thrown beyond the property lines of the property on
which the WECS is located, or that structures exist within the limits
of the projected possibility, then the WECS must be relocated to a
distance greater than the calculated blade throw. This calculation
shall not be used to reduce the minimum required setback
established in Subsection A(8) herein.
(11)WECS shall have a nonreflective, painted steel finish in a neutral
color in order to reduce the visual impact. No WECS shall be
artificially lighted. No signs shall be mounted on the WECS or
support structure.
(12) The minimum lot size required for the erection, construction or
placement of a WECS on a property shall be three acres.
B. Commercial WECS use: Commercial WECS, which are not accessory to
any residential, agricultural, recreational or public use, shall comply
with the industrial and development performance standards set forth in
§ 195-137.13 and the following requirements: [Amended 2-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 191]
(1) The applicant shall submit a land development plan and application
in accordance with Brighton Township Code Chapter 180 with site
plan information as required. In addition to the information
required by the Land Development Code, the applicant shall submit
the following.
(a) Specific information on the type, size, height, rotor material,
rated power output, performance, safety, and noise
characteristics of each commercial wind turbine model to be
erected and the tower and electrical transmission equipment.
§ 195-137.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.8
1:717
(b) Photographs or detailed drawings of each WECS model to be
erected, including the tower and foundation.
(c) To protect the safety and property of persons, the applicant
shall submit with his/her application ice throw calculations
from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that
calculates the maximum distance that ice from the turbine
blades could be thrown with the basis of the calculations and
assumptions disclosed. Should the calculations project the
possibility that ice may be thrown beyond the property lines of
the property on which the WECS is located, or that structures
exist within the limits of the projected possibility, then the
WECS must be relocated to a distance greater than the
calculated ice throw. This calculation shall not be used to
reduce the minimum required setback established in
Subsection B(2)(c) herein.
(d) To protect the safety and property of persons, the applicant
shall submit with his/her application blade throw calculations
from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that
calculates the maximum distance that pieces of the turbine
blades could be thrown with the basis of the calculations and
assumptions disclosed. Should the calculations project the
possibility that a blade may be thrown beyond the property
lines of the property on which the WECS is located, or that
structures exist within the limits of the projected possibility,
then the WECS must be relocated to a distance greater than
the calculated blade throw. This calculation shall not be used to
reduce the minimum required setback established in
Subsection B(2)(c) herein.
(e) A copy of the written notification to the Federal Aviation
Administration and any replies to the notification.
(f) Utility interconnection data and a copy of a written notification
to the utility of the proposed interconnection.
(g) The developer/applicant shall utilize good utility practices to
minimize, to the extent practicable, the impact, if any, of stray
voltage and/or EF on adjacent properties. A report addressing
these issues shall be submitted with the application.
(h) Other information as may be reasonably requested by the
Zoning Officer, Township Engineer, Building Inspector,
Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors.
(2) Height and setback requirements.
(a) The maximum height of a structure supporting a WECS as
measured from the ground at the base of the structure to the
axis of the shaft that the blades for the WECS revolve on shall
not exceed 120 feet.
§ 195-137.8 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.8
1:718
(b) The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
rotor or blade system shall be 30 feet.
(c) The minimum distance as measured from the blades of the
WECS as they revolve around the axis of the shaft of the WECS
to any property line shall be 1,000 feet or 500 feet to a public
or private street, unless a greater distance is needed based
upon ice and blade throw calculations as required in
Subsections B(1)(d) and (e) herein.
(3) Safety, security, landscaping, lighting regulations and inspections.
(a) Each WECS shall be equipped with both manual and automatic
controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade within design
limits of the rotor. A manual electrical and/or over speed
shutdown disconnect switches shall be provided and clearly
labeled on the wind turbine structure.
(b) All wiring between the WECS and the facility substation shall
be underground.
(c) WECS towers shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
ground level.
(d) All access doors to the WECS towers and electrical equipment
shall be lockable and shall remain locked at all times when
operator personnel are not present.
(e) An eight-foot-high chain link fence with a lock gate shall be
installed, maintained, and replaced if necessary around each
tower or structure supporting the WECS, equipment buildings,
accessory buildings and structures to prevent unauthorized
access to the facilities.
(f) WECS shall have a nonreflective, painted steel finish in a
neutral color in order to reduce the visual impact.
(g) No signs or other advertising material (including flags,
decorative streamers, pennants, ribbons, or similar devices)
shall be mounted on the WECS or support structure.
(h) No WECS shall be artificially lighted except as provided for
and required by the FAA. When the FAA requires such lighting,
no bright white lights shall be permitted at night, but only red
lights as approved by the FAA. White strobes are permitted
only during daylight hours.
(i) Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of the base of
the WECS, equipment buildings, accessory buildings and
structures as possible, the fence surrounding each structure
supporting the WECS, equipment buildings, accessory
buildings or structures and any other ground level features and
in general to soften the appearance of the WECS site. As part
§ 195-137.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.8
1:719
of the conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors of
Brighton Township may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same
degree of screening as the required landscaping.
[1] An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the
site. The screen can either be a hedge (planted three feet
on center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted
10 feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall
be a minimum of six feet in height at planting and shall
grow to a minimum height of 15 feet at maturity.
[2] In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
(j) Access shall be provided to the WECS, equipment buildings,
accessory buildings and structures by means of a public street
or easement, to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of 30 feet on width and shall be improved to a width
of 14 feet with a dust-free all-weather surface for its entire
length.
(k) The owner/operator of the WECS shall provide an annual
inspection report to Brighton Township prepared by a
registered professional engineer as to the structural integrity
of the WECS, supporting structures and towers.
(l) The facility owner and operator shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
(m) The facility owner and operator shall make reasonable efforts
to respond to the public's inquiries and complaints.
(n) There shall be maintained a current general liability policy
covering bodily injury and property damage with limits of at
least $1,000,000 per person and $5,000,000 per accident.
Certificates shall be made available to the Township upon
request.
(4) Decommissioning.
(a) The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the WECS(s) within 12 months after the
end of the useful life of the facility or individual WECS. The
facility or individual WECS will be presumed to be at the end of
its useful life if no electricity is generated for a continuous
period of 12 months.
§ 195-137.8 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.8
1:720
(b) Decommissioning shall include removal of WECS, buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations to a depth
of 36 inches, and any other associated facilities.
(c) Disturbed earth shall be graded and reseeded, unless the
landowner requests in writing that the access roads or other
land surface areas not be restored.
(d) An independent Pennsylvania registered professional engineer
shall be retained by the facility owner or operator to estimate
the total cost of decommissioning (decommissioning costs)
without regard to salvage value of the equipment, and the cost
of decommissioning net salvage value of the equipment (net
decommissioning costs). These estimates shall be submitted to
the Township after the first year of operation and every fifth
year thereafter.
(e) The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain
decommissioning funds in an amount equal to net
decommissioning costs, provided, that at no point shall
decommissioning funds be less than 110% of decommissioning
costs. The decommissioning funds shall be posted and
maintained with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
facility owner or operator and participating landowner posting
the financial security, provided that the bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth and is approved by the Township.
(f) Decommissioning funds may be in the form of a performance
bond, surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or
other form of financial assurance as may be acceptable to the
Township.
(g) If the facility owner or operator fails to complete
decommissioning within the period prescribed by Subsection
B(4)(a), then the landowner, if different, shall have six months
to complete decommissioning.
(h) If neither the facility owner or operator nor the landowner
complete decommissioning within the periods prescribed by
Subsection B(4)(a) and (g), then the Township may declare the
facility owner or operator in default and proceed to collect the
financial security. The entry into and submission of evidence of
a participating landowner agreement to the Township shall
constitute agreement and consent of the parties to the
agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns that
the Township may take such action as necessary to implement
the decommissioning plan.
(i) The financial security may be released when the facility owner
or operator has demonstrated and the Township concurs that
§ 195-137.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.8
1:721
§ 195-137.9. Dog kennels. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 171]
decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or upon
written approval of the Township in order to implement the
decommissioning plan.
C. Exceptions. These regulations shall not apply to WECS that meet the
following conditions:
(1) The structure is used exclusively for decorative uses and does not
generate any power for residential or commercial uses.
(2) The length of the blades of the WECS does not exceed more than
three feet, and the height of the structure supporting the WECS
does not exceed more than 12 feet.
A. Private dog kennels accessory to residential use shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) Lot or parcel area shall be on a minimum five-acre lot.
(2) Up to nine dogs may be kept on the premises. Dogs deemed
dangerous pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law144 shall be
prohibited.
(3) All buildings shall have the following setbacks:
(a) One hundred feet from the nearest property line and all rightsof-
way;
(b) Five hundred feet from the nearest dwelling, excluding any
dwelling located on site;
(c) Buffer Yard A is required.
(4) Outdoor runs or common exercise areas may be permitted for the
animals being cared for at the kennel, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The outdoor runs are utilized only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(b) The outdoor runs are confined within a defined external area,
which is completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence. The
perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a
Buffer Yard A.
(c) The outdoor runs shall be located at least 100 feet from the
nearest property line and 500 feet from the nearest dwelling,
excluding any on site dwelling.
144. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 195-137.8 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.9
1:722
(5) All areas where dogs are kept, both inside and outside, shall have
concrete floors.
(6) No other accessory uses, such as pet grooming services, veterinary
or clinical care services, pet supplies or other similar uses shall be
permitted.
(7) The accessory use private dog kennel must be owned and operated
by the property resident, and all dogs on the premises must be
owned by the property owner.
(8) The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of by
discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility for
biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or biological
waste shall be within a building, within enclosed containers,
pending removal to or disposal at an approved facility. A plan for
management of such wastes shall be submitted for municipal
review.
B. Public dog kennels shall meet the industrial and development
performance standards set forth in § 195-137.13 and the following
requirements: [Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
(1) Lot or parcel area shall be on a minimum ten-acre lot.
(2) Ten or more dogs may be kept on the premises. Dogs deemed
dangerous pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law145 shall be
prohibited.
(3) All buildings shall have the following setbacks:
(a) 100 feet from the nearest property line and all rights-of-way;
(b) 500 feet from the nearest dwelling, excluding any on-site
dwelling;
(c) Buffer Yard A is required.
(4) Outdoor runs or common exercise areas may be permitted for the
animals being cared for at the kennel, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The outdoor runs are utilized only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(b) The outdoor runs are confined within a defined external area,
which is completely enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence. The
perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a
Buffer Yard A.
145. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 195-137.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.9
1:723
(c) The outdoor runs shall be located at least 100 feet from the
nearest property line and 500 feet from the nearest dwelling,
excluding any on-site dwelling.
(5) All areas where dogs are kept, both inside and outside, shall have
concrete floors.
(6) Other accessory uses, such as pet grooming services, veterinary or
clinical care services, pet supplies or other similar uses shall be
permitted.
(7) The public dog kennel owner may board dogs not owned by the
property owner.
(8) The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of by
discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility for
biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or biological
waste shall be within a building, within enclosed containers,
pending removal to or disposal at an approved facility. A plan for
management of such wastes shall be submitted for municipal
review.
(9) The owner of dogs and the operator of the public dog kennel shall
comply with all Township Code provisions relating to noise,
disturbance, odors or other nuisances.
(10) All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be
designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and
adjacent uses.
(11) There shall be at least one parking space per every five dogs
boarded, and at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of
net floor area of retail space for public use.
(12) Any signs shall comply with § 195-115.
(13) Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly
screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials. All
containers shall be airtight, vermin-proof and have adequate
storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid
waste. No such storage area will be permitted within 100 feet from
any lot line.
(14) A site plan shall be provided showing the location of all items in this
subsection.
(15) A dog kennel required to comply with the kennel provisions of the
Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-207, shall provide a current
copy of its state dog kennel license. If a property owner/public dog
kennel operator is not required to comply with these provisions of
the Pennsylvania Dog Law, the property owner/public dog kennel
operator must comply with and demonstrate compliance with 3 P.S.
§ 459-207(b), (g), and (h) of the Pennsylvania Dog Law to the
§ 195-137.9 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.9
1:724
§ 195-137.10. Firing range. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 179]
Township, in addition to the provisions herein, and obtain an
annual public dog kennel license from the Township. The annual
fee shall be established by resolution by the Township Board of
Supervisors, and the township shall have 60 days to inspect the
premises to be licensed prior to the issuance of the local license.
C. License application.
(1) Application. Application for a public dog kennel license shall be
made to the Zoning Officer on a form provided by the Township and
shall be accompanied by the prevailing filing fee as established by
resolution by the Township Board of Supervisors. The Zoning
Officer will make a decision and notify the applicant and landowner
in writing within 60 calendar days of the date the application is
received.
(2) Scope. In cases where the Zoning Officer considers the application
not within the scope of the public dog kennel use, the application
will be denied.
(3) Time limit. All public dog kennel licenses shall be valid for the
period stated thereon.
(4) Voiding of license. The Zoning Officer may void any public dog
kennel license for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this
chapter. Revocation may take place at any time prior to the
expiration date of the license. If the license is revoked or is not
renewed, it becomes null and void, and said use shall be
terminated.
(5) Inspection. Applicants and landowners shall permit a reasonable
inspection of the premises by the Zoning Officer to determine
compliance with this chapter.
(6) Renewal. A public dog kennel license may be renewed only in
accordance with this section. Requests for renewals shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer in writing, accompanied by the
prevailing renewal fee, as established by the Township Board of
Supervisors by resolution, at least 60 days prior to expiration of the
license.
A. Permit required.
(1) Permit. Any person who operates a firing range without a valid
permit issued by the Township is guilty of a violation of this section.
(2) Application. An application for a permit to operate a firing range
must be made on a form provided by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer of the Township. The operator/applicant must agree in his
or her application that a responsible attendant shall be in charge of
§ 195-137.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.10
1:725
the operation and management of the firing range at all times.
The application must set forth the names of the management
attendants to be in active charge of the proposed firing range and
their hours of duties shall be set forth. A site plan showing trees,
roads, firing positions, target areas, firing lines and facilities must
be submitted with the application. The operator/applicant shall also
submit a firing range safety plan, a firing range security plan and
plans to control noise, litter, lighting, trespassing and traffic. Any
changes after the permit is granted shall be filed with the Township
Zoning Officer within five days from the date of change.
(3) Compliance. The operator/applicant must comply with the
provisions of this section and the premises must be inspected and
found to be in compliance with the application, this section and the
law by the Zoning Enforcement Officer before a permit can be
issued.
(4) Issuance of permit. The Township Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
approve the issuance of a permit to the operator/applicant within
30 days after the date the conditional use is approved and all
conditions are met by the operator/applicant.
(5) Permit fee. The annual fee for a firing range permit will be
established by resolution of the Supervisors of Brighton Township.
(6) Permit expiration. Each permit shall expire one year from the date
of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as
provided in Subsection A(2) above and Subsection B below
[Performance standards]. The application for renewal should be
made at least 30 days before the expiration date and when made
less than 30 days before the expiration date, the pendency of the
application will not prevent the expiration of the permit.
(7) Permit suspension. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall suspend
a permit if he determines that the operator has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this section. During the suspension
of the permit, the firing range shall be closed and shall remain
closed. After being advised by the firing range operator that the
violations have been corrected, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall have up to seven days to inspect the premises for compliance
with this section. Upon compliance as determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the permit shall be reinstated for the
operation of the firing range.
(8) Site plan. A site plan for the firing range which shows the following
applicable information drawn to an appropriate scale, shall
accompany the permit application:
(a) Property lines for any parcel upon which the firing range is to
be located, north arrow, plan scale, date, and ownership
information for the site.
§ 195-137.10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.10
1:726
(b) Complete layout of each firing range, including, firing
positions, firing lines, target lines, direct fire zones, shortfall
zones or safety fans, backstops, berms, baffles and all other
items proposed.
(c) Projected noise contours and plans to reduce or suppress
noise.
(d) Existing and proposed structures; occupied dwellings within
1,000 feet; roads, streets, or other access areas; buffer areas;
and parking areas for the range facility.
(e) Plans for refuse service and bathroom and other sanitary
facilities.
(f) Any other appropriate information related to the specific type
of firing range being proposed and as required by the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.146
(9) Permit display. Permits shall be kept and displayed in a readily
visible location on the firing range complex and at all times be
available for public inspection.
(10) Permit transferability. A permit issued pursuant to this section may
not be transferred to another operator without the written approval
and consent of Brighton Township.
(11) Changes or expansions. If any firing range is intended to be
substantially changed or expanded to include types of firing
ranges, operations, or activities not covered by an approved permit
or otherwise to cause nonconformance with this section, a new
permit for the firing range complex shall be secured in accordance
with all of the provisions of this section.
B. Performance standards. The following performance standards shall
apply to all firing ranges:
(1) Projectile containment. A firing range shall be designed to contain
all of the bullets, shot, arrows or other projectiles or any other
debris on the firing range through the use of backstops, sideberms
and sidewalls, baffles, target placement, hills, and other accepted
methods or practices.
(2) Noise mitigation. Noise mitigation shall meet the industrial and
development performance standards set forth in § 195-137.13.
[Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
(3) Certification. Every application for a firing range permit shall be
accompanied by a notarized certification by the operator that the
firing range complies with this section, meets firing range safety
and design practices as outlined in the National Rifle Association
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 195-137.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.10
1:727
Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning and Construction, current
edition, and will be operated in a manner that protects the safety
of the general public.
C. Development requirements.
(1) Minimum design requirements. Where not otherwise specified
within this section, a firing range shall meet or exceed the
guidelines as specified by the National Rifle Association's (NRA)
Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning and Construction, current
edition and as required by this section.
(2) Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply:
(a) A firing range shall be situated on a minimum of 20 contiguous
acres.
(b) The distance from a firing position to a target line shall not
exceed 250 yards in length.
(c) No part of a firing range shall be within 150 feet of a public
highway. Target positions shall be oriented away from public
highways and access roads or drives.
(d) No part of a firing range shall be within 450 feet of any
property line. This perimeter buffer strip shall be used for lawn
and screening purposes only, such as ornamental fencing or
natural growth. No part of any required buffer strip shall be
used for any other required area for a firing range, service
buildings, drives or water and sewage facilities which are
located above ground. Buffer strips shall be a planted visual
barrier or landscape screen and be of shrubs and hedges
planted at an initial height of not less than two feet. The lowlevel
screen shall be placed in alternating rows to produce a
more effective barrier.
(e) A firing range shall not be permitted to accommodate more
than 10 firing positions at one time, regardless of the number
of targets.
(f) The surface danger zone shall be contained within the leased
boundary line of the firing range complex on leased land or the
property boundary line for nonleased land.
(3) Access. A firing range shall have adequate access for automobiles,
and fire-fighting equipment. All access and interior drives shall be
dust free. No structure shall be permitted within 30 feet of the
right-of-way of an access road and interior road or within 20 feet of
common parking.
(4) Facilities. All water facilities and sewage collection, treatment and
disposal shall be approved and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
§ 195-137.10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.10
1:728
Protection. Bathroom and other sanitary facilities shall be sufficient
to adequately service the proposed firing range.
(5) No accessory uses, other than provided herein, shall be permitted
at the firing range.
(6) The entire safety fan shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high fence to
prevent unauthorized entry into the area.
(7) Warning signs. Warning signs meeting National Rifle Association
(NRA) guidelines for shooting ranges shall be posted at onehundred-
foot intervals along the entire perimeter of the firing
range complex and along the entire perimeter of the property lines
in the same intervals.
(8) Targets. The use of automobiles, appliances, junk, refuse or any
other type of discarded material or debris as a target is expressly
prohibited.
(9) Distance from occupied dwelling.
(a) Where a firing range has not been constructed with baffles, all
firing positions, targets, and firing lines shall be located at
least 1,000 feet from any existing dwelling.
(b) Where a firing range has been designed and constructed with
the use of baffles so that no direct fire can exit the range from
any firing position, all firing positions, targets, and firing lines
shall be located at least 600 feet from any existing dwelling.
(10) Access to facility. Access to the firing range complex shall be
secured and controlled, with ingress and egress permitted only
during operating hours as established in Subsection D(3).
D. Operational requirements.
(1) Maintenance. Where not otherwise specified within this section, a
firing range shall be operated and maintained in a manner that
shall meet or exceed the guidelines as specified by the National
Rifle Association's (NRA) Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning
and Construction, current edition.
(2) Best management practices. The operator of an outdoor firing
range shall provide a plan outlining its best management practices
(BMPs) relating to lead management. The plan shall meet or exceed
the guidelines as specified by the Environmental Protection
Agency's (EPA) Best Management Practices for Lead at Outdoor
Shooting Ranges, current edition.
(3) Hours of operation. Firing ranges shall be allowed to operate one
hour after sunrise to one hour preceding sunset, unless sufficient
lighting is used, in which case all shooting shall cease by 9:00 p.m.
§ 195-137.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.10
1:729
§ 195-137.11. Keeping of chickens. [Added 10-13-2014 by Ord. No.
189]
The keeping of chickens shall be allowed as an accessory use incidental to
the permitted principal use in the R-2 Agricultural Residential District and
the SC-1 Special Conservation District, provided the following conditions
are met:
The hours may be extended after sunset for purposes of subduedlighting
certification of law enforcement officers.
(4) Liability insurance. The applicant/operator shall provide a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the firing range or firing range complex. In
January of each following year, the owner or operator of the firing
range or firing range complex shall submit written verification to
the Township Manager that there have been no changes in the
operating characteristics of the firing range or firing range
complex as represented at the time of approval of the use by
conditional use. The Township shall be notified immediately if there
are any lapses or policy changes.
(5) Ammunition and weapons. No ammunition or weapons shall be
stored on site.
(6) Alcohol prohibited. The consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited within the area approved as the firing range.
(7) Attendant required. During operation, every firing range shall have
on site a person responsible for the operation of the firing range.
Such attendant shall supervise conduct on and in all common areas
and be responsible for any violation of the provisions of this section
or any other laws, ordinances or rules that govern the operation of
a firing range.
(8) Abandonment and discontinuance. When an existing firing range is
discontinued without the intent to reinstate the firing range use,
the property owner or operator shall notify the Township of such
intent. In any event, the discontinuance of the firing range or
nonuse of the firing range complex for a period in excess of 90 days
shall create the presumption said facility is abandoned, and any
current, valid permits issued shall terminate.
A. The minimum lot size shall be three acres.
B. A chicken coop shall be maintained only in the back yard of the
property; the chicken coop is prohibited from being located in the front
or side yard of any property.
§ 195-137.10 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.11
1:730
C. All chickens shall be housed in a chicken coop that is either stationary
or mobile, and secure and enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
D. The chicken coop shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any lot
line.
E. The chicken coop shall not be within 50 feet from any dwelling.
F. A person or household shall not erect or maintain more than one
chicken coop on his, her or its property.
G. An outside run is permitted when attached to the chicken coop.
Chickens shall not be permitted to run at large. If an outside run is
provided, it shall be no bigger than 10 square feet per chicken and shall
be enclosed in such a way that contains the chickens. The outside run
shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any property line and 50
feet from any dwelling on an adjacent lot. Any chicken not contained
within an approved coop or run shall be deemed "at large."
H. Chickens shall be kept for personal use only. The selling of chickens, or
chicken manure, or the breeding of chickens for commercial purposes
is prohibited.
I. The maximum number of chickens permitted on a lot of three to 10
acres is 12.
J. The keeping of roosters is prohibited.
K. Sanitary requirements for housing chickens:
(1) Any owner or owners of chickens are required to house such
chickens at all times under sanitary conditions so that the keeping
of chickens shall not become either a public or private nuisance;
and
(2) All chicken feces accumulated on private property shall be removed
by using the approved sanitary method of double-bagging and
placing in the trash for collection; and
(3) Chicken feces on private property shall not be allowed to
accumulate to the degree that it becomes a public health nuisance
or hazard. In cases where chicken feces do accumulate on private
property, the Code Enforcement Officer may conduct an
investigation, after which the accumulation may be declared a
public health hazard or nuisance and the owners shall be ordered
to remove and dispose of the accumulated feces in an approved
manner. The order to remove such accumulated feces shall be
given personally to the owner and shall be sent by certified mail,
and the owner shall be given a period of 48 hours from the date and
time of receipt of the order to clean the property and remove the
accumulated feces.
§ 195-137.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.11
1:731
§ 195-137.12. Oil and gas operations. [Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
191]
L. Composting. It shall be unlawful for any person to spread or cause to
spread or deposit upon any ground or premises any chicken manure.
M. Proper storage of feed. All feed, water and other items associated with
the keeping of chickens shall be protected in a way that prevents
infestation by rats, mice, or other rodents or vectors.
A. Purpose: to provide for the health and safety of the residents of
Brighton Township, to preserve the character of residential
neighborhoods, and to encourage beneficial and compatible land uses
with regard to oil and gas operations.
B. Industrial and development performance standards. Oil and gas
operations shall comply with the industrial and development standards
set forth in § 195-137.13.
C. Permit requirement.
(1) No oil or gas operation, natural gas compressor station, natural gas
processing plant, nor an addition to an existing oil or gas operation,
natural gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant
shall be constructed or located Brighton Township unless a permit
has been issued by the Township to the operator approving the
construction or preparation of the site for oil or gas operation, or
for construction of natural gas compressor stations or natural gas
processing plants.
(2) The permit application, and any amended permit application, shall
be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors of Brighton Township.
(3) Any modification to an existing and permitted oil or gas operation
that materially alters the size, location, number of wells or
accessory equipment or structures, or any modification to an
existing natural gas compressor station or natural gas processing
plant, shall require a modification of the permit under this section.
Like-kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
D. Application requirements for oil and gas operations.
(1) The operator of an oil and gas operation shall submit to the Zoning
Officer the following at least 10 days prior to the commencement of
drilling:
(a) A complete copy of the application for permit filed with the
PADEP.
(b) All accompanying materials provided to the Department of
Environmental Protection of the commonwealth.
§ 195-137.11 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.12
1:732
(c) A copy of the drilling permit issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(d) Contact information for the operator, 24 hours a day, 365 days
a year.
(e) A description of plans for the transportation of materials and
equipment, and proposed routes, to construct, operate,
dismantle, or remove the facility, and measures that will be
taken to maintain all Township roads that are used to transport
materials and equipment. See also § 195-137.13D.
(f) A schedule indicating the following dates, when known, or at
least 30 days prior:
[1] Anticipated site preparation start and completion.
[2] Anticipated drilling activity start and completion.
[3] Anticipated completion/perforating work start and
completion.
[4] Anticipated stimulation/fracturing work start and
completion.
[5] Anticipated production work to begin and end.
[6] Anticipated plugging date.
(2) The information required by Subsection D(1)(a) through (f) herein
shall be updated upon changes occurring.
E. Emergency, preparedness, prevention and contingency plan.
(1) Prior to the development of an oil and gas operation, the operator
shall provide to the Township's first responders, including the
Police Department, Fire Department, and Zoning Officer, a copy of
its (emergency) preparedness, prevention and contingency plan.
The operator shall make available an appropriate site orientation
for first responders. Such site orientation shall be made available at
least annually during the period when the operator anticipates
construction, drilling, development, production and related
activities in the Township. The preparedness, prevention and
contingency plan shall be updated at least annually, or upon
changes occurring, and shall also include the following provisions:
(a) Vandalism.
(b) Emergency contact numbers.
(c) Fire response plan.
(d) Plan for the location and rescue of trapped employees in the
event of a well site disaster.
§ 195-137.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.12
1:733
(e) Application for a 911 address for this well site.
F. Access drives. An access drive shall be provided along and from the
street to the well site area in compliance with the following:
(1) The access drive shall be installed prior to the arrival of any
equipment to the site and shall be maintained in good condition.
(2) The access drive shall be of such design and material so as to keep
vehicular traffic exiting the site from carrying mud or dirt onto a
public road. No operator shall allow mud or dirt to be carried onto
the public road from the site. All access drives must also comply
with the dust-control measures provided in § 195-137.13C.
(3) The operator shall cause the access drive to a site to be reasonably
clear of snow, ice, mud, garbage, trash, abandoned vehicles and
debris as long as the site is active, or in a state of development or
production, to enable emergency access.
(4) An off-street area for construction, maintenance and site vehicles
to stand while gaining entrance to the access road shall be
provided that does not disrupt the normal flow of traffic on the
public street.
(5) Driveways and access roads connecting directly to state roads shall
require Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
highway occupancy permit approval. Prior to initiating any work at
a drill site, the operator shall provide the Township a copy of its
highway occupancy permit.
G. Setback requirements for oil and gas operations other than
unconventional wells.
(1) No well shall be drilled within 200 feet of a building, measured
horizontally from the vertical well bore.
(2) No well shall be drilled within 200 feet of an existing private water
well, measured horizontally from the vertical well bore.
(3) No well site may be prepared nor well drilled within 100 feet from
the vertical well bore or 100 feet from the edge of the well site,
whichever is greater, measured horizontally from any streams,
springs, wetlands, and other bodies of water.
(4) The required setbacks may be waived by the owner of the building
or water well.
H. Setbacks for unconventional gas wells.
(1) No unconventional well shall be drilled within 1,000 feet from a
property line in the R-1 District; 750 feet from the property line in
the UD District; and 500 feet of a property line in all other districts.
§ 195-137.12 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.12
1:734
The distance shall be measured horizontally from the vertical well
bore.
(2) No unconventional well shall be drilled within 500 feet of an
existing private water well, measured horizontally from the vertical
well bore.
(3) No unconventional well shall be drilled within 1,000 feet, measured
horizontally from the vertical well bore, of an existing public water
supply well, surface water intake, reservoir, or other water supply
extraction point used by a water purveyor.
(4) No unconventional well site may be prepared nor well drilled
within 300 feet from the vertical well bore or 100 feet from the
edge of the well site, whichever is greater, measured horizontally
from any streams, springs, wetlands, and other bodies of water.
(5) The required setbacks may be waived in writing by the owner of the
building or water well.
I. Public information meetings. The operator is encouraged, but not
required, to hold a public information meeting wherein it will describe
the planned development activities and allow questions from Township
residents. The operator shall advertise the meeting(s) in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Township. If drilling or development
activities continue for more than one year, the operator may consider
annual meetings to update the residents as long as drilling or
development is continuing or planned.
J. For the purposes of this § 195-137.12, the word "building" is defined as
an occupied structure with walls and a roof within which individuals
live or customarily work.
K. Natural gas compressor stations. Where natural gas compressor
stations are authorized as a permitted use or a conditional use, the
natural gas compressor station building must meet the following
standards:
(1) The natural gas compressor station is located 750 feet or more
from the nearest existing building or 200 feet from the nearest lot
line, whichever is greater, unless waived by the owner of the
building or adjoining lot; and
(2) The noise level does not exceed a noise standard of 60 dBA at the
nearest property line or the applicable standard imposed by federal
law, whichever is less.
L. Natural gas processing plants. Natural gas processing plants must
meet the following requirements:
(1) The natural gas processing plant building is located at the greater
of at least 750 feet from the nearest existing building or at least
§ 195-137.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.12
1:735
§ 195-137.13. Industrial and development performance standards.
[Added 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 191]
200 feet from the nearest lot line, unless waived by the owner of
the building or adjoining lot; and
(2) The noise level of the natural gas processing plant building does
not exceed a noise standard of 60 dBA at the nearest property line
or the applicable standard imposed by federal law, whichever is
less.
M. Impoundment areas. The edge of any water or other fluid storage or
impoundment areas used exclusively for oil and gas operations shall not
be located closer than 300 feet from any existing building.
N. Geophysical and seismic testing.
(1) Prior to any geophysical or seismic testing being conducted on
Township property, the operator shall provide the following
information to the Township:
(a) Contact information for the operator and its subcontractor
conducting the testing.
(b) Time schedule for the testing.
(c) Location of the testing.
(2) Geophysical and seismic testing shall be prohibited between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Mondays through Saturdays and
all day Sundays and holidays.
(3) The operator shall comply with Article VI of Chapter 175, §§ 175-37
through 175-46.
A. Lighting requirements. The applicant/owner shall cause all temporary
and permanent site lighting to be located to prevent direct glare from
such lighting on adjacent public roads and residential property, to have
a maximum footcandle at all property lines of 0.5, and to direct light
downward and inward.
B. Noise. The Township recognizes and acknowledges that certain
ongoing operations are accompanied by inherent noise. The regulations
in this section are intended and shall be interpreted and applied to
establish a process for reasonable noise control that provides for
response to individual complaints and requires that undue noise be
addressed, where feasible, without the Township dictating the
particular operational steps that must be taken. The applicant/owner
shall take the following steps to minimize, to the extent practicable, the
noise resulting from the development:
(1) Prior to site development, the applicant/owner shall establish a
continuous seventy-two-hour ambient noise level at the nearest
§ 195-137.12 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.13
1:736
protected structure property line or 100 feet from the nearest
protected structure (as measured to the closest exterior point of
the building), whichever is closer to the protected structure, or,
alternatively, and in lieu of establishing the above seventy-two-hour
ambient noise level, the applicant/owner may assume and use, for
the purposes of compliance with this section a default ambient
noise level of 60 dBA. The sound-level meter used in conducting
any evaluation shall meet the American National Standards
Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the
associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide
equivalent data.
(2) The applicant/owner shall provide documentation of any
established seventy-two-hour evaluation, relied upon to establish
an ambient noise level greater than 60 dBA, to the Township's
Zoning Officer within three business days of such a request from
the Zoning Officer.
(3) Noise levels.
(a) The noise levels generated during ongoing activities when
measured at the nearest protected structure property line or
100 feet from the nearest protected structure (as measured to
the closest exterior point of the building), whichever is closer
to the protected structure, shall not exceed the ambient noise
level (as determined by the seventy-two-hour evaluation) or
default level, whichever is higher:
[1] During ongoing activities, by more than seven decibels
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.;
[2] During ongoing activities, by more than five decibels
during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(b) The applicant/owner shall inform the Township of which level
(average ambient noise level or default level) is being used.
(4) Adjustments to the foregoing noise limits may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 1
NOTES:
*Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
§ 195-137.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.13
1:737
(5) If a complaint is received by the Township from any person using a
protected structure, whether a resident or otherwise, regarding
noise during ongoing activities, the applicant/owner shall, within
24 hours of receipt of the complaint from the Township,
continuously monitor for a forty-eight-hour period at a point which
is the closer of:
(a) The complainant's protected structure property line nearest to
the equipment generating the noise; or
(b) One hundred feet from the protected structure.
(6) Once the monitoring is complete, the applicant/owner will provide
monitoring data to the Township and will meet with Township
representatives and affected property owners to discuss whether
possible noise-abatement measures are warranted, if the potential
levels set forth herein were exceeded. If permitted levels are
exceeded, the applicant/owner shall utilize the services of a person
with expertise in noise measurement and noise remediation to
study, with the involvement and input of the Township Engineer,
any possible remedial measures, including but not limited to
construction of sound walls and placement of acoustic blanketing
for sound insulation. The results of the study shall be provided in a
written report to the Township as to whether any such remedial
measures are effective and feasible based on all the relevant
circumstances, including the noise level, the extent that the
permitted noise level is exceeded, the number of protected
structures adversely affected and their location, the nature and
type of drilling equipment being utilized, and whether the use of
any such remedial measures would create a safety hazard or be
contrary to state or federal regulation.
(a) If the written report concludes that any effective and feasible
remedial measures are available, then such measure or
measures shall be implemented as recommended by the
report, to bring noise within permitted levels.
(7) To reduce noise, any internal combustion engine or compressor for
use on any production equipment shall be equipped with an
exhaust muffler or an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or exhaust
box shall be constructed of noncombustible materials designed and
installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations. Moreover, all
such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be
maintained in good operating condition according to
manufacturer's specifications.
(8) Where electricity is reasonably available to the site, an electricpowered
pump motor is preferred. Where electricity is not utilized,
petroleum-powered pump motors shall have an adequate muffler
system so that the noise level of the engines during the actual
§ 195-137.13 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.13
1:738
drilling does not exceed the noise level of 60 decibels at the
property line.
C. Dust control.
(1) The emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes or
similar substances or conditions which can endanger the health,
safety or general welfare or which can cause any soiling or staining
of persons or property at any point beyond the property line of the
use creating the emission is prohibited. Dust-control measures
shall be used to stabilize soil from wind erosion and to reduce dust
generated from drilling or site activities, including:
(a) Stabilize exposed soils using vegetation, mulching, spray-on
adhesives, calcium chloride, sprinkling, and stone and gravel
layering.
(b) Stabilize unpaved haul roads, parking and staging areas within
the site.
(c) Minimize the impact of dust by anticipating the direction of
prevailing winds.
(d) Direct construction and commercial vehicle traffic to stabilized
roadways within the site.
(e) Pave, vegetate, or chemically stabilize access points where
unpaved traffic surfaces adjoin paved public streets.
(f) Provide covers for haul trucks transporting materials that
contribute to dust.
(g) Provide for wet suppression or chemical stabilization of
exposed soils.
(h) Provide for rapid cleanup of sediments deposited on paved
roads.
(i) Furnish vehicle wash-down areas.
(j) Reduce speed to 15 miles per hour or less and reduce trips on
unpaved roads on site.
(k) Implement dust-control measures for material stockpiles.
(l) Stabilize abandoned construction/staging areas on site using
vegetation or chemical stabilization methods.
(m) Minimize extent of site areas which are disturbed.
(2) A dust-control plan shall be submitted with the site plan,
demonstrating compliance with this subsection.
D. Over-posted-weight local traffic and excess maintenance agreement.
§ 195-137.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.13
1:739
(1) The applicant/owner shall show the proposed Township routes of
all vehicles to be utilized for hauling and the estimated weights of
those vehicles. The applicant/owner shall show evidence of
compliance with designated weight limits on Township streets,
unless bond and an excess maintenance agreement has been
entered into to assure road damage repair. The applicant/owner
shall design the hauling routes for the oil and gas operation,
mineral extraction operation, and other industrial uses to minimize
the use of and impact upon Township roads wherever feasible.
(2) The applicant/owner shall show evidence satisfactory to the
Township Engineer that intersections along proposed hauling
routes provide a sufficient turning radius for vehicles to be utilized
for hauling, such that all turns can be safely made without damage
to vehicles, sidewalks or curbs.
(3) The Township Engineer shall review the proposed routes provided
by the applicant/owner and reasonably determine whether
preventive measures, such as shoring of bridges or putting
protective mats over utility lines, should be taken to prevent
damage to Township roads, bridges or utilities. If such preventive
measures are recommended, the applicant/owner shall install such
protective measures as directed by the Township Engineer prior to
beginning operations.
(4) As required by § 189-43 of the Township Code, the applicant/owner
shall post a bond and enter into an excess maintenance agreement.
E. Bunk housing. Bunk housing of nonsupervisory site workers is not
permitted. The Township acknowledges that certain supervisory
personnel (not exceeding six individuals at any one time) are required
for reasons of safety to be present on a continuous basis during certain
ongoing operations, and resting accommodations for such supervisory
personnel are not prohibited. Prior to utilizing supervisory personnel
accommodations, the applicant or applicant/owner shall complete a
registration form provided by the Township, which shall include, but not
be limited to, a list of the job titles which constitute supervisory
personnel and the names and contact information of each supervisor to
be on site.
F. Signs.
(1) Every industrial development operation shall have a sign posted at
the site to list the following:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant/owner.
(b) Any Pennsylvania DEP number and permit number or other
similar type of identifying data.
(c) "Danger" or "Warning" in conspicuous print.
§ 195-137.13 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.13
1:740
§ 195-137.14. Boardinghouses. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
(d) "Dial 911 to reach the Brighton Township Police Department or
Fire Department in case of emergency."
(e) Emergency telephone numbers for the driller, applicant and
owner.
(2) The applicant/owner shall keep the information provided on the
sign current.
G. Fencing of detention facilities and impoundments. As a matter of public
safety, detention facilities and impoundments shall be fully enclosed
with a minimum four-foot-high fence with an access gate of sufficient
width to permit entry of maintenance vehicles.
H. Site development hours of operation. Site development which requires
the operation of heavy construction or excavation machinery, including
but not limited to bulldozers, high lifts, backhoes, trucks, power
shovels, pump and jackhammers, and the operation of equipment or any
other type of machinery used outside a structure, in conjunction with
work requiring a building permit, excluding oil and gas operations, but
including general site development for such operations, which causes a
noise sufficient to disturb the peace and general tranquility of the
general public or any portion thereof shall be prohibited in the entire
Township between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Saturday and all day Sunday and on holidays.
I. Environmental impact. The applicant/owner must provide an
environmental impact study for the proposed development.
J. Health impact. The applicant/owner must provide a health impact study
for the proposed development.
A. The owner shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling.
B. The maximum number of sleeping rooms offered for use shall be two.
C. The minimum night stay shall be two weeks.
D. No boarding rooms shall be in the basement.
E. There shall be no separate access for the boarding rooms; boarders
shall use same access as owner.
F. Meals may be provided by the owner and may be shared family style.
There shall be a central kitchen and shared dining. No separate kitchen
facilities shall be located in sleeping rooms. Meals shall not be served to
customers who are not boarders.
G. Owners must register rental properties and tenants or guest boarding
for more than 30 consecutive overnight stays in any thirty-day period.
See § 152-3.
§ 195-137.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.14
1:741
§ 195-137.15. Nightclubs. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
A nightclub may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding of compliance with the following specific criteria:
H. Signs advertising the boardinghouse are prohibited.
I. One off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot for each
sleeping room, in addition to two required spaces. The parking area
shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a minimum
six-foot-high compact hedge or fence.
J. Public sanitary sewer and public water service shall be provided.
K. A minimum of one acre is required.
A. Location.
(1) There shall be only one nightclub permitted on a single lot or
parcel.
(2) A nightclub shall not be located within 100 feet from any land or lot
in residential districts or from any parcel of land or lot used
principally as a residential use.
(3) A nightclub shall not create an enticement for minors because of its
proximity to nearby uses where minors may congregate, including
but not limited to parks, schools, churches, or libraries. A minimum
setback of 300 feet from the property lines of parks, schools,
churches, and libraries is required.
B. Measuring separation requirements.
(1) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured from the lot
line of the lot used by the nightclub to the lot line of any residential
district.
(2) Where a nightclub is located within a multitenant facility, such as a
shopping center, measurement shall occur from the boundary of
the leasehold interest, instead of the property line.
(3) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
point on each parcel.
C. Hours of operation. A nightclub may be open for business no longer
than on Mondays through Thursdays from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight; on Fridays and Saturdays from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (the
following day); and on Sundays from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Such
hours of operation may be further limited or restricted (as an additional
condition) upon a finding that such is reasonable and necessary due to
the proximity of the nightclub to adjacent uses.
§ 195-137.14 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.15
1:742
§ 195-137.16. Bars/taverns. [Added 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 203]
A bar/tavern may be authorized by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional
use upon a finding of compliance with the following specific criteria:
D. A proposed nightclub must demonstrate specific compliance with the
regulations concerning fire protection; lighting; noise limitations;
odors; off-street parking; and off-street loading, and the industrial and
development standards as set forth in § 195-137.13.
E. All outdoor sound speakers are prohibited. Nightclubs shall not
generate noise in excess of the limits otherwise permitted by this
chapter. No windows or doors shall be opened during operation to limit
noise to neighboring areas.
F. Outdoor tents or activities are prohibited.
G. The owner/operator of the nightclub shall be responsible for the
conduct and safety of the patrons. The owner/operator is required to
have appropriate security to maintain peace and safety of the patrons.
A. Location.
(1) There shall be only one bar/tavern permitted on a single lot or
parcel.
(2) A bar/tavern shall not be located within 200 feet from any land or
lot in residential districts or from any parcel of land or lot used
principally as a residential use.
(3) A bar/tavern shall not create an enticement for minors because of
its proximity to nearby uses where minors may congregate,
including but not limited to parks, schools, churches, or libraries. A
minimum setback of 300 feet from the property lines of parks,
schools, churches, and libraries is required.
B. Measuring separation requirements.
(1) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured from the lot
line of the lot used by the bar/tavern to the lot line of any
residential district.
(2) Where a bar/tavern is located within a multitenant facility, such as
a shopping center, measurement shall occur from the boundary of
the leasehold interest, instead of the property line.
(3) The separation requirements hereof shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
point on each parcel.
C. Hours of operation. A bar/tavern may be open for business no longer
than on Mondays through Thursdays from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight; on Fridays and Saturdays from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. (the
§ 195-137.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.16
1:743
§ 195-137.17. Senior housing. [Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 210]
following day); and on Sundays from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Such
hours of operation may be further limited or restricted (as an additional
condition) upon a finding that such is reasonable and necessary due to
the proximity of the bar/tavern to adjacent uses.
D. A proposed bar/tavern must demonstrate specific compliance with the
regulations concerning fire protection; lighting; noise limitations;
odors; off-street parking; and off-street loading, and the industrial and
development standards as set forth in § 195-137.13.
E. All outdoor sound speakers are prohibited. Bar/taverns shall not
generate noise in excess of the limits otherwise permitted by this
chapter. No windows or doors shall be opened during operation to limit
noise to neighboring areas.
F. Outdoor tents or activities are prohibited.
G. The owner/operator of the bar/tavern shall be responsible for the
conduct and safety of the patrons. The owner/operator is required to
have appropriate security to maintain peace and safety of the patrons.
A. The housing is intended and operated for persons 55 years of age and
older.
B. At least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person
who is 55 years of age or older.
C. The housing facility or community shall publish and adhere to policies
and procedures that demonstrate its intent to qualify for the exemption
under the Housing for Older Persons Act.147
D. The facility or community must comply with HUD's regulatory
requirements for age verification of residents.
E. The development is a minimum of three acres.
F. The development shall include only garden apartments, single-family
semidetached dwellings (duplex triplex, or quadraplex), or townhouse
dwellings (no single-family detached dwellings), with the following
minimum building separation distances.
(1) End walls face each other but contain no windows: 20 feet.
(2) End walls face each other and contain windows: 35 feet.
(3) End wall of one building faces principal façade (front or rear) of
neighboring building: 45 feet.
(4) Principal facades (front or rear) of neighboring buildings face each
other: 60 feet.
147. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 195-137.16 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-137.17
1:744
(5) Connected groups of abutting buildings shall not exceed in total
length 300 feet.
(6) Distances shall be measured from the shortest dimension between
any parts, including projecting balconies, of adjacent buildings.
G. The owner/developer/applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the
exemption of 24 CFR 100, Subpart E, of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and
the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995, and amendments.148
148. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 195-137.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-137.17
1:745

ARTICLE XVI
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 195-138. Term defined.
A nonconforming lot, structure or use is the lawful employment or
occupancy of a land area, building or structure which was in existence prior
to the enactment of this chapter and all amendments thereto, but does not
comply with the present provisions of this chapter or amendments hereafter
enacted.
§ 195-139. Permitted continuation.
§ 195-140. Nonconforming lots.
§ 195-141. Nonconforming use of a lot.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a
lawful use of a lot exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms
of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued as long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. A nonconforming lot, structure or use may continue, be bought or sold,
altered, restored or extended subject to the provisions of this article
even though such lot, structure or use does not conform to the
regulations established for the zoning district in which it is located.
B. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a
permit has been issued and the construction of which shall have
diligently pursued within two months of the date of such permit and the
ground story framework of which shall have been completed within four
months of the date of the permit and which entire building shall be
completed according to such plans as filed within one year from the
date of the permit.
A. In any zoning district in which single-family detached dwellings are
permitted, a single-family detached dwelling and customary accessory
structures may be erected on any single nonconforming lot if the lot is
in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in
the same ownership (provided that other requirements not involving lot
area or lot width shall conform to the regulations for the zoning district
in which such lot is located). This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for lot area or lot width that are
generally applicable in the zoning district. Variation of yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning
Hearing Board as provided for by § 195-157, Variance.
B. Where two or more such nonconforming lots of record abut each other
and are in single ownership, they shall be combined prior to
development to effect a more conforming situation.
§ 195-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-141
1:747
§ 195-142. Nonconforming use of a structure.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a
lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and lot in combination, exists that
is made no longer permissible in the Zoning District under the terms of this
chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued as long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No nonconforming use of a lot shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
B. No nonconforming use of a lot shall be changed to another type of
nonconforming use unless such new use is considered by the Zoning
Hearing Board to be less nonconforming than the original use.
C. No nonresidential nonconforming use of a lot shall be enlarged or
increased or extended to occupy a greater area of a lot than was
occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
unless a special exception shall be obtained through action of the
Zoning Hearing Board as provided for by § 195-157.1, Uses by special
exception, and subject to the following:
(1) The extension does not encroach upon the lot area requirements,
minimum setbacks, zoning or land development requirements of
the district in which the nonconforming use is presently located.
(2) The extension is for the purpose of expanding the nonconforming
use which was in existence at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
(3) Such extension does not result in an increase in total lot use area of
more than 50% of the original lot use area.
(4) The extension is in the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board
interpreted to be necessary by the natural expansion and growth of
trade of the nonconforming use.
(5) Adequate parking can be provided in conformance with this
chapter to serve both the original and expanded use.
(6) Such expansion does not present a threat to the health or safety of
the community or its residents.
D. A residential nonconforming use of a lot located within a commercial or
other nonresidential zoning district may be enlarged or increased or
extended to occupy a greater area of the lot than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, subject to
compliance with the yard requirements of Article VI, R-2 Agricultural
Residential District.
A. No nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and lot in
combination, shall be changed to another type of nonconforming use
§ 195-141 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-142
1:748
§ 195-143. Nonconforming structure.
unless such new use is considered by the Zoning Hearing Board to be
less nonconforming than the original use.
B. A nonconforming use of a structure may be extended throughout any
part of a structure that was manifestly arranged or designed for such
use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy any lot or portion of a lot outside such
structure.
C. No nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and lot in
combination, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed
or moved unless a special exception shall be obtained through action of
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for by § 195-157.1, Uses by
special exception, and subject to the following:
(1) The extension does not encroach upon the lot area requirements,
minimum setbacks, the maximum building height requirements or
other zoning and land development requirements of the district in
which the nonconforming use is presently located.
(2) The extension is for the purpose of expanding the nonconforming
use which was in existence at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
(3) Such extension does not result in an increase in total floor area or
lot use area of more than 50% of the original floor area or lot area.
(4) Adequate parking can be provided in conformance with this
chapter to serve both the original and expanded use.
(5) Such expansion does not present a threat to the health or safety of
the community or its residents.
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building declared unsafe by a proper
authority.
A. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this section, a
lawful structure exists that could not be built under the requirements of
this chapter, such structure may be continued as long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No commercial or other nonresidential use structure may be
enlarged or otherwise have any structural alterations made to it in
a way that increases its nonconformity unless approved by action of
the Zoning Hearing Board as provided for by § 195-157, Variance. A
residential structure may be enlarged or otherwise have structural
alterations made to it that increases its nonconformity, subject to
the following restrictions:
§ 195-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-143
1:749
§ 195-144. Abandonment.
(a) The addition or structural alteration does not increase the
nonconformity by being closer to the property line, thereby
reducing the setback of the structure; and
(b) The existing structure being enlarged through addition or
structural alteration meets the following criteria:
[1] The front yard is not less than 80% of the front yard
setback requirement for the zoning district in which it is
located.
[2] The rear yard is not less than 70% of the rear yard setback
requirement for the zoning district in which it is located.
[3] The side yard is not less than 60% of the side yard setback
requirement for the zoning district in which it is located.
(2) A nonconforming structure may be altered or improved within the
confines of the existing buildings.
(3) A nonconforming structure that has a nonconforming use may be
altered to the extent necessary if such alteration is intended and
will result in the conversion of the use of the structure to a
conforming use.
(4) A nonconforming structure which is damaged by fire, explosion,
flood or other casualty to the extent of 100% of its value (exclusive
of walls below grade) at the date of the damage as determined by
fair market value of the building and which does not comply with
the yard requirements or height regulations of the chapter shall not
be restored except in conformity with the regulations for the zoning
district in which such building is located.
(5) A nonconforming building destroyed to the extent of less than
100% by fire, explosion, flood or other casualty or legally
condemned may be reconstructed and used for the same
nonconforming use, provided that:
(a) The reconstructed building shall not exceed in height, area or
volume the building destroyed or condemned; and
(b) Building reconstruction shall be commenced within one year
from the date the building was destroyed or condemned, shall
comply with applicable building codes in effect at the time of
reconstruction and shall be completed without interruption.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any portion of a building declared unsafe by a proper
authority.
§ 195-143 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-144
1:750
§ 195-145. Registration.
The Zoning Officer shall prepare a list registering all nonconforming uses,
lots or structures existing at the time of the legal enactment of this chapter.
Said list shall include a general description of the nature and extent of
the nonconformity and may include photographs as documentation. Further,
said list shall be maintained for public use and information.
§ 195-146. (Reserved)
§ 195-147. (Reserved)
§ 195-148. (Reserved)
§ 195-149. (Reserved)
§ 195-150. (Reserved)
A. The nonconforming use of a structure or lot on which a nonconforming
use has been changed by an authorized or permitted use shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which
the structure or lot is located, and the nonconforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
B. A nonconforming use of a structure or structure and lot in combination
shall be considered abandoned when one of the following conditions
exists:
(1) When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent
either by vacation of the structure or lot, cessation of activity or by
formal application for a change of use or demolition.
(2) When the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the
nonconforming use have been removed from the structure or lot
and have not been replaced by similar equipment within six
months, unless other facts show intention to resume the
nonconforming use.
(3) When a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of
one year.
(4) When it has been replaced by a conforming use.
(5) When it has been changed to a use permitted as a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Any nonconforming use of a sign or outdoor advertising device which is
discontinued or for which the face is not replaced or not used for six
months shall not be resumed, and if any nonconforming sign or outdoor
advertising device is removed, it shall not be reconstructed.
§ 195-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-150
1:751

ARTICLE XVII
Amendments
§ 195-151. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time as deemed necessary
for the public welfare or convenience, in compliance with the provision of
Article VI, Sections 609 and 609.1 of Act 247, as amended, known and cited
as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."149
A. Enactment of amendment. An amendment to this chapter may be
initiated by the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission.
Before voting on an enactment of an amendment, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. In the case of an amendment prepared by other than the
Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors shall submit said
amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendations, at least
30 days prior to the public hearing. If, after any public hearing held
upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is revised or further
revised to include land not previously affected by it, the Board of
Supervisors shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public
notice, before proceeding to vote on the amendment. Thirty days prior
to the public hearing held by the Board of Supervisors, the Township
Planning Commission shall submit the proposed amendment to the
Beaver County Planning Commission for recommendations. [Amended
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 156]
B. Procedure for landowner curative amendment. A landowner who
desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this chapter,
the Zoning Map attached and made a part hereof or any provision
hereof which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment,
accompanied by the appropriate fee, to the Board of Supervisors with a
written request that his challenge and proposed amendment or
amendments be heard and decided in the manner prescribed by Act
247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Article VI, and all
amendments thereto,150 and further defined as follows:
(1) Procedure for filing for curative amendment.
(a) The landowner shall make a written request to the Board of
Supervisors that it hold a hearing on his challenge. The request
shall contain a short statement reasonably informing the Board
of Supervisors of the matters that are in issue and the grounds
for the challenge.
(b) Such request may be submitted at any time, but if an
application for a permit or approval is denied under this
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
150. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-151
1:753
chapter, the request shall be made not later than 30 days
after notification of such denial. In such case, if the landowner
elects to make the request to the Board of Supervisors and the
request is timely, the time within which he may seek review of
the denial of the permit or approval on other issues shall not
begin until the request is finally disposed of.
(c) The request shall be accompanied by plans and other materials
describing the use or development proposed by the landowner.
Such plans and other material may be general in nature, but
should provide a sufficient base for evaluating the challenge.
(d) If the Township of Brighton does not accept a landowner's
curative amendment brought in accordance with this
subsection and a court subsequently rules that the challenge
has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration
of invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and map, but only
those provisions relating to the landowner's challenge.
(2) Public hearing.
(a) Upon petition, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing
thereon within 60 days of the filing of the request.
(b) At least 30 days prior to the hearing the Board of Supervisors
shall refer the proposed amendment to the Township Planning
Commission and the Beaver County Planning Commission for
recommendations.
(c) The public notices of the hearing shall, in addition to the
requirements for advertisement for any amendment, indicate
that the validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map is in
question and shall indicate the place and times when a copy of
the landowner's request, including all plans submitted and the
proposed amendment(s), may be examined by the public.
(d) The public hearing shall be conducted within the following
guidelines:
[1] The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors presiding shall have the power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant documents and
papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
[2] The parties have the right to be represented by counsel
and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and
present evidence and argument and cross-examine
adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
§ 195-151 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-151
1:754
[3] Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be
excluded.
[4] The Board of Supervisors shall keep a transcript of the
proceedings as well as copies of graphic or written
material received in evidence. These shall be made
available to any party at cost.
[5] The Board of Supervisors shall not communicate, directly
or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in
connection with any issue involved except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or
other materials unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall
not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his
representatives unless all parties are given an opportunity
to be present.
(e) The hearing may be postponed or continued at the request of
the landowner or by mutual consent of the parties.
(3) Procedure for rendering formal action. Upon completion of the
hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall render a decision and
communicate said decision to all parties within 30 days.
(a) Approval of the amendment shall be granted by formal
affirmative vote at a regular or special meeting of the Board of
Township Supervisors.
(b) The landowner's request shall be considered denied when:
[1] The Board of Supervisors notifies the landowner that it will
not adopt the amendment.
[2] The Board of Supervisors adopts another amendment
which is unacceptable to the landowner.
[3] The Board of Supervisors fails to act on the landowner's
request within 30 days of the close of the last hearing,
unless the time is extended by mutual consent of the
landowner and Board of Supervisors.
C. Procedure for municipal curative amendment. If the Township of
Brighton determines that its zoning ordinance or any portion thereof is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following action:
(1) The Township of Brighton shall declare by formal action its zoning
ordinance or portions thereof substantively invalid and propose a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of
§ 195-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-151
1:755
such declaration the governing body shall, by resolution, make
specific findings setting forth the invalidity, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are not permitted or not
permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses requiring revision;
(c) Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
(2) Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Township of Brighton shall enact a curative amendment to validate
or reaffirm the validity of its zoning ordinance pursuant to the
provisions of Act 247, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Article VI, and all amendments thereto.151
(3) Upon declaration of invalidity, the Board of Supervisors shall not be
required to consider a landowner's curative amendment nor shall
the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report subsequent
to the declaration and proposal to remedy said invalidity.
(4) The Township of Brighton may not again utilize said procedure for a
thirty-six-month period following the date of enactment of a
curative amendment unless a change in statute or a court decision
requires such curative amendment.
D. Public notice. When a proposed zoning amendment involves the
reclassification of land, a minimum of two notices shall be posted on the
subject property not less than seven days prior to the date of the
required public hearing.
E. Procedure following enactment. Within 30 days following enactment of
a zoning ordinance amendment, a copy of such amendment shall be
forwarded to the Beaver County Planning Commission.
F. Appeal. Any action taken or decision rendered under this article may be
appealed by any parties aggrieved by said action or decision under the
provision and procedures provided in Act 247.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-151 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-151
1:756
ARTICLE XVIII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 195-152. Creation and appointment.
§ 195-153. Removal of members.
Any Zoning Hearing Board member or alternate may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by
a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors which appointed the member,
taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent
to take such vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
§ 195-154. Organization of Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers,
who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For
the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning Hearing Board
and alternates, if appointed, but the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint
a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing
Board as provided in Article IX, Section 908, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.152 The Zoning Hearing
Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure,
consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full public records
A. A Zoning Hearing Board is hereby created. The membership of said
Board shall consist of five residents of the Township appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. Their terms of office shall be five years after
expiration of the initial term; said initial term shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any
vacancies which occur. Appointment to fill vacancies shall be only for
the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing
Board shall hold no other office or be appointed to any other board or
commission in the Township.
B. The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board. Alternates shall serve threeyear
terms and shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions and to cast a vote if designated as a voting alternate
member. Alternates shall hold no other office or be appointed to any
other board or commission in the Township.
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-154
1:757
of its business and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Supervisors once a year.
§ 195-155. Jurisdiction.
§ 195-156. General procedures.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals from any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Officer in the administration of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide all matters referred to
it or upon which it is required to pass under this chapter.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for special
exceptions in those cases where this chapter indicates a special
exception may be granted subject to compliance with the standards and
criteria prescribed. In granting a special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may conduct a hearing and take evidence on
a substantive challenge and amendment to this chapter filed by a
landowner. The Board may further make findings of fact relative to the
challenge and cause to be made a record or transcript, which may serve
as the basis for further action. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not
make recommendations or render an opinion in such matters and has
no authority to alter, change or otherwise grant relief in such cases.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear challenges of validity raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the enactment process if
filed within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance or
amendment.
F. Appeals from the determination of the Municipal Engineer or Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of Chapter 100, Floodplain
Management, shall be heard by the Zoning Hearing Board.
G. Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with
the administration of transfers of development rights or density
provisions shall be heard by the Zoning Hearing Board.
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Municipal
Engineer involving stormwater management or erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be heard by the Zoning Hearing
Board relative to development other than subdivision or planned
residential development applications.
A. The Board shall conduct public hearings following publication of notice
of said hearings once each week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Publication shall
§ 195-154 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-156
1:758
be made as defined in this article. In addition, written notice shall
be provided to the applicant before the Board and other persons so
designated by the Board. Written notice shall also be posted
conspicuously on the subject property not later than seven days prior
to the date of the public hearing.
B. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the Secretary and
Board members, notice and advertising costs and administrative
overhead costs connected with the hearing. Costs for legal expenses,
engineering and technical consultants or expert witnesses shall not be
included.
C. Within the funding limits established by the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Brighton, the Board may employ or contract for
secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and
clerical services. Members of the Board and designated alternates may
receive compensation for the performance of their duties, but in no case
shall it exceed the rate of compensation of the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Board or Hearing Officer, if so designated, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for the
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if ordered
by the Board or Hearing Officer or shall be paid by the person appealing
from the decision of the Board if such appeal is made. In other cases the
party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost.
E. The Board or Hearing Officer, if so designated, shall render a written
decision or make written findings within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or Hearing Officer. When the application is contested
or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the Hearing Officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision. If the
§ 195-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-156
1:759
§ 195-157. Variance.
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F. A copy of the final decision or of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following
the date of the decision.
G. Parties before the Board may utilize mediation as an aid in completing
such proceedings. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those
procedures outlined in this article and shall not be interpreted as
expanding or limiting municipal police powers. Participation shall be
voluntary and be determined by the willingness of parties to negotiate.
Terms and conditions of mediation are as follows:
(1) Parties must establish a method of funding of the mediation.
(2) The selected mediator shall have a working knowledge of municipal
(zoning and subdivision) procedures and demonstrate skills in
mediation.
(3) A time limit for completion or for suspending mediation must be
agreed upon.
(4) Suspension of time limits otherwise authorized by this article,
provided that there is written consent by the mediating parties and
by the applicant or Board of Supervisors if either is not a party at
the mediation, may be agreed upon.
(5) All parties must be identified and afforded an opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, parties shall determine whether some of
all mediation sessions are open or closed to the public.
(7) Mediated solutions shall be in writing, signed by participating
parties and become subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to procedures set forth in this article.
(8) No offers or statements made in other than the final written
mediated agreement shall be admissible as evidence in any
subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
H. Appeal from the Zoning Officer's decision. Appeals arising from the
Zoning Officer's decision on a specific provision of this chapter shall be
handled in the same manner as outlined in § 195-155 of this article.
A. The landowner shall file a request for a variance with the Zoning Officer
along with all maps, plans and text which may be relevant to the
request. Said request shall be accompanied by a fee specified by the
Board of Supervisors pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 195-156 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-157
1:760
§ 195-157.1. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 119]
B. The Zoning Officer shall transmit the request and any information
received therewith, along with his file on said issue forthwith to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
C. Upon receipt of a request for a variance, the Board shall establish a
time and place to hear said request within 60 days.
D. The Board shall render a decision and inform the applicant of said
decision as outlined in § 195-156 of this article.
E. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance where the following
findings are made:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions,
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(6) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code153
and this chapter.
A. General criteria.
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-157.1
1:761
(1) Special exception uses are listed for each zoning district article of
this chapter unless otherwise noted. Only those uses expressly
listed as special exceptions in a particular zoning district may be
considered in that zoning district, except as otherwise specified.
(2) Special exceptions shall be accompanied by an application for land
development. Compliance with land development requirements
shall be required for approval of the development.
(3) Any application for a special exception use shall demonstrate that:
(a) The use will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare if
located where proposed, and will not deteriorate the
environment or generate nuisance conditions;
(b) The use can be accommodated on the site with no variances
required;
(c) The use is compatible with or will support the uses in the
neighborhood of the site;
(d) The use does not require extensive earth moving or revision of
drainage patterns or create substantial increase in stormwater
flow;
(e) The use will not create excessive traffic congestion, and
adequate off-street parking is provided on the same property
as the use;
(f) Areas of the property not to be covered by buildings or paved
are to be landscaped and maintained;
(g) Primary access points to the property are located as far as
possible from road or street intersections, and adequate sight
distances for the posted speed limits have been met;
(h) The Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards in addition to those expressed herein to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
B. Procedure for review.
(1) A developer proposing a special exception use shall submit three
copies of the following materials to the Secretary of the Zoning
Hearing Board:
(a) A written statement supporting the general criteria outlined in
this section and describing in detail the proposed use;
(b) An accurate scaled illustrative site plan showing the
arrangement of the proposed use on the site, including
property lines, uses and structures on adjacent properties,
abutting streets, buildings existing and proposed on the site by
use and height, points of access into the site, internal
§ 195-157.1 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-157.1
1:762
§ 195-158. Time limitations.
Any person aggrieved by the rendering of a decision by the Zoning Officer,
municipal agency or body shall have 30 days from the date of said decision
in which to file an appeal or request for review if such appeal is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person
proves that he had no notice or knowledge of such decision.
§ 195-159. Appeals.
Appeals from a decision or from the findings of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be filed and handled in the manner prescribed by Act 247, Article IX,
as amended, known as the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."154
driveways, parking area layout with number of spaces noted,
freestanding signs to remain or are proposed, areas of
earthmoving with proposed grade of finished slopes identified,
method of collecting and disposing of stormwater, proposed
landscaping and other pertinent information to illustrate the
proposal.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board shall call and hold a public hearing
pursuant to public notice on the proposal within 60 days of receipt
of the required materials and a complete application, in the same
manner as for any action requested of it.
(3) The Board shall, within 45 days of the conclusion of the public
hearing, render a decision on the proposal to either:
(a) Approve the use as submitted;
(b) Approve the use with conditions determined by the Board;
(c) Deny the proposal.
(4) The applicant shall have 30 days in which to notify the Board that
he accepts any attached conditions. Failure to accept shall render
the approval denied for failure to accept the specified conditions.
[Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 206]
(5) The Board shall authorize the Zoning Officer to issue a zoning/
building permit for any approved special exception use.
(6) Failure of the applicant to apply for a zoning/building permit within
one year of receiving approval shall render the decision by the
Board null and void.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-157.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-159
1:763

ARTICLE XIX
Administration
§ 195-160. Zoning Officer.
§ 195-161. Permits.
A. Appointment. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Officer
pursuant to the provisions of Section 614 of Act 247, as amended, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.155 Said Zoning Officer shall
be appointed, shall not hold elective office and shall have a working
knowledge of zoning and subdivision procedures. The Board of
Supervisors may also appoint an Assistant Zoning Officer who shall
exercise the same authority and have the same duties as the Zoning
Officer.
B. Powers and duties. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in
accordance with its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit
any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter. The Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement within the scope of his responsibilities. Within this power,
the Zoning Officer shall have duties as follows:
(1) The Zoning Officer shall receive applications for and issue zoning
and sign permits, certificates of use and occupancy and stop-work
orders in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall make all the required inspections or he
may engage such expert opinion as he may deem necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that may arise.
(3) At least annually, the Zoning Officer shall submit to the Board of
Supervisors a written statement of all zoning and sign permits,
certificates of use and occupancy issued and notices and orders
issued.
(4) An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the
office of the Zoning Officer specified by provisions of this chapter,
and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all
appropriate times.
A. Building and zoning permit. A building and zoning permit shall be
required prior to the erection, addition or alteration of any building or
portion thereof; prior to the use or change in use of a building or land;
and prior to the changes or extension of a nonconforming use. It shall
be unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection or
alteration of any building or for a change in land use, until a permit has
been duly issued therefor. No building and zoning permit shall be
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 195-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-161
1:765
required in cases of normal maintenance activities, minor repairs and
alterations which do not structurally change a building or structure.
(1) Application for permits. All completed applications for permits
shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon
and the exact size and location of any building. All applications
shall be accompanied by the required fee and shall be reviewed
within 10 working days of the date of submittal. In the case of a
permit denial, the applicant shall have 30 days to file an appeal
with the Township Zoning Hearing Board.
(a) No building or structure shall be erected, remodeled, added to
or structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued
by the Zoning Officer. All applications for building and zoning
permits shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and unless, upon written order of the Zoning Hearing
Board, no such building and zoning permit shall be issued for
any building where said construction, addition or alteration for
use thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(b) Remodeling or improvement of existing buildings which does
not alter the basic structure, create additional lot area
coverage or change the use of the parcel or building is exempt
from this specific requirement, provided that the estimated
cost of such activities does not exceed 50% of the fair market
value.
(c) All applications for building permits shall be made in writing by
the owner or his authorized agent and shall include a
statement of intended use of the building. Applications shall be
accompanied by two copies of a layout or plot plan drawn to
scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
the exact size and location upon the lot of the building and
accessory buildings to be erected upon the lot, necessary to
determine that the proposed structure and use of the land will
conform to the provisions of this chapter. When complete and
accurate information is not readily available from existing
records, the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to furnish
a survey of the lot by a registered engineer or registered
surveyor.
(d) One copy of such layout or plat plan shall be returned when
approved by the Zoning Officer, together with the permit, to
the applicant upon payment of a fee as predetermined from a
fee schedule adopted by the Board of Supervisors.156
156. Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 195-161 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-161
1:766
(2) A permit shall be deemed to be revoked and the permit fee forfeited
unless more than token activity is commenced within 90 days of
issuance. Where construction is not completed within one year, a
new permit shall be applied for and fees paid in accordance with a
schedule of fees adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Occupancy permit.
(1) A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or for a part of a
new building or for the structural alteration of an existing building,
shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building
and zoning permit and shall be issued after the erection or
alteration of such building or part of a building shall have been
completed and after due inspection shows the same to be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) A certificate of occupancy for the use or occupancy of vacant land
or for a change of use in an existing building shall be applied for
and issued before any such land or building shall be occupied, used
or changed in use and such certificate of occupancy shall be issued
after application has been made, provided that such proposed use
is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) A fee may be charged for an application for a certificate of
occupancy as required herein; and for the issuance of each copy of
said certificate of occupancy, there will be a charge as per the fee
schedule adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Refusal by the Zoning Officer to issue an occupancy permit shall
include a written statement to the applicant containing reasons for
such denial.
(5) Occupancy permits are required for the following:
(a) Occupancy of a new building.
(b) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter moved or altered so
as to require a building and zoning permit.
(c) Change in the use of an existing building other than to a use of
the same type.
(d) Occupancy and use of unimproved or vacant land.
(e) Change in the use of land except to another use of the same
type.
(f) Any change in use of nonconforming use to a conforming use.
(g) Any vacant, public, commercial or industrial building.
(6) Occupancy permits shall state that the building or the proposed use
of a building or land complies with all provisions of law and of this
chapter and all other ordinances of the municipality. They are
§ 195-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-161
1:767
§ 195-162. Inspection.
The Zoning Officer or his duly appointed representative may make the
following inspections on property for which a permit has been issued:
deemed to authorize and are required for both initial and continued
occupancy and use of the building and land so long as such building
and use is in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Sign permit.
(1) No permanent or temporary sign as described in this chapter shall
be erected until a permit therefor has been issued by the Zoning
Officer.
(2) Application to the Zoning Officer shall be processed within one
week upon receipt of the written request to erect a sign and
payment of a fee as predetermined from a fee schedule adopted by
the Board of Supervisors, with the provisions of this chapter and all
other effective and applicable ordinances. Refusal for a sign permit
shall include a written statement to the applicant containing the
reasons for denial.
(3) Failure to apply for a sign permit shall subject the property owner
to enforcement procedures prescribed by this chapter. Payment of
fines or damages shall not indicate approval to erect a sign.
D. Temporary use permit.
(1) Temporary use permits are required where it is anticipated that the
character of the temporary or seasonal use is of a nature which
may negatively impact existing property.
(2) No temporary use permit shall be issued for any temporary use
where said use would violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Written request to the Zoning Officer for a temporary use permit
shall be processed within one week of receipt of the request and
the payment of the appropriate fee as outlined in the fee schedule
adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Said temporary use permit may be revoked by the Zoning Officer
where a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred.
A. During the period of construction: A record shall be made indicating the
time and date of the inspections and the finding of the Zoning Officer
that the construction is in accordance with plans submitted with the
application for the building.
(1) If the actual construction does not conform to the application, a
written notice of a violation shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
and such construction shall be discontinued. Upon proper
§ 195-161 BRIGHTON CODE § 195-162
1:768
correction of the violation and receipt of written notice from the
Zoning Officer, construction shall proceed.
(2) The notice of violation for the purpose of enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter shall be issued as per the provisions of
Article XXI.
B. At the completion of construction: A record shall be made indicating the
time and date of the inspection, the findings of the Zoning Officer in
regard to conformance to this chapter and the issuance of an occupancy
permit.
§ 195-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-162
1:769

ARTICLE XX
Conditional Use
§ 195-163. Powers and duties.
The Board of Supervisors shall hear and decide all requests for conditional
uses in those cases where this chapter indicates a conditional use may be
granted subject to compliance with the standards and criteria prescribed
and a finding by the Board that said use is consistent with the purpose
of this chapter and the Township's General Development Plan. In granting
a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
§ 195-164. Procedures.
A. The landowner shall file with the Township Secretary a request for the
granting of a conditional use along with all maps, plans and text which
may be necessary to explain the development proposed and its
compliance with the standards and criteria of this chapter. Said request
shall be accompanied by a fee specified by the Board of Supervisors and
shall be filed in triplicate.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall transmit one copy of the request as well
as all documentation to the Township Planning Commission for
recommendations at least 30 days prior to the scheduled public
hearing.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing with required
public notice within 60 days of the filing of said request with the
Township Secretary.
D. The Board shall render a decision and inform the applicant of said
decision within 45 days of the public hearing, unless upon mutual
consent of the Board and applicant it is agreed to continue the
proceedings. [Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 129]
E. The applicant will also be responsible for paying the cost of related
services provided to the Township by municipal consultants and
engineers in connection with the review of the application, plus 5% for
administrative costs. Applicant shall reimburse the Township for said
charges within 30 days of invoicing.
§ 195-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-164
1:771

ARTICLE XXI
Notice of Violation
§ 195-165. Enforcement notice.
A. If any violation of this chapter has occurred, the Township of Brighton
shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township of Brighton intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
§ 195-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-165
1:773

ARTICLE XXII
Enforcement
§ 195-166. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township of Brighton, pay a judgment of not more
than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township of Brighton as a result thereof. No judgment
shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant
neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation this chapter shall be paid over
to the Township of Brighton.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township of Brighton the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Township shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first. [Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 119]
E. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
Township if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent
appeal, rules in favor of the appealing party. [Added 11-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 119]
§ 195-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-166
1:775

ARTICLE XXIII
Legal Remedies
§ 195-167. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is or is proposed to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used
in violation of any ordinance enacted or prior enabling laws, the Board of
Supervisors or, with the approval of the Board, an officer of the Township
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun
by serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Supervisors of Brighton
Township. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
§ 195-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-167
1:777
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
109
7-12-1999 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
110
11-8-1999 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
111
2-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord. No.
127
Ord. No.
112
5-8-2000 Planning Commission Ch. 47
Ord. No.
113
6-22-2000 Increase in
indebtedness
NCM
Ord. No.
114
7-10-2000 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
115
10-9-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
116
1-8-2001 Yard waste
composting site
Ch. 166, Art. VI
Ord. No.
117
1-8-2001 Compensation for
Supervisor
NCM
Ord. No.
118
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord. No.
127
Ord. No.
119
11-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
120
11-13-2001 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 180, Part 1
Ord. No.
121
3-11-2002 Property
maintenance;
dangerous buildings
repealer; abandoned
vehicles repealer
Ch. 148; Chs. 78 and 121,
Art. I (footnote only)
Ord. No.
122
3-11-2002 Registration of rental
property
Ch. 152
Ord. No.
123
5-13-2002 Uniform construction
codes
Repealed by Ord. No. 136
§ 195-167 BRIGHTON CODE § DL-1
1:778
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
124
7-8-2002 Numbering of
buildings
Ch. 79
Res. No.
02-17
8-12-2002 Taxation: earned
income tax
Ch. 184, Art. IV
Ord. No.
125
10-14-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
126
12-9-2002 Municipal Risk
Management Workers'
Compensation Pooled
Trust
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
127
12-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 189
Ord. No.
128
2-10-2003 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; public
and private
improvement
standards
Ch. 180, Parts 1 and 2
Ord. No.
129
5-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
130
6-9-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
131
12-8-2003 Sidewalk and curbing
construction,
maintenance and
repair
Repealed by Ord. No. 190
Ord. No.
132
3-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
133
3-8-2004 Wild, dangerous or
exotic animals
Ch. 70, Art. II
Ord. No.
134
3-8-2004 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; public
and private
improvement
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Parts 1 and 2
Ord. No.
135
3-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
136
4-12-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 85
Res. No.
04-14
6-14-2004 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 43, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:779
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
137
11-4-2004 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 85, footnote only
Ord. No.
138
2-14-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord. No. 144
Ord. No.
139
3-14-2005 Municipal pension
plan agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
140
4-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
141
6-13-2005 Municipal employees
retirement plan
Repealed by Ord. No. 209
Ord. No.
142
6-30-2005 Solid waste and
recycling
Ch. 166
Ord. No.
143
11-14-2005 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
144
1-12-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord. No. 150
Ord. No.
145
12-12-2005 Intergovernmental
agreement to
purchase excavator
NCM
Ord. No.
146
12-12-2005 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; public
and private
improvement
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Parts 1 and 2
Ord. No.
147
12-12-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
148
7-10-2006 Street vacation
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
149
7-10-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
150
1-2-2007 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Repealed by Ord. No. 157
Ord. No.
151
3-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
152
6-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
§ DL-1 BRIGHTON CODE § DL-1
1:780
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
153
6-11-2007 Subdivision and land
development
standards
amendment; public
and private
improvement
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Parts 1 and 2
Res. No.
2007-13
6-11-2007 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 43, Art. II
Ord. No.
154
10-8-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
155
10-8-2007 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
156
12-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
157
12-20-2007 Local services tax Ch. 184, Art. VI
Ord. No.
158
4-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
159
6-9-2008 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 82
Ord. No.
160
7-14-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
161
7-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
162
11-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
163
5-11-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
164
8-10-2009 Increase in
indebtedness
NCM
Ord. No.
165
11-9-2009 Numbering of
buildings amendment
Ch. 79
Ord. No.
166
4-12-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No.
167
5-10-2010 Fireworks Repealed by Ord. No. 216
Ord. No.
168
5-10-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
169
9-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:781
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
170
9-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
171
9-13-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
172
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
173
1-31-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
174
6-6-2011 Sewers: holding tanks Ch. 160, Art. V
Ord. No.
175
6-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
176
9-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
177
9-12-2011 Outdoor burning Ch. 82
Ord. No.
178
12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
179
12-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
180
5-14-2012 Adoption of Official
Map
NCM
Ord. No.
181
8-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
182
7-9-2012 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 82
Ord. No.
183
5-13-2013 Fire loss Ch. 147
Ord. No.
184
9-9-2013 Subdivision and land
development
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Part 1
Ord. No.
185
12-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
186
7-8-2014 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 133
Ord. No.
187
6-9-2014 Park and Recreation
Board
Ch. 38
Ord. No.
188
10-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
§ DL-1 BRIGHTON CODE § DL-1
1:782
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
189
10-13-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
190
10-13-2014 Streets and sidewalks Ch. 175
Ord. No.
191
2-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
192
2-9-2015 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 133
Ord. No.
193
3-9-2015 Salaries and
compensation:
unemployment group
trust
Ch. 54, Art. I
Ord. No.
194
5-11-2015 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
195
6-8-2015 Floodplain
management
Ch. 100
Ord. No.
196
6-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
197
6-22-2015 Stormwater
management
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
198
8-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
199
8-10-2015 Subdivision and land
development
standards
amendment; public
and private
improvement
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Arts. I and II
Ord. No.
200
4-11-2016 Grading and
excavating
Ch. 104
Ord. No.
201
4-11-2016 Stormwater
management
amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
202
4-11-2016 Subdivision and land
development:
subdivision and land
development
standards amendment
Ch. 180, Part 1
Ord. No.
203
4-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:783
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
204
8-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
205
5-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
206
12-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
207
12-11-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
208
2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
209
2-12-2018 Pensions: Municipal
Employees
Retirement Plan
Ch. 43, Art. I
Ord. No.
210
3-12-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
Ord. No.
211
7-9-2018 Property Maintenance Ch. 148
Ord. No.
212
7-9-2018 Nuisances Ch. 121
Ord. No.
213
7-9-2018 Peace and Good Order Ch. 138
Ord. No.
214
7-9-2018 Animals: Dogs Ch. 70, Art. I
Ord. No.
215
7-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 189
Ord. No.
216
11-13-2018 Fireworks Ch. 97
Ord. No.
217
12-10-2018 Stormwater
Management
Amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
218
12-10-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 148
Ord. No.
219
2-11-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No. 220 4-8-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 195 29
Ord. No. 221 9-9-2019 Fire Hydrants
Amendment
Ch. 96 29
§ DL-1 BRIGHTON CODE § DL-1
1:784
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No. 222 11-12-2019 Street Vacation NCM 29
Ord. No. 223 1-13-2020 Nonuniformed
Pension Plan
Ch. 43, Art.
I
29
Ord. No. 224 1-13-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 189 29
Ord. No. 225 4-13-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 189 29
Ord. No. 226 4-13-2020 Peace and Good
Order
Amendment
Ch. 138 29
Res. No.
2020-11
4-13-2020 Pensions: Police
Pension Fund
Amendment
Ch. 43, Art.
II
29
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:785