Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of Baldwin,
County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 173, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the
Borough of Baldwin, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the Borough of Baldwin," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Baldwin and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 17, 1984.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines; or authorizing the
execution and delivery of agreements of leases between the Municipal
Authority and the Borough of Baldwin.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 BALDWIN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance, are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances; new
provisions.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance amending the zoning regulations or Zoning Map.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Council
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. General deletions. Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates
and repeals have been deleted since such provisions are included in this
ordinance or are of no further effect.
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Council, and it is the intent of the
Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed have been previously formally amended to read
as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect
as of the effective date of the Code specified in § 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: A complete description of these changes is on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Council subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which the Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code books,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
§ 1-7 BALDWIN CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution, collectible as provided by law,
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided, however,
that if the District Justice determines that the defendant is without financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and over
such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Council that this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after December 19, 1985.
§ 1-16. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall be included in the Code as Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
Chapter 4
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 4-1. Abolition of elected office.
From and after December 31, 1982, the office of elected auditors in the
Borough of Baldwin is hereby abolished. Any auditors presently holding
office for the term for which elected shall not, from and after December
31, 1982, audit, settle or adjust any accounts audited by such elected
auditors, but such elected auditors shall perform other duties of their office
as specified in the Borough Code.
§ 4-2. Appointment of independent auditor.
The office of Auditor shall henceforth be held by an independent auditor,
who shall be a certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania; a
firm of certified public accountants so registered; or a competent public
accountant or a competent firm of public accountants. The office of
independent auditor shall be appointed annually by a resolution of the
Borough Council, which resolution shall be adopted before the close of the
fiscal year of the Borough and shall authorize the independent auditor to
make an independent examination of the accounting records of the Borough
for such fiscal year, and such independent auditor shall also perform
whatever other duties and shall exercise such powers as are conferred
upon the Auditor by the annual resolution of the Borough Council or by the
powers and duties created in § 4-3 hereof.
§ 4-3. Powers and duties.
The general powers and duties of the independent auditors appointed under
this chapter shall be as follows:
A. The independent auditor shall annually examine, audit and settle all
accounts whatsoever in which the Borough is concerned, and the audit
shall consist of an examination in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards and shall include such tests of the accounting
records and such other auditing procedures as it considers necessary in
the circumstances.
B. The independent auditor shall audit the accounting records of the
Borough for the fiscal year and shall prepare a report on the
examination, which shall set forth:
(1) The scope of its examination.
(2) Its opinion of the fairness of the presentation of the financial
statement of the Borough which shall show a complete statement of
the financial condition of the Borough, giving in detail the actual
indebtedness, the amount of the funded debt, the amount of the
floating debt thereof, the valuation of taxable property therein, the
§ 1-16 BALDWIN CODE § 4-3
1:8
Chapter 8
CABLE TELEVISION RATE REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A174.
assets of the Borough with the character and value thereof and the
date of maturity of the respective forms of funded debt thereof.
(3) The amount of any balance or shortage or any expenditure of a kind
or made in a manner prohibited or not authorized by a statute
which came to its attention during the course of its examination
and which, in its opinion, causes a financial loss to the Borough,
which loss is material in relation to the receipts and disbursements
of the Borough, and such amount shall be a surcharge against any
officer against whom such balance or shortage shall appear.
C. It shall be the duty of the independent auditor:
(1) To file a copy of the report with the Secretary of the Borough and
the Clerk of the Court of Quarter Sessions of the County and the
Department of Community Affairs2 not less than 90 days after the
close of the fiscal year.
(2) To publish within 10 days thereafter, by advertisement in at least
one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a concise
financial statement setting forth the balance in the treasury at the
beginning of the fiscal year, all revenues received during the fiscal
year by major classifications, all expenditures made during the
fiscal year by major functions, the current resources and liabilities
of the Borough at the end of the fiscal year, the gross liability and
net debt of the Borough, the amount of the assessed valuation of
the Borough, the assets of the Borough with the character and
value thereof, the date of the last maturity of the respective forms
of funded debt and the assets in each sinking fund. The
independent auditor shall make his report on the uniform form
prepared pursuant to Article XIII of Title 53, 53 P.S. § 46301 et seq.
Such publication shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
the Act of June 25, 1941, P.L. 159, known as the "Municipal
Borrowing Law," 53 P.S. § 6101 et seq.,3 which requires the
corporate authorities of the boroughs to publish an annual
statement of indebtedness.
2. Editor's Note: Now the Department of Community and Economic Development.
3. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 6101 et seq. was repealed by the Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 781, No.
185. For current provisions pertaining to municipal borrowing, see the Local Government
Unit Debt Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:9
§ 8-1. Adoption of SHACOG resolution.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby adopts SHACOG Board Resolution No.
01-944 and agrees to participate in the joint cable television rate review
process.
§ 8-2. Term of participation.
SHACOG Board Resolution No. 01-94 shall be binding upon the Borough
of Baldwin from year to year as provided in that resolution until such time
as Borough Council withdraws pursuant to the procedures established in
SHACOG Resolution No. 01-94.
§ 8-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 658, establishing the Franchising Authority of the Borough
of Baldwin, is hereby repealed and the Authority is dissolved, and
Resolution No. 94-3 establishing regulations for that Board to review cable
television rates is hereby repealed.
§ 8-4. Authorization of signatures.
The appropriate municipal officers are authorized to sign the attached
agreement5 between SHACOG and the Borough of Baldwin to participate in
the SHACOG Joint Rate Review Program.
§ 8-5. Authority of Committee and Review Board.
The Rate Review Committee and the SHACOG Joint Rate Review Board
created by SHACOG Board Resolution No. 01-94 is hereby authorized to act
on behalf of the Borough of Baldwin within the confines of the authority
set forth in SHACOG Resolution No. 01-94 for so long as the Borough of
Baldwin participates in that process.
No. 01-94
SHACOG BOARD RESOLUTION
Authorizing a system by which member municipalities which are serviced
by TCI of Pennsylvania as their cable television operator may jointly
coordinate rate review procedures and decisions.
BE IT HEREBY RESOLVED that the Board of the South Hills Area Council
of Governments (SHACOG) hereby establishes a joint municipal procedure
for reviewing cable television rate requests from member municipalities
serviced by TCI of Pennsylvania and sets forth the following procedures:
Section 1
4. Editor's Note: Said resolution is included at the end of this chapter.
5. Editor's Note: Said agreement is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 8-1 BALDWIN CODE § 8-5
1:10
(a) Any SHACOG member municipality serviced by TCI of Pennsylvania
as its cable television operator may enter into an agreement with
SHACOG to jointly review and decide on cable television rates as
permitted by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (the "Cable Act"), and the Rate Regulation
Standards of the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") in
Subpart (N) — Cable Rate Regulation, 47 CFR 76.900 et seq., as may
be amended.
(b) The signing of an agreement to participate in the Joint Rate Review
Program will be binding on that member municipality for the duration
of that calendar year. The agreement will automatically renew unless
the Executive Director of SHACOG receives written notice of
withdrawal at least 90 days before the end of the preceding calendar
year.
Section 2
(a) The SHACOG Rate Review Board Administrative Committee is hereby
established (hereinafter referred to as the Rate Review Committee).
The Committee shall consist of the Manager or Secretary or a
designated substitute from each participating municipality. The
SHACOG Executive Director shall be ex officio the Secretary for this
Committee.
(b) The Rate Review Committee shall meet and review rate information
filed with the participating member municipalities within 10 days
of notification that rate review information has been submitted to
a member municipality. The representatives of those participating
municipalities present shall decide what investigation, if any, will be
undertaken to determine if the rate request is appropriate and lawful.
A quorum of the Rate Review Committee will consist of a
representative from 1/2 of the participating municipalities.
(c) A majority vote of the members then present and voting shall be
binding on all municipalities participating in the program. The Rate
Review Committee may extend the time within which to decide on the
extent of investigation, provided that the total time expended permits
the hearing provided for in Section 3 to be conducted within the time
parameters permitted by the FCC regulations.
(d) If a majority of the Rate Review Committee members present
determine that the thirty-day period is insufficient to review the filing,
they may recommend that participating municipalities act to extend
the period established for the review as permitted by the Cable Act
and the FCC's regulations to prevent the proposed rates from
becoming effective by operation of law.
(e) The Rate Review Committee may waive the requirements of the public
hearing provided for by Section 3 for promotional rate reductions.
(f) In the event that there is a tie vote of the Rate Review Committee, the
SHACOG Executive Director is hereby empowered to vote to break the
tie.
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:11
Section 3
(a) The SHACOG Joint Rate Review Board is hereby established with
authority to determine whether a rate request received by any
participating member municipality is appropriate and lawful. The
SHACOG Executive Director shall be ex officio the Secretary of the
Board.
(b) The Review Board small be composed of one representative and one
alternate appointed by each participating member municipality,
although each municipality will only have one vote in deciding whether
the rate request is permissible. Each municipality will determine who
its representatives will be on the Review Board, and said
representatives need not be a presently elected official or a member of
the municipality's professional staff. In the event that an even number
of municipalities participate, then the Executive Director of SHACOG,
or his designate, shall sit on the Review Board to vote in the event of
a tie. A quorum of the Review Board will consist of a representative
from 1/2 of the participating municipalities.
(c) The Review Board will schedule and conduct a public hearing for the
receipt of oral comments and will receive written comments from the
public and the cable operator on the reasonableness of the rates. The
Executive Director of SHACOG shall give public notice of the hearing
and notice of the hearing to the participating municipalities and to the
cable operator.
(d) The public hearing for oral comments shall normally be held and the
close of the period for written comments shall be scheduled within
30 days of receipt of the rate filing unless extended by the Rate
Review Committee. If the Rate Review Committee extends the period
for the review of a rate filing, the period for written comments and the
public hearing may be scheduled by the Board later than the thirty-day
period commencing upon receipt of the rate filing, provided that such
a period and hearing shall be held at such time that the comments
received will be available for the Board's consideration in making the
evaluation. The close of the comment period and the hearing for the
initial rate filing of a cable operator that is providing service upon
the effective date of the participating member municipality's ability to
review rates as permitted by the FCC shall not be scheduled more than
120 days from the effective date of the participating member's ability
to review rates.
(e) The Review Board shall review the rate filing and the comments
received and make a determination as to the reasonableness of the
rate filing. The Board shall present its evaluation within 30 days of
receipt of the rate filing unless the time period is extended as provided
in Section 2(c).
Section 4
§ 8-5 BALDWIN CODE § 8-5
1:12
(a) The costs of providing this Joint Rate Review Program shall be
assessed on the participating member municipalities only. Such
assessment shall be a pro rata share based on the ratio that the
number of basic cable television subscribers in each participating
municipality bears to the total number of basic cable television
subscribers in all participating municipalities.
(b) The number of basic subscribers shall be determined in each
municipality as of September 30 of the preceding calendar year, and
said ratio shall be revised annually in this manner.
ADOPTED this 17th day of February, 1994
ATTEST:
Executive Director President
AGREEMENT BETWEEN SHACOG AND THE BOROUGH OF
BALDWIN TO PARTICIPATE IN THE SHACOG JOINT RATE REVIEW
PROGRAM
AND NOW, intending to be legally bound, the following agreement is
entered into on this _____ day of _____, 1994, between the South Hills Area
Council of Governments ("SHACOG") and the Borough of Baldwin:
1. It is the intent of the participating municipality to join the SHACOG
Joint Rate Review program, and it is the intent of SHACOG to permit
the participating municipality to participate fully in that program.
2. The participating municipality has read and reviewed SHACOG Board
Resolution No. 01-94 which established the Joint Rate Review Program
and any amendments to that resolution and agrees to be bound by that
program.
3. The participating municipality agrees to pay its proportionate share
of the costs as set forth in that resolution and to pay the annual
assessment within 30 days of receipt. This agreement will continue
to bind the two parties for each calendar year hereafter unless the
participating municipality gives written notice to the Executive
Director of SHACOG that it wishes to withdraw at least 90 days prior
to the start of a calendar year.
4. SHACOG agrees to provide the participating municipality with an
annual budget estimate prior to September 30 of the preceding
calendar year, which assessment shall be based on the ratio which
the number of basic cable television subscribers in the participating
municipality bears to the total number of basic cable television
subscribers of all of the participating communities. A member
municipality shall not be required to pay more than that amount
during the year unless SHACOG requests additional funds and the
participating municipality agrees to pay same. If the participating
municipality declines to pay the increased assessment, then that
municipality's ability to participate in the joint program will end for
that year as of the date of such refusal.
§ 8-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:13
5. The assessment for calendar year 1994 shall be $0.14 per basic cable
subscriber in the participating municipality as of September 30, 1993.
6. The participating municipality understands that it must pass an
appropriate resolution and/or ordinance to effectuate the cable review
program, and SHACOG takes no responsibility for municipality's
failure to properly do so.
BOROUGH OF BALDWIN
By
President of Council
ATTEST
Borough Secretary
EXAMINED AND APPROVED this _____ day of ____________________, 1994.
SHACOG
By
President
ATTEST:
Executive Director
Chapter 11
FIRE COMPANIES
§ 8-5 BALDWIN CODE § 8-5
1:14
ARTICLE I
Collection of Costs
[Adopted 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 754]
§ 11-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE COMPANIES — Four volunteer fire companies of the Borough of
Baldwin as follows: Baldwin Independent Fire Company No. 1, Becks Run
Independent Fire Company, Option Independent Fire Company and South
Baldwin Volunteer Fire Company.
PERSON — A natural person or persons, partnership, corporation,
association, firm or other legal entity.
§ 11-2. Authorization to recover costs and expenses.
The Council of the Borough of Baldwin authorizes the fire companies to
recover the costs of fire-fighting materials used and expended, the costs
of the fire trucks, fire engines, rescue equipment and tankers, hazardous
situation abatement materials involving any fire, safety and rescue and
incident or operation, and hazardous abatement, including vehicular
accidents and fires.
§ 11-3. Schedule of fees and costs.
Attached hereto, incorporated herein and made a part hereof as Exhibit A6
is a schedule of fees and costs which have been authorized by the Council of
the Borough of Baldwin to be charged by the fire companies. These fees and
costs may be charged and invoiced to any person or persons or insurance
carrier for whom or for whose property such services were rendered and/or
material provided.
§ 11-4. Collection of costs.
Said costs and fees as outlined above and in Exhibit A shall be recovered
directly by the fire companies by direct billing of fire companies or shall be
recovered by arrangements and contract with a third-party administrator
(TPA). The utilization of the collection services of a TPA shall be for those
situations or collection situations in which a TPA and the fire companies
agree that services provided by a TPA, Inc., can be best utilized.
§ 11-5. Interest and administration fees.
In addition to the aforementioned fees and costs, the fire companies and a
TPA, Inc., are authorized to collect reasonable interest and administration
fees for collecting said fees and costs.
6. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:15
§ 11-6. Enforcement.
In the event that a person utilizing the services or materials of the fire
companies fails to make payment for those fees and services directly to
the fire companies or a TPA then, upon receipt of notice of the failure of
payment, the Council of the Borough of Baldwin may elect to bring an
action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts
due hereunder plus attorney's fees or for any other relief that may be
appropriate.
§ 11-6 BALDWIN CODE § 11-6
1:16
Chapter 12
HEALTH DEPARTMENT, COUNTY
§ 12-1. Intention to vest authority in County.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Borough of Baldwin that,
upon the establishment of the County Department of Health of Allegheny
County, the Borough of Baldwin will cease to exercise any of the public
health functions vested in it by law and become subject to the jurisdiction
of the said County Department of Health.
Chapter 17
LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 17-1. Creation; membership; appointment; terms.
There is hereby created a Board of Library Directors consisting of seven
members who are residents of the Borough of Baldwin and who shall
serve without compensation. The members of the said Board of Library
Directors shall be appointed by the Borough Council, the first members to
be appointed in the following manner: Two members are to be appointed
for a term of one year; two members are to be appointed for a term of two
years; and three members are to be appointed for a term of three years.
All appointments to fill the places of those whose terms expire shall be for
a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. All
members shall serve until their successors have been appointed.
§ 17-2. Organization; officers.
The Board of Library Directors shall organize as soon as may be possible
after appointment by electing a President, Secretary and Treasurer from
its membership and such other officers and agents as the Board may deem
necessary.
§ 17-3. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
The Board of Library Directors shall have all the powers, duties and
responsibilities as are prescribed by the Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324,
known as "The Library Code,"7 and shall have the further power to adopt
such rules and regulations for its own organization and procedure as are
necessary and are consistent with the ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
7. Editor's Note: See 24 P.S. § 4101 et seq.
§ 11-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-3
1:17
Chapter 21
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 33.
§ 21-1. Position created.
The Borough Council hereby creates the position of Borough Manager.
§ 21-2. Duties.
The Borough Council may delegate those same duties to the position of
Borough Manager that were formerly delegated and performed by the
individual in the position of Borough Secretary and, in addition, may
delegate any other nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers which the
Borough Council is empowered to delegate.
Chapter 24
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 134.
§ 24-1. Intention to organize authority.
It is the desire of the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania, and the Borough Council hereby signifies its intention
to organize an authority under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended.8
§ 24-2. Name.
The name of the proposed authority shall be "the Municipal Authority of the
Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania."9
8. The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed by Act 22 of
2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: Original Sections 3 and 4 of Ord. No. 152, which immediately followed this
section and which contained the names of the members of the original Municipal
Authority and the proposed Articles of Incorporation, were repealed 12-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 566.
§ 17-3 BALDWIN CODE § 24-3
1:18
§ 24-3. Articles of Incorporation.
The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the said Municipal Authority
shall be executed by and on behalf of the Borough of Baldwin by the
Mayor and the President of Council, and the Seal of said Borough shall
be thereto affixed, attested by the Borough Secretary and filed with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth. The Solicitor is hereby authorized and
directed to cause to be published the notice of intention to file the Articles
of Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth as required by
the aforementioned Act.10
Chapter 29
PENSION FUNDS; RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 33.
Police Department — See Ch. 41.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 49.
Social security — See Ch. 52.
10.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary and are available for inspection during normal office hours. In addition, copies
of the following ordinances pertaining to the Municipal Authority can be found in the
Borough Secretary's office: Ord. No. 167, adopted 3-16-1959, authorizing the conveyance
to the Authority of the existing sewer system; Ord. No. 168, providing for terms and
conditions for the agreement of lease; Ord. No. 169, adopted 3-16-1959, providing for a
management agreement with the Authority; Ord. No. 173, adopted 3-16-1959, authorizing
the Authority to construct and repair sewer lines; and Ord. No. 274, adopted 3-23-1964,
which provided for a lease surrender agreement for the sewer system. Ordinance No. 143,
adopted 2-4-1958 and also on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, adopted an
agreement with the Pleasant Hills Authority relating to the furnishing of sanitary sewage
treatment service for certain areas of the Borough. Such service agreement was amended
by supplemental agreements adopted 11-19-1962 by Ord. No. 237 and 3-15-1965 by Ord.
No. 293. See also Ch. 134, Sewers.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:19

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 1-21-2002 by Ord. No. 76511; amended in its entirety
7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 812]
§ 29-1. Restatement of plan; adoption by reference.
The plan, now known as "Borough of Baldwin Police Pension Plan," is hereby
amended and restated in its entirety and is effective for participants who
terminate employment on or after January 1, 2008, as provided in this plan
document, and to that extent this document supersedes and repeals all prior
plan documents. The benefits of any former participant who terminated
employment prior to January 1, 2008, shall be determined by the applicable
pension documentation in place prior to this plan document.12
§ 29-2. through § 29-17. (Reserved)
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Police Pension Fund, adopted
4-21-1958 by Ord. No. 153, as amended.
12.Editor's Note: A copy of the current Police Pension Plan document is on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary.
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2
1:21

ARTICLE II
Service Employees Pension Plan
[Adopted 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. 81713]
§ 29-18. Restatement of plan; adoption by reference. [Amended
10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 840]
The plan now known as the "Service Employees Pension Plan of the Borough
of Baldwin," attached hereto as Exhibit A, is hereby amended and restated
in its entirety effective for participants who terminate employment on or
after January 1, 2011, as provided in this plan document, and to that
extent this document supersedes and repeals all prior plan documents.14
The benefits of any former participant who terminated employment prior
to January 1, 2011, shall be determined by the applicable pension
documentation in place prior to this plan document.
§ 29-19. through § 29-31. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Fund, adopted 1-21-2002 by Ord. No. 766.
14.Editor's Note: A copy of the current Service Employees Pension Plan document is on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 29-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-19
1:23

ARTICLE III
Mandatory Police Retirement Age
[Adopted 2-21-1972 by Ord. No. 416]
§ 29-32. Mandatory retirement age established. [Amended
2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 433]
Any police officer of the Borough of Baldwin having attained the age of 65
shall, on the anniversary date of his employment with the Borough which
anniversary shall occur subsequent to said policeman's 65th birthday, be
retired from active duty with the Borough of Baldwin and shall be ineligible
to serve thereafter as a police officer on active duty with the Borough of
Baldwin Police Department.
§ 29-33. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to interfere, contradict,
change or amend any other ordinance regarding police pension funds and
minimum periods of total service therein and all minimum ages at which
members of the force may be retired from active duty; provided, however,
that the retirement age designated herein shall be mandatory.
§ 29-34. Applicability. [Amended 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 433]
This article shall become effective immediately; providing, however, that
any police officers presently employed with the Borough Police Department
who may have attained that age of 65 years or older prior to the adoption of
this article shall be covered by the provisions of this article and may serve
until the anniversary date of their employment.15
15.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Supplementary Police Pension Fund Provisions, adopted
5-17-1993 by Ord. No. 656, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 1-21-2002 by Ord. No. 765. See Art. I of this chapter.
§ 29-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-34
1:25
Chapter 33
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension funds; retirement — See Ch. 29.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 49.
Social security — See Ch. 52.
§ 33-1. Discrimination; tenure; political contributions.
§ 33-2. Sick leave, emergency leave and annual leave.
§ 33-3. Overtime; compensatory time off.
A. No employee shall be discriminated against because of race, religious
belief, or political opinion or affiliations.
B. The tenure of all employees shall be based upon continued satisfactory
service, proper personal conduct and continued fitness for their
positions.
C. No employee shall be required to contribute to any political fund, be
required to contribute financially to a campaign for an elective
municipal office or be required to take part in any such campaign.
A. No employee shall be entitled to sick leave, emergency leave or annual
leave until said employee shall have completed at least 12 months fulltime
or regularly scheduled part-time employment; however, all other
benefits shall accrue as of the date any such employee enters the
service of the Borough.
B. Any regularly scheduled part-time employee, except school guard, may
be entitled, at the discretion of Council, to annual leave without
diminution in compensation, sick leave and emergency leave. The
period of time of such annual leave, sick leave and emergency leave
shall be determined by Council and shall be computed on the basis of
one working day or portion thereof annual leave, sick leave or
emergency leave for a designated number of hours or days or major
portions thereof actually worked by said employee for the Borough
during the prior twelve-month period. No such regularly scheduled
part-time employee shall be permitted to accumulate annual leave for
the purpose of receiving extra or overtime compensation. The schedule
of holidays and holiday pay rates provided for herein shall apply to any
regularly scheduled part-time or casual employees.
C. Time lost by any employee by reason of leave without pay or time
otherwise not worked or paid for will not be counted in computing sick
leave or annual leave to which such employee is entitled.
§ 29-34 BALDWIN CODE § 33-3
1:26
§ 33-4. Sick leave.
§ 33-5. Annual leave.
Annual leave without diminution in compensation shall be granted to all
eligible full-time employees in accordance with the following schedule: five
working days per year after 12 consecutive months of full-time employment
with the Borough; 10 working days per year after 36 consecutive months of
full-time employment with the Borough; and 15 working days per year after
60 consecutive months of full-time employment with the Borough; provided,
however, that all eligible full-time employees who, at the effective date of
A. Work in excess of established schedules shall be permitted only when
necessary to meet operating requirements and only when authorized in
advance of the performance of such work by a designated officer.
Overtime work so authorized for salaried employees shall be
compensated for by allowing said employee a like amount of time off
within 90 days after the end of the month in which such authorized
overtime work was performed; provided, however, that such time off
must first be approved by a designated officer, provided further that, if
Council determines that the granting of such time off after performance
of authorized overtime work would be disruptive of the orderly
operation and administration of the Borough, Council may, at its
discretion, authorize, in lieu of like compensatory time off, payment for
such authorized overtime work by salaried employees in excess of
established schedules.
B. Employees who are compensated at an hourly wage rate shall receive
compensation for similarly authorized overtime work at the rate of time
and 1/2 for every hour worked in excess of 40 hours in any working
week.
A. Sick leave with full pay shall be granted at the rate of 10 working days
per year. Sick leave may be granted only for personal illness and may be
accumulated for a period of three years. Earned sick leave shall be
considered as working time in computing the annual leave to which the
employee may be entitled.
B. Sick leave in excess of three consecutive days shall be granted an
employee only upon presentation to the Secretary of a signed
certification from the attending physician or practitioner. The Secretary
must be contacted on the first day of absence in order for the employee
to claim sick leave benefits. False claims for sick leave or emergency
leave benefits will be considered cause of disciplinary action, including
suspension, demotion or dismissal.
C. Emergency leave of not more than three days for death or serious
illness of the spouse, parent, child, brother or sister of any full-time or
regularly scheduled part-time employee may be granted without
diminution in compensation; provided, however, that approval of the
Secretary shall be secured in advance.
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:27
this chapter have worked at least 12 but less than 36 consecutive months
for the Borough shall be entitled to annual leave, without diminution of
compensation, of 10 working days per year. No employee shall be permitted
to accumulate annual leave time for more than one year or to waive annual
leave for the purpose of receiving overtime compensation.
§ 33-6. Holidays. [Amended 9-27-1965 by Ord. No. 305]
§ 33-7. Compensation for jury duty.
Any employee called for jury duty shall be compensated in an amount equal
to the difference between the employee's regular compensation and his
compensation as a juror.
§ 33-8. Leaves of absence.
A. All employees shall be entitled to the following seven legal holidays at
full pay: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. When one of the
aforesaid holidays falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be
observed as a holiday. All employees shall be entitled to a one-half-day
holiday on Good Friday at full pay; provided, however, that no employee
shall be entitled to be compensated for any of the aforesaid holidays
upon which an employee does not actually work if such employee fails
to work on the working day before and the working day after said
designated holiday.
B. Any holiday work by a salaried employee shall be compensated for by
allowing such employee time off within 90 days of the time earned at
the rate of 1 1/2 hours for each hour or major fraction thereof, provided
that such compensatory time off may be taken only with the prior
approval of the Secretary. Holiday work by hourly rate employees shall
be compensated at double the regular time.
A. Where the good of the service is involved, a leave of absence granted by
Council to any employee to attend a recognized official meeting shall be
considered as time on duty.
B. Any employees called into the active service of any branch of the armed
forces of the United States shall be granted leave of absence for the
period of such service without loss of status, provided that the
employee applies for reinstatement to the Secretary within 90 days
after honorable discharge.
C. Any employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a
period not to exceed 60 days in any one calendar year for sickness,
disability or other good and sufficient reasons which are considered by
the Council to be in the best interests of the Borough.
§ 33-5 BALDWIN CODE § 33-9
1:28
§ 33-9. Resignations; unauthorized absences.
Any employee wishing to leave the service of the Borough in good standing
shall file with the Secretary, at least 14 days before leaving, a written
resignation stating the effective date of resignation and the reasons for
leaving. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may be
considered cause for denying such employee future employment and for
denying him such benefits as have been made available. Unauthorized
absence from work for a period of three days may be considered as a
resignation disclaiming benefits.
§ 33-10. Benefits for disabled police officers.
A. From and after the effective date of this section, the Council of the
Borough of Baldwin shall constitute and be the forum for the hearing
and determination of Heart and Lung Act benefits under the provisions
of the Heart and Lung Act, the Act of May 31, 1974, P.L. 309, No. 99, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 637, and all claims authorized under the provisions
of the Act shall be administered and determined by the Council of the
Borough of Baldwin, except that, in the event that a determination shall
be made by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin that a police officer
should be terminated or dismissed because of his inability to perform
his duties in accordance with the civil service provisions of the Borough
Code,16 and such officer has appealed the termination to the Civil
Service Commission and such officer has made claims under the Heart
and Lung Act because of his disability, then the Civil Service
Commission of the Borough shall be authorized and empowered to hear
such Heart and Lung Act claim, but only in that case. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed so as to authorize or impose any
responsibility for the determination or administration of workers'
compensation claims upon the Council.
B. For the purposes of the administration of this section, a quorum of the
Council of the Borough of Baldwin shall be considered a sufficient
forum for the determination of whether or not benefits should be
payable under the Heart and Lung Act, and the vote of the majority of
the quorum present shall be sufficient to render a decision. A
stenographic record of the proceedings shall be kept at the expense of
the Borough, which record is to be sealed and shall not be released to
any member of the public or to any persons other than the
Councilpersons of the Borough of Baldwin, the Secretary of the
Borough, the Solicitor of the Borough, or such persons acting in the
capacities of Borough Secretary or Solicitor, unless the police officer
shall, in writing, authorize the release of such transcript to any other
persons; provided further, however, that nothing contained herein shall
restrict the right of the Borough to use such records in any court
proceedings and appeals, or to provide them to the workers'
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 33-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-10
1:29
compensation carrier responsible for the payment of workers'
compensation benefits to employees of the Borough.
C. The hearing regarding any claim by a police officer under the Heart and
Lung Act shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Local Agency
Law, the Act of April 28, 1978, P.L. 202, No. 53, as amended,17 and all
provisions stated therein shall be observed, unless the same shall be in
direct conflict with the provisions of this section insofar as the same
relates to the confidentiality of the stenographic record. Following the
hearing, the Council shall make its decision in writing, which shall
briefly describe its reasons for the adjudication, its findings of fact and
conclusions of law. The decision shall be rendered no later than 90 days
from the date of the hearing and shall be forwarded by first-class mail
to the police officer making any such claims. Prior to any such hearing,
and upon the presentation of a claim or demand by a police officer, such
police officer shall submit in writing a concise statement of all facts or
circumstances which the police officer deems to be relevant to his or
her claim, and shall submit any medical documentation of any
physicians attending such police officer which shall detail the nature of
the injury and whether or not the same is causally connected to the
claimed disability of the police officer, and shall specifically indicate
that the disability is job related or was incurred while on duty. To the
extent that the disabilities of any police officers have been the basis of a
claim for workers' compensation benefits, the standards of proof
requiring causal connection between the employment and the injury
which have been developed through workers' compensation cases shall
apply to the Heart and Lung Act cases where the issue of whether
disability is work related is involved. The Borough may seek further
evidence of the claimant's disability and may require the claimant to
appear before a physician of the Borough's choice for examination. The
failure or refusal of the police officer or claimant to submit such
documentation or yield to such examinations in a timely manner shall
be the basis for dismissal of all such claims. Witnesses may be
subpoenaed pursuant to the subpoena power contained in the Borough
Code.
D. This section shall take effect immediately; further, any cases decided
prior to the enactment of this section and pursuant to and in reliance
upon the determination of the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania in
the case of Sidlow v. Township of Nether Providence, 621 A.2nd 1105
(1993), shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
section pending its adoption by the Borough Council.
E. Any provisions of this section which shall be declared unconstitutional
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the section,
and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect
unless amended or repealed by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin.
17.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 33-10 BALDWIN CODE § 33-10
1:30
Chapter 38
PLANNING COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 33-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-10
1:31

ARTICLE I
Borough Planning Commission
[Adopted 11-20-1952 by Ord. No. 16]
§ 38-1. Creation. [Amended 3-16-1970 by Ord. No. 383]
There is hereby created and established under the authority of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968,18 a
Planning Commission.
§ 38-2. Membership; terms. [Amended 3-16-1970 by Ord. No. 383;
3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 523; 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 665; 9-20-2004
by Ord. No. 789]
Said Planning Commission shall consist of five regular members serving
alternative four-year terms and one alternate member to serve a four-year
term, who must be residents of the Borough of Baldwin. The Planning
Commission shall have the duties prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 38-3. Filling of vacancies; removal from office. [Amended
3-16-1970 by Ord. No. 383]
Vacancies occurring in the office of a member of the Planning Commission,
other than by expiration of a term, shall be filled by appointment of the
Borough Council for the unexpired portion of the term vacated. Any member
of a planning commission once qualified and appointed may be removed
from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for any
other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council, said vote to be
taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent
to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if
the member shall request it in writing.
§ 38-4. Compensation; reports; making of maps and
recommendations.
The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation
and shall make annual report to Council of their transactions. The Borough
Planning Commission may make or cause to be made and lay before Council
and, at its discretion, cause to be published maps of the Borough or any
portion thereof, including territory extending three miles beyond the
Borough limits, showing the streets and highways, and other natural and
artificial features, and also locations proposed by it for any new public
buildings, civic centers, streets, parkways, parks, playgrounds or any other
public ground or public improvement or any widening, extension or
relocation of the same or any change in the Borough plan by it deemed
advisable; and it may make recommendations to Council from time to time
concerning any such matters and things aforesaid for action by Council
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-4
1:33
thereon, and in so doing have regard for the present conditions and future
needs and growth of the Borough, and the distribution and relative location
of all the principal and other streets and railways, waterways and all
other means of public travel and business communications, as well as the
distribution and relative location of all public buildings, public grounds and
open spaces devoted to public use; it may make recommendations to any
public authorities or any corporations or individuals in said Borough with
reference to the location of any buildings, structures or works to be erected
or constructed by them.
§ 38-5. Submission and approval of plans and plots required.
All plans, plots or replots of lands laid out in building lots and the streets
or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public use or
for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent
thereto, and located within the Borough limits, shall be first submitted to
the Borough Planning Commission and approved by it before said plans
shall be recorded; it shall be unlawful to receive or record any plan in
any public office unless the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or
otherwise, the approval of the Borough Planning Commission and of the
Borough Council. The disapproval of any such plan by the Borough Planning
Commission shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown
thereon. The approval of the Planning Commission shall be deemed an
acceptance of the proposed dedication, but it shall not impose any duty
upon the Borough concerning the maintenance or improvement of any
such dedicated parts until the Borough Council shall have made actual
appropriations of the same by entry, use or improvement.
§ 38-6. Appropriation for expenses.
The Borough Council shall appropriate annually such sums as it deems
necessary for defraying the expenses of the Planning Commission, and in
no event shall the expenses of the Planning Commission, including the
salaries of the Engineer or other employees, exceed the amount of the
appropriation.
§ 38-4 BALDWIN CODE § 38-6
1:34
ARTICLE II
South Hills Regional Planning Commission
[Adopted 11-18-1963 by Ord. No. 265]
§ 38-7. Association with Commission.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby joins and associates in the creation of the
South Hills Regional Planning Commission in conformity with the state
statutes, as now or hereafter amended, and shall be bound thereby and in
consideration of the mutual covenants and obligations contained within the
Articles of Agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part
hereof.19
§ 38-8. Operating costs.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby appropriates public funds for the operation
of the South Hills Regional Planning Commission in the amount of $25 for
the year 1963 and for such subsequent years as the governing body shall
approve of, which is determined to be the cost of operating the Regional
Planning Commission and accomplishing the planning objectives of the
participating municipalities.20
§ 38-9. Execution of Articles of Agreement; filing with Commission.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby authorizes proper Borough officials of the
Borough of Baldwin to execute the Articles of Agreement, and directs the
Secretary to duly attest the signature, place the corporate seal thereon and
forward a certified copy of this article to the Acting Secretary of the South
Hills Regional Planning Commission.
19.Editor's Note: A complete copy of the Articles of Agreement is on file in the Borough
offices.
20.Editor's Note: Original Section 3 of Ord. No. 265, which immediately followed this section
and which provided for specific appointments to the Commission, was deleted 12-19-1985
by Ord. No. 566.
§ 38-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-9
1:35
Chapter 41
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension funds; retirement — See Ch. 29.
§ 41-1. Confirmation and reestablishment; Chief of Police.
A Police Department is hereby confirmed and reestablished in and for the
Borough of Baldwin. The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive of the
Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge
of the police force and have supervision over its members in the exercise of
their powers, duties and responsibilities.
§ 41-2. Divisions and classifications. [Amended 4-29-1968 by Ord.
No. 362; 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 432; 8-20-1973 by Ord. No. 438;
6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 896]
There is hereby established in the Department of Police of the Borough of
Baldwin the following divisions: the General Police Division; the Juvenile
Division; the Narcotics Division; and the Traffic Division. The aforesaid
divisions shall be subordinate to the Chief of Police. The classifications
established by the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin, as amended
by this section, shall be Deputy Chief of Police, Sergeant, Patrolman and
Juvenile Officer. The number of persons to serve in each of said subordinate
classifications and the compensation of each shall be determined by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin from time to time.
§ 41-3. Authority to appoint special policemen.
Nothing contained herein shall affect the right of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during an emergency in which the safety and welfare of
the Borough and the public is endangered.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Chapter 49
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension funds; retirement — See Ch. 29. Personnel policies — See Ch. 33.
§ 38-9 BALDWIN CODE § 41-3
1:36
ARTICLE I
Salary of Mayor, Council and Treasurer
[Adopted 1-7-1974 by Ord. No. 446; amended in its entirety
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 49-1. Mayor.
From and after January 1, 2000, the salary of the Mayor of the Borough of
Baldwin shall be $475 per month.
§ 49-2. Members of Council.
From and after January 1, 2000, the salary of a member of Borough Council
of the Borough of Baldwin shall be $343.75 per month.
§ 49-3. Treasurer.
From and after January 1, 2000, the salary of the Borough Treasurer of the
Borough of Baldwin shall be $150 per month.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-3
1:37

ARTICLE II
Salaries of Other Officers and Employees
[A complete list of the salaries of all officers and employees of the
Borough of Baldwin is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary
and is available for inspection during normal office hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-3
1:39
Chapter 52
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension funds; retirement — See Ch. 29.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 33.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 49.
§ 52-1. Extension of benefits to officers and employees.
The Borough of Baldwin shall become a participant in the social security
system and the benefits of old-age and survivors' insurance shall be
extended to its employees and officers.
§ 52-2. Authorization to execute agreement.
The President of Council, the Borough Secretary and the Mayor of the
Borough of Baldwin, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Allegheny
County, are authorized to execute and deliver to the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the state agency charged
with the administration of the enabling act, the plan and agreement
required under the provisions of Section 6 of said enabling act21 and the
Social Security Act, to extend coverage to the employees and officers of this
Borough and to do all other things necessary to that end.
§ 52-3. Authorization to make payments and deductions.
The Borough Secretary and the Borough Treasurer be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to make all required payments into the contribution
fund established by Section 7 of said enabling act,22 and they are further
authorized and directed to establish such a system of payroll deductions
from salaries of officers and employees as may be necessary to their
coverage under said old age and survivors insurance system.
§ 52-4. Appropriation of necessary funds.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, in the necessary amount to pay
into the contribution fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act,23 and
in accordance with the plan or plans and agreement.
21.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
22.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
23.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
§ 49-3 BALDWIN CODE § 52-5
1:40
§ 52-5. Compliance with provisions.
The proper officials of the Borough of Baldwin do all things necessary
in accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement
necessary to the continued implementation of said old-age and survivors'
insurance system.
§ 52-6. Commencement of active participation.
The Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, shall become
a participant in the social security system, and such participation shall
commence as of January 1, 1952.
Chapter 57
VACANCY BOARD
§ 57-1. Creation; membership. [Amended 1-17-1983 by Ord. No.
531]
There is hereby created in the Borough of Baldwin a Vacancy Board, which
Board shall consist of the Borough Council, exclusive of the Mayor, and one
registered elector of the Borough who shall be appointed by the Borough
Council at the Council's first meeting each calendar year or as soon
thereafter as practical, and who shall act as Chairman of the Vacancy Board.
Such registered elector appointed to the Board shall remain in office until
the first meeting of the Council each calendar year or until his successor
shall be duly appointed and qualified.
§ 57-2. Action by Board.
If any vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council, Auditor, Controller, if
elected, or Tax Collector by reason of death, resignation or removal from
the Borough or, in the event that a vacancy occurs by reason of the failure of
the person elected to take the required oath or to give bond as provided by
law or ordinance or for any other reason whatsoever, and if the Council of
the Borough of Baldwin refuses, fails or neglects or is unable, for any reason
whatsoever, to fill any such vacancy within 30 days after the vacancy occurs,
then such vacancy shall be filled within 15 additional days by the Vacancy
Board created herein. Any person appointed by such Vacancy Board to fill
any such vacancy shall hold such office to which such person is appointed,
if the term thereof continues so long, until the first Monday in January after
the first municipal election occurring more than 60 days after the vacancy
occurs, at which election an eligible person shall be elected to the office for
the remainder of the term.
§ 57-3. Failure of Board to fill vacancy.
If any such vacancy occurs in the offices referred to herein, and if such
vacancy is not filled by the Vacancy Board within 15 days, then it shall be
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-3
1:41
the duty of the Chairman of the Vacancy Board to petition the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County to fill the vacancy by the appointment of
a registered elector of the Borough to hold such office, if the term continues
so long, until the first Monday in January after the first municipal election
occurring more than 60 days after the vacancy occurs, at which election an
eligible person shall be elected to the office for the remainder of the term.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 62
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 41.
Buildings, numbering of — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 62-1. Purpose.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVISORY BOARD — Persons designated by a governing authority that
should be representative of the community, alarm industry, and law
enforcement. The Advisory Board should review and recommend false
alarm reduction efforts and report to the governing authority (City Council,
County Board, etc.).
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — A person or persons designated by the
governing authority to administer, control and review false alarm reduction
efforts.
ALARM COMPANY — The business, by an individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm
system in an alarm site.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness
and proper utilization of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false
alarms which may unduly divert law enforcement from responding to
criminal activity.
B. This chapter governs systems intended to summon law enforcement
and fire response, and requires registration, establishes fees, provides
for penalties for violation, establishes a system of administration, and
sets conditions for suspension or loss of registration.
§ 57-3 BALDWIN CODE § 62-2
1:42
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST — A notification to a law enforcement agency
that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a
particular alarm site.
ALARM REGISTRATION (or PERMITS) — The notification by an alarm
company or an alarm user of the Alarm Administrator that an alarm system
has been installed and is in use.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD — Should consist of five members as follows: The
Chief of Police or designee, Borough Secretary or designee, member of
Borough Council or designee, a representative of the Fire Department or
designee, and an at-large appointee of the Borough Council that cannot be
resolved at a first level. All appointees shall serve at the pleasure of Council.
ALARM SITE — A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm
system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a
multitenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or series of devices, including, but not limited
to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular
or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible,
visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to
summon law enforcement services of the municipality, including local alarm
system. "Alarm systems" does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or
person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity
who (which) uses or is in control of any alarm system at its alarm site.
ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class conducted by the
municipality or law enforcement agency for the purpose of educating alarm
users about the problems created by false alarms and responsible use and
operation of alarm systems.
AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER — Any electrical, electronic, mechanical or
other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice
message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other
communication system to a law enforcement agency.
CANCELLATION or RESPONDING AGENCY ALARM DISPATCH
CANCELLATIONS — The process by which an alarm company providing
monitoring verifies with the alarm user or responsible party that a false
dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the alarm
site requiring law enforcement agency response.
CONVERSION — The transaction or process by which one alarm company
begins monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm
system previously monitored by another alarm company.
DURESS ALARM — A silent alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening situation or a
crime in progress requiring law enforcement response.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency,
when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:43
attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of
the alarm site.
HOLDUP ALARM — A silent alarm signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
KEYPAD — A device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual
entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Commissioner, Superintendent,
Sheriff and Chief of Police, director of a law enforcement agency or an
authorized representative. The term "law enforcement authority" is also
to include fire chiefs, public safety officials, emergency management
coordinator or authorized representatives of same.[Amended 6-12-2018
by Ord. No. 889]
LICENSE — A license issued to an alarm company to sell, install, monitor,
repair or replace alarm systems by an authority having jurisdiction.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — Any alarm system that annunciates an alarm
only by an internal or external audio device.
MONITORING — The process by which an alarm company receives signals
from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the
municipality for the purpose of summoning law enforcement response to the
alarm site.
ONE PLUS DURESS ALARM — The manual activation of a silent alarm
signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of
the normal arm/disarm code (normal code = 1234; one plus duress code =
1235).
PANIC — An audible alarm system signal generated by the manual
activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening or emergency
situation requiring law enforcement response.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or similar entity.
TAKEOVER — The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes
over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled
by another alarm user.
VERIFY — An attempt, by the alarm company or its representative, to
contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether
or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting law
enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm
dispatch request.
ZONES — Subdivisions into which an alarm system is divided to indicate
the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted.
§ 62-3. Registration required; application; fees; transferability;
false statements.
§ 62-2 BALDWIN CODE § 62-3
1:44
A. No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
at its alarm site without a valid alarm registration issued by Baldwin
Borough. A separate registration is required for each alarm site.
(1) An additional alarm registration classification shall be required for
alarm systems programmed with duress alarm or holdup alarm.
B. The annual fee for a registration or registration renewal for a
residential alarm site shall be $5 and for a commercial site shall be $60,
and should reflect the administration cost. No refund of a registration
or registration renewal fee will be made. The initial annual registration
fee must be submitted to Baldwin Borough within five days after the
alarm installation or alarm takeover. A registration occurring on or
before June 30 shall be charged the full annual fee. A registration
occurring after June 30 shall be charged 1/2 the annual fee.
(1) An additional fee established by Baldwin Borough shall be assessed
for an alarm system programmed with duress alarm or holdup
alarm.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application form and the alarm
registration fee, Baldwin Borough shall register the applicant unless
the applicant has:
(1) Failed to pay a fine assessed under § 62-10; or
(2) Had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked,
and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been
corrected.
D. Each alarm registration application must include the following
information:
(1) The name, complete address (including apartment or suite
number), and telephone numbers of the person who will be the
registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance
and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed
under this chapter.
(2) The classification of an alarm site shall be either residential
(including single-family dwelling, duplexes, condos, and/or mobile
homes) or commercial site.
(3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification
of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, or other, for each
purpose, whether audible or silent.
(4) Mailing address, if different from the alarm site.
(5) Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site.
(6) Name and telephone numbers of at least three individuals who are
able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:45
§ 62-4. Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
A tenant of an apartment with an alarm system shall obtain an alarm
registration from Baldwin Borough before operating or causing the
operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The owner or
property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm
registration of any alarm system operated in offices or common areas of the
apartment complex. The annual fee for these registrations or the renewal of
these registrations shall be the same as the fee for a commercial alarm site.
Each building, regardless of the number of units contained therein, shall be
at any time; respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes; and upon
request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm
system if such becomes necessary.
(7) Type of business conducted at the alarm site.
(8) Signed certification from the alarm user stating:
(a) The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable;
(b) The name, address, and phone number of the alarm company
performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm
system takeover and responsible for providing repair service to
the alarm system;
(c) The phone number of the alarm company monitoring the alarm
system, if different from the installing alarm company;
(d) That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false
alarms, has been left with the applicant; and
(e) That the alarm company has trained the applicant in proper
use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid
false alarms.
(f) The law enforcement response may be based on factors such as
availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions,
traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc.
E. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue a registration.
F. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm
site. An alarm user shall inform Baldwin Borough of any change that
alters any information listed on the registration application within five
business days.
G. All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a registration may be
issued or renewed.
§ 62-3 BALDWIN CODE § 62-4
1:46
deemed as one commercial alarm site and shall pay the annual registration
fee for a commercial alarm site.
§ 62-5. Registration duration and renewal.
A registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance and must be
renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a registration
renewal fee to Baldwin Borough. Baldwin Borough shall notify each alarm
user of the need to renew 30 days prior to the expiration date. Failure
to renew will be classified as use of a nonregistered alarm system, and
citations and penalties shall be assessed without waiver. A twenty-fivedollar
late fee can be assessed if the renewal is more than 30 days late.
§ 62-6. Duties of alarm user.
A. An alarm user shall:
(1) Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms.
(2) Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative
to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when
notified by the municipality to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm
system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide alternative
security for the premises; and should the alarm user either refuse
to respond or not respond within 30 minutes, then he/she shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $300.
(3) Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to
report.
B. An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site
will sound for no longer than 10 minutes after being activated (or 15
minutes for systems operating under Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
Standard 365 or 609).
C. An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm company inspect the
alarm system after two false alarms in a one-year period from the date
of registration issuance or renewal. Baldwin Borough may waive an
inspection requirement if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not
have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system to be
more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as
appropriate. See Appendix A for Installers False Alarm Prevention
Checklist.24
D. An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers.
24.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 62-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-6
1:47
§ 62-7. Duties of alarm company; permit required; fee.
E. An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system.
A. Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm companies shall obtain a permit
from Baldwin Borough to sell maintenance and/or service alarm
systems in the Borough prior to installation of same. The fee shall be
$50 for each permit issued.
B. Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm companies shall not program
alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress
alarms. Alarm companies may continue to report one plus duress
alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress
prior to enactment of this chapter. However, upon enactment of this
chapter, when a takeover or conversion occurs, or if an alarm user
requests an alarm system inspection or modification pursuant to
§ 62-6C of this chapter, an alarm company must remove the one plus
duress alarm capability from such alarm system.
C. Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm companies shall not install a
device activating a holdup alarm, which is a single-action nonrecessed
button. An alarm company must remove all single-action nonrecessed
buttons when a takeover or conversion occurs.
D. Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm companies shall use control
panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association
(SIA) Control Panel Standard — Features for False Alarm Reduction.
E. After completion of the installation, an alarm company employee shall
review with the alarm user the Customer False Alarm Prevention
Checklist (Appendix B25) or an equivalent approved by Baldwin
Borough.
F. An alarm company performing monitoring services:
(1) Shall offer a training period in which no request for dispatch by law
enforcement will occur during the first seven days after installation
of an alarm system, but rather will use that week to train the alarm
user on proper use of the alarm system, unless circumstances
necessitate immediate requests for response, as determined by
Baldwin Borough;
(2) Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by
Baldwin Borough;
(3) Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress and holdup
alarm activation, before requesting a law enforcement response to
an alarm system signal;
25.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 62-6 BALDWIN CODE § 62-7
1:48
§ 62-8. Suspension or revocation of alarm company license.
Baldwin Borough can appeal to an appropriate governmental body
regulating the alarm company to suspend or revoke the alarm company's
license when the alarm company fails to comply with the duties listed in
§ 62-7. In the event Baldwin Borough cannot obtain required information
about the alarm company from the governmental body regulating the alarm
company, Baldwin Borough can require the alarm company to supply the
required information in a registration with Baldwin Borough.
§ 62-9. Duties of Baldwin Borough.
(4) Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the municipality in a
manner and form determined by Baldwin Borough;
(5) Communicate cancellations to the municipality in a manner and
form determined by Baldwin Borough;
(6) Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a
duress or holdup alarm are given adequate training as to the
proper use of the duress or holdup alarm;
(7) Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back,
floor, etc.) about the location of the alarm;
(8) Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or
perimeter);
(9) Provide alarm user registration number when requesting dispatch;
(10) Endeavor to contact the alarm user when an alarm dispatch
request is made; and
(11) Upon enactment of this chapter, alarm companies that perform
monitoring services must maintain, for a period of at least one year,
records relating to alarm dispatch request. Records must include
the name, address, and phone number of the alarm user, the alarm
system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and
evidence of an attempt to verify. Baldwin Borough may request
copies of such records for individually named alarm users.
A. Baldwin Borough shall:
(1) Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests.
(2) Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch
requests.
B. Baldwin Borough shall establish a procedure to record such information
on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit Baldwin Borough to
maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following
information. This information may be relayed by the responding officer
§ 62-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-9
1:49
§ 62-10. False alarm penalties.
at the time of clearance to law enforcement dispatchers, who will then
record said information on the call record.
(1) Identification of the registration number for the alarm site;
(2) Identification of the alarm site;
(3) Date and time alarm dispatch request was received;
(4) Date and time of law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site;
(5) Zone, if available;
(6) Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any;
(7) Identification of the responsible alarm company;
(8) Whether unable to locate the address; and/or
(9) Cause of alarm, if known.
C. The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification
to the alarm user of a false alarm. Options include, but are not limited
to, the officer leaving a door hanger or notice at the alarm site. The
notice shall include the following information:
(1) The date and time of law enforcement response to the false alarm;
(2) The identification number of the responding law enforcement
officer; and
(3) A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system
is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false
alarms and resulting fines.
D. If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or
maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses
false alarms, Baldwin Borough may require a conference with an alarm
user and the alarm company responsible for the repair of the alarm
system to review the circumstances of each false alarm.
E. The Alarm Administrator shall oversee the creation and implementation
of an alarm user awareness class. The Alarm Administrator may request
the assistance of alarm companies and a law enforcement agency in
developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm
users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users
how to operate their alarm systems without generating false alarms.
A. An alarm user shall be subject to penalties, warnings and suspension or
revocation of registration depending on the number of false alarms
emitted from an alarm system within a twelve-month period from the
date of registration or renewal, based upon the following schedule:
§ 62-9 BALDWIN CODE § 62-10
1:50
§ 62-11. Suspension of response.
Number of False Alarms Penalties
1, 2 or 3 $0
4 $50
5 $100
6 or 7 $200
8 or more $300 (each)
B. In addition, any person operating a nonregistered alarm system
(whether suspended or never acquired) will be subject to a citation and
assessment of a two-hundred-dollar penalty for each false alarm, in
addition of any other penalties.
C. An alarm user shall have the option of attending an alarm user
awareness class in lieu of paying one prescribed penalty.
D. If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene,
this is not a false alarm for the purpose of penalties, and no penalties
will be assessed.
E. The alarm company shall be issued a civil citation if the officer
responding to the false alarm determines that an on-site employee of
the alarm company directly caused the false alarm. In this situation this
will not be counted against the alarm user.
F. The alarm company may be penalized for failure to verify if the Alarm
Administrator determines the existence of the consistent pattern or
written policy against verification.
G. The alarm company can be penalized if the Alarm Administrator
determines that an alarm company employee make a false statement
concerning the inspection of an alarm site or the performance of an
alarm system.
A. Alarm Administrator may suspend alarm response if it is determined
that:
(1) The alarm user has four or more false alarms in one year;
(2) There is a false statement of a material fact in the application for a
registration;
(3) The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a fine assessed
under § 62-10 or fee assessed under § 62-3; or
(4) The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an
alarm company that complies with the requirement of this chapter,
stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if
necessary) by the alarm company.
§ 62-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:51
§ 62-12. Notification upon false alarm.
§ 62-13. Appeals; fee.
B. A person commits an offense if he/she operates an alarm system during
the period in which his alarm registration is suspended and is subject to
enforcement and penalties set in § 62-15. An alarm company commits
an offense if it continues to request law enforcement dispatch to an
alarm site after notification by the Alarm Administrator that the
registration has been suspended or revoked and is subject to
enforcement and penalties set in § 62-15.
C. If the alarm registration is reinstated pursuant to § 62-13, the Alarm
Administrator may suspend alarm response if it is determined that two
false alarms have occurred within 60 days after the reinstatement date.
A. The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after the
first, second, and third false alarms. The notification shall include the
amount of the penalty for each false alarm, notice that the alarm user
can attend alarm user awareness class to waive a penalty, the fact that
response will be suspended after the fourth false alarm, and a
description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user.
B. The Alarm Administrator will notify the alarm user and the alarm
company in writing after the fourth false alarm that alarm response has
been suspended. This notice of suspension will also include the amount
of the penalty for each false alarm and a description of the appeals
procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm company.
A. An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a penalty, suspension, or
request reinstatement to the Alarm Administrator. An appeal fee of $25
will accompany the appeal by the alarm user. Appeal fees will be
returned to the alarm user if the appeal is upheld. The filing of an
appeal with the Alarm Administrator stays the assessment of the
penalty or suspension until the Alarm Administrator makes a final
decision.
(1) The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the Alarm
Administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 10
days after receipt of the penalty.
B. If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance or renewal of an alarm
registration or suspends response, the Alarm Administrator shall send
written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to
either the applicant or alarm user and the alarm company.
C. A second level of appeal is available to the Alarm Review Board in cases
where the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision reached at a
lower level.
(1) The applicant, alarm user or the alarm company on behalf of the
alarm user may appeal the decision of the Alarm Administrator to
§ 62-11 BALDWIN CODE § 62-13
1:52
§ 62-14. Reinstatement of alarm response.
the Alarm Review Board by filing a written request for a review,
setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 days after receipt
of the notice from the Alarm Administrator.
(2) The Alarm Review Board shall conduct a formal hearing and
consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The Board shall
make its decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence
presented at the hearing. The Board must render a decision within
30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The Board
shall affirm or reverse the assessment of the penalty. The decision
of the Board is final as to administrative remedies of the
municipality.
(3) Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action of the Alarm
Administrator suspending a registration or requiring a payment of
a penalty until the Alarm Review Board has completed the review. If
a request for an appeal is not made within the twenty-day period,
the action of the Alarm Administrator is final.
A. A person whose alarm response has been suspended may have alarm
response reinstated by the Alarm Administrator or the Alarm Review
Board if the person has abided by one or more of the following:
(1) Submits an updated application and the registration fee.
(2) Pays or otherwise resolves all citations and penalties.
(3) Submits a certification from an alarm company that complies with
the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has
been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm company.
(4) Payment to the Borough of Baldwin for reinspection and
reinstatement of a fee in the amount of $50.
B. And one or more of the following, if applicable:
(1) Submits proof that an employee of the alarm company caused the
false alarm.
(2) Files with the Alarm Administrator a certificate showing that the
alarm user has successfully completed the alarm user awareness
class as provided under § 62-9E.
(3) Files with the Alarm Administrator a written statement from the
municipal alarm inspector designated by the Police Department
that the alarm or alarm system has been inspected and found to be
in good working order or repaired so as to be in good working
order.
§ 62-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-15
1:53
§ 62-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, before the District Magistrate, pursuant to citation filed,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300 and cost
of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 62-16. Confidentiality.
Information contained in registration application and applications for
appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of
the municipality and by any third-party administrator or employees of a
third-party administrator with access to such information.
§ 62-17. Government immunity.
Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a
contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any
and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to
respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity
as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm
user acknowledges that police response may be based on factors such
as availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic
conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels.
Chapter 65
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 65-1. License required.
No person shall set up, establish or cause to be set up or established
or exhibit, display or maintain for the purpose of gaining advantage or
profit within the Borough any mechanical device, machine or apparatus of
any kind for the playing of games or otherwise used for the purpose of
amusement or entertainment by the insertion therein of a coin or any other
metal disk, slug or token without obtaining a license from the license officer.
§ 65-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership or corporation who seeks to
obtain a license for a mechanical device under this chapter.[Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OF MECHANICAL DEVICE — The document
filed by the applicant requesting a permit to possess in the Borough of
Baldwin any mechanical device, music box and/or other electronic device,
§ 62-15 BALDWIN CODE § 65-2
1:54
machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of games and
amusement.[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any restaurant, bar, tavern, retail,
manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, educational, religious,
governmental or other nonresidential establishment, store or business,
whether or not in operation.[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for the
playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo or other casino games by the
insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or token.[Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
ILLEGAL GAMBLING DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for
the playing of poker, blackjack, keno, bingo, slots or other casino gambling
games by the insertion therein of any coin, currency, metal disc, slug or
token which contains or has been modified to have a knockoff or knockdown
switch or other capability for erasing or eliminating playing credits.[Added
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
LICENSEE — A license holder for any period of time of any special privilege
granted relevant to any section of this chapter.
LICENSE OFFICER — The Borough Secretary and any person to whom
the Borough Secretary shall delegate the authority given to the Borough
Secretary under this chapter.
MECHANICAL DEVICE — Any device, machine or apparatus used for the
purpose of playing games or otherwise used for the purpose of amusement
or entertainment by the insertion therein of any currency, metal disc, slug
or token.[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
OWNER — Any individual, partnership or corporation who is the lawful
owner of any mechanical device for which a license is sought under this
chapter.[Added 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
PROPRIETOR — Any individual, partnership or corporation who owns,
leases or maintains the business establishment in which any mechanical
device is placed for use, patronage, recreation or amusement of the public
or of persons in or about the business establishment.[Added 12-21-1998
by Ord. No. 730]
§ 65-3. Compliance required.
No person, either directly or indirectly, shall conduct any business or
enterprise or use in connection herewith any mechanical device, in whole
or in part, for which a license is required by this chapter, without first
obtaining such license and keeping it in effect at all times as required by
this chapter. No person under 18 years of age shall be entitled to a license
under this chapter.
§ 65-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-4
1:55
§ 65-4. Duties of license officer.
The license officer shall collect all license fees and issue all licenses in the
name of the Borough to all persons qualified under the provisions of this
chapter and shall do the following:
§ 65-5. Qualifications of applicants.
§ 65-6. Reasons for denial of license.
The license officer shall not issue a license if it is determined that the
licensed activity at the proposed location:
A. Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and
regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. Adopt forms. Adopt any and all forms necessary under this chapter and
prescribe the information to be given thereon.
C. Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths
necessary to the administration of this chapter.
D. Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant
for a license as prescribed by this chapter.
E. Examine records. Examine the books and records of any applicant or
licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
F. Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his
application and deliver written reasons for denial at the applicant's
request.
A. General standards to be applied. The general standards herein set out
relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a Borough license
shall be considered and applied by the license officer.
B. Good moral character. Each applicant shall be of good moral character.
In making such determination the license officer shall consider only:
(1) Penal history. All convictions and the reasons thereof and
subsequent parole conduct, if applicable.
(2) License history. Whether such person, in previously operating in
this or another state under a similar license, has had such a license
revoked or suspended and the reasons thereof.
A. Will be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare.
B. If the proposed use will be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity of the proposed use.
§ 65-4 BALDWIN CODE § 65-7
1:56
§ 65-7. License fees; transferability of license.
A. The annual license fee for mechanical devices including music boxes,
pool tables, pinball machines and similar devices, excluding all devices
defined as "gambling devices" by § 65-2, shall be $235. [Amended
12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 600; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 68026;
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730; 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 748;
3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 76827; 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 77928]
B. The annual license fee for all devices defined as "gambling devices" by
§ 65-2, including but not limited to video poker machines, shall be $800
per device. [Amended 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 600; 12-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 779]
C. Any device licensed under this chapter may not be moved to another
location within the Borough for use thereon unless a new license is
obtained, except that a device licensed under this chapter may be
moved to another location if the said device is replacing another device
that had been licensed at said location.
D. A license for any device under this chapter may not be transferred to
another device at the same location whether or not that device is
similar to the licensed device, except that a license issued for a device
which has fallen into disrepair or requires maintenance may be
transferred to a substitute device or, in the event that a device in any
establishment is removed, the license for that device may be
transferred to the substitute or replacement device, provided that the
number of devices in the establishment at which the device is located is
not increased.
(1) Should any license be transferred to a replacement device, the
owner or applicant must register the new device, type and serial
number with the Borough of Baldwin. [Added 12-18-2000 by
Ord. No. 748]
(2) Should any machine be confiscated for illegal use by a recognized
law enforcement agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
license for such machine shall become null and void, and the
license may not be transferred. Should any applicant or owner wish
to replace the confiscated machine with another device, a new
license and fee shall be obtained through the Borough of Baldwin.
[Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 748]
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that "Any revision, repeal, increase or
decrease in the fees set forth in this section shall, from time to time, be amended by
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin."
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 4-1-2002, would only be in
effect for new licenses purchased after 4-1-2002, and licenses purchased prior to the
effective date would not be eligible for any monetary refund.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2004.
§ 65-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-7
1:57
§ 65-8. Information to be stated on license.
Each license issued shall state upon its face:
§ 65-9. Additional information to be supplied.
In addition to the information required in the previous section, the following
information is also required to be furnished to the license officer:
§ 65-10. Duties of license holder.
E. No rebate or refund or any license fee or part thereof shall be made for
any reason except if the fee or any part thereof was collected through
an error.
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such
business is to be conducted.
B. The address of each business so licensed.
C. The amount of the license fee.
D. The dates of issuance and expiration.
E. Such other information as the license officer determines is necessary.
A. The name and address of the applicant and length of residence at each
address.
B. The previous occupation of any applicant.
C. The name of the premises owner where machines are to be used and
installed and the lease term, if applicable.
A. The licensee shall maintain at the premises where the mechanical
device is located the license issued with respect to that device, together
with a list of all devices licensed under the provisions of this chapter,
and the licensee shall provide said list to any police officer, license
officer, zoning officer or other representative of the Borough upon
request. The licensee shall affix any disk, plate or insignia, if any, which
may be provided by the license officer to be used in connection
herewith upon the outside of any mechanical device licensed by this
chapter, so that it may be easily seen at all times by interested parties.
B. Any licensee shall not permit any license, insignia, disk or plate to
remain posted, displayed or used after the period for which it was
issued has expired or when it has been suspended or revoked or when it
has for any reason become ineffective. The licensee shall promptly
return such inoperative license, insignia, disk or plate to the license
officer.
C. The licensee shall not loan, sell, give or assign to any person to use or
display or to destroy, damage or remove or to have in his possession,
§ 65-7 BALDWIN CODE § 65-10
1:58
§ 65-11. Term of license.
The term of the license under this chapter shall be from January 1 until
December 31 of each fiscal year.
§ 65-11.1. Application deadline. [Added 12-18-2000 by Ord. No.
748]
The deadline to apply for mechanical device licenses shall be January 31 of
each year. Applications must be submitted by this date or may be subject to
penalties.
§ 65-12. Inspections.
§ 65-13. Noncompliance.
Any owner, occupant, lessee or permittee of land or lands who allows
or permits any mechanical device that is required to be lodged in or on
premises under his, her, its or their control when said mechanical device
has not been licensed shall be considered to have violated the terms of this
chapter and shall be liable for the prescribed penalties.
§ 65-14. Revocation or suspension of license.
except as authorized by the license officer, any license, insignia, disk or
plate which has been issued to such licensee.
A. The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter:
(1) The license officer.
(2) Any police officer of the Borough of Baldwin in the course of his
duties.
(3) Any official authorized by the license officer.
B. All violations noted by the above-mentioned inspections shall be
reported to the license officer in any manner or form that the license
officer shall require.
A. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the license officer for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
license application.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
(3) Violation of any provision of this chapter or rules or regulations
duly made in accordance therewith.
§ 65-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-14
1:59
§ 65-15. Gambling devices prohibited. [Amended 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 730]
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize, license or permit any gambling
devices or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device or that is in any way contrary to present or future law. A
license shall not be issued unless the applicant acknowledges:
§ 65-16. Right of appeal.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Using any machine or other mechanical device in connection
herewith in an unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
(6) Obstruction of or denial of entry for authorized inspections.
B. The license officer shall revoke the license of any licensee whose
license shall be suspended twice within any one year's period of time,
and no new license or reinstatement or renewal shall be approved or
issued for one year from the revocation date.
A. That obtaining or displaying a Borough license does not sanction,
authorize or permit the use or possession of an illegal gambling device,
either per se or as modified;
B. That the Borough shall notify the appropriate law enforcement officials
of the use or possession of per se, modified or other illegal gambling
devices, whether or not such devices are licensed;
C. The Borough shall immediately revoke the license of any mechanical
device illegally used or possessed, either per se or as modified;
D. That if the applicant or licensee illegally uses or possesses an unlawful
gambling device, either per se or as modified, he may be prosecuted by
the Borough or other law enforcement officials; and
E. That if the Borough has reasonable grounds to believe that a particular
mechanical device is illegal, either per se or as modified, the Borough
shall not issue a license for said device.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the license officer may request a
hearing before the license officer within 10 days following the effective
date of any action complained hereof. The appeal shall set out a copy of
the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the
facts forming the basis of the appeal.
B. A copy of such appeal shall be filed by the appellant with the license
officer at the time of filing. The license officer shall notify the aggrieved
party of the date and place of hearing within five days of receipt of the
§ 65-14 BALDWIN CODE § 65-16
1:60
§ 65-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566; 12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 730]
Any persons or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the District Justice,
be fined up to $1,000 for each and every offense, or imprisoned for up to
30 days, at the discretion of the District Justice. Each and every day that
any machine or device, under the terms of this chapter, shall be operated
and used in violation thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
under this chapter and shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties
thereunder.
Chapter 70
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees, shrubs and bushes — See Ch. 150.
§ 70-1. Prohibited grass, weeds and other vegetation.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the
Borough of Baldwin shall permit any poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac
or any other similar noxious and harmful weed to remain growing, nor shall
he or it permit any grass or other weeds or other vegetation whatsoever
not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose to grow or
remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six inches or to
throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or
to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing
upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any of the provisions of this
section and which affect the public or residents of the Borough and which is
detrimental to the safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the
Borough is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 70-2. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall require the cutting of grass,
weeds or other vegetation growing in areas which customarily and
historically have contained brush and dense foliage or which remain
undeveloped and are not proximate or contiguous to developed areas; nor
shall any such grass, weeds or other vegetation be required to be cut or
maintained where such cutting or maintaining would impose a hardship
on the property owner because of the presence of extreme slope grades,
appeal, and the hearing shall be held within 15 days from the date of
appeal.
§ 65-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:61
crevasses or the existence of areas which are unable to be reasonably
cleared.
§ 70-3. Notice of violation; failure to comply.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin is hereby authorized to give
notice, as permitted by law and rules of civil and criminal procedure, to the
owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon any poison
ivy, poison oak, poison sumac or any other similar noxious and harmful weed
or whereon grass, other weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining
in violation of the provisions of the first section of this chapter, directing
and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such vegetation so as to
conform to the requirements of this chapter within five days after issuance
of such notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail
or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the Borough authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds
or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty
authorized by law, may be collected by the Borough from such person, firm
or corporation in the manner provided by law.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 plus
costs of prosecution or imprisoned for up to 30 days, provided that each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 74
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings and structures — See
Ch. 77.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 70-2 BALDWIN CODE § 70-4
1:62
ARTICLE I
Building Construction
§ 74-1. Purpose; adoption of standards.29
To promote and protect public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Borough of Baldwin and for the purpose of codifying and regulating the
design, construction, alteration, demolition, extension, repair and removal
of all buildings, homes, structures and/or edifices in the Borough of
Baldwin, and to prescribe reasonable standards for the use of materials,
roofing and construction components in such structures in the Borough,
the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin hereby adopts that certain
building code known as the "Boca National Building Code (1996 Edition)
of the Building Officials and Code Administration International, Inc.,"
hereinafter referred to as the "code," as hereinafter modified. Copies of the
code have been and are now on file in the office of the Borough Secretary
of the Borough of Baldwin. The provisions, standards, specifications and
interpretations of the aforesaid code are hereby adopted by reference to the
same, and they are incorporated herein as fully as if they had been set out
at length herein.
§ 74-2. Interpretation of provisions; enforcement authority.
Any references in the aforesaid code to terms such as "municipality," "city"
or any other reference to a governmental authority shall be held to mean
the Borough of Baldwin; any terms used in the code referring to building
inspector, inspector, code officer or other person authorized to enforce
the code shall be held to mean the Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning
Officer of the Borough of Baldwin or any inspectors hired by the Borough to
accomplish the purposes set out in this chapter. The Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin is hereby authorized to appoint and hire inspectors to
carry out the provisions of this chapter, but the Code Enforcement Officer
and/or the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin shall be the primary
official responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 74-3. Plan approval required.
Before any work of construction, alteration, extension, repair, demolition
or removal of any building, house, edifice or structure is begun, approval
of the plans and specifications pertaining to such building, house, edifice
or structure shall be required to be obtained from the Zoning Officer of
the Borough; the plans and specifications sought to be approved shall be
submitted by the owner, or the agent or employee of such owner, and shall
be in such form and manner as is more specifically required in the code.
The submission of such plans and specifications shall be accompanied by a
check or money order in an amount as required under the resolutions of the
29.Editor's Note: See also uniform construction codes adoption in Ch. 83, Construction
Codes, Uniform, and adoption of building and other international codes in § 131-2,
Adoption of standards, in Ch. 131, Property Maintenance.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:63
Borough of Baldwin adopted from time to time and shall include, if required,
engineering and architectural certification.
§ 74-4. Definitions.
All terms used in this chapter shall be defined as the same are more
fully defined in the code, except that in the event that there is a conflict
between the definitions contained in the code and terms that are defined in
the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin, as amended,30 then the
definition as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin
shall prevail. For these purposes, the definitions section of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin is incorporated herein by reference
thereto, the same as though it had been fully set forth herein at length.31
§ 74-5. Modifications to standards.
The code adopted herein is hereby modified in the following respects:
A. The provisions of Chapter 29 relating to plumbing systems shall, where
applicable, be subordinated in favor of the ordinances of the County of
Allegheny relating to plumbing systems; where a conflict appears in the
ordinances of the County of Allegheny and Chapter 29 of the code, the
County provisions shall prevail.
B. Any reference to signs, their size, height, etc., where stated in the code
shall be subordinated to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Baldwin insofar as relates to signs.32
C. Chapter 13 of the code relating to energy conservation shall be
subordinated in favor of the ordinances of the County of Allegheny
relating to energy and energy conservation, and where a conflict
appears in the ordinances of the County of Allegheny and Chapter 13 of
the code, the County provisions shall prevail.
D. Section 104.1 is hereby amended by deleting the same in its entirety
and substituting therefor the following: "The Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough of Baldwin is hereby designated and appointed as the
Code Official."
E. Section 112.0 relating to fees is deleted in its entirety and substituted
therefor is the following: "The Borough shall from time to time by
resolution designate fees for new construction, alteration, removal,
demolition or other building operations, and no permits shall be issued
until the fees prescribed by such resolutions shall have been paid to the
Borough. The Borough Council shall, from time to time, designate the
amount of the fees; the current resolution in effect in the Borough of
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
31.Editor's Note: See § 168-12, Definitions, of the Zoning Ordinance.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning, and specifically § 168-29, Signs.
§ 74-3 BALDWIN CODE § 74-5
1:64
Baldwin relating to fees shall continue in full force and effect until
amended, modified or changed by the Borough Council."
F. Section 116.4 is deleted and § 74-10 hereafter substituted in lieu
thereof.
G. Section 121.0 et seq. of the code is deleted in its entirety and
substituted therefor shall be the following: "Any person shall have the
right to appeal by requesting the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Zoning Officer to seek an interpretation of the ordinance from the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.; in the
event that such a decision is adverse to the applicant, or not
forthcoming, the applicant may then request that an arbitrator be
appointed to determine the issue and to render a decision. The
arbitrator shall be an architect selected by the Borough and the
applicant. All costs of the arbitrator shall be paid for by the applicant."
H. Chapter 4, Section 421.0 et seq., relating to swimming pools, shall be
construed in conjunction with the provisions set out in the code and in
relation to other ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin relating to
swimming pools, and the most stringent of the codes shall apply;
provided, however, that in the event that any question arises as to
which code is the more stringent, then the provisions of the Borough of
Baldwin ordinances relating to swimming pools shall prevail.
I. Section 1810.3.1 of the code is deleted in its entirety and substituted
therefor is the following: "Plain concrete as it relates to concrete
footings shall be followed except that the following minimums shall be
observed: a) Footer sizes are to be a minimum of eight inches in depth
and a minimum of 20 inches in width; b) Footers must be as the same
are referred to in Section 1806.1 hereof and shall have the further
limitation that the footers must be below frost line, which is a minimum
of 36 inches; c) Further, Section 1806.1 shall be limited to the extent
that concrete shall not be poured under 20° F."
J. Section 1904.3.1 and Section 1810.3.1 are hereby amended by adding
the additional requirement that footers must be inspected before any
concrete shall be poured.
K. Section 1816.1 shall be amended by adding to the six requirements set
out therein the following:
"7. When pilings must be used, the pilings must have a minimum
sixteen-inch diameter.
8. Pilings must have a minimum of four one-half-inch rods protruding
into the footer at least three feet.
9. Pilings must be set on solid ground.
10. Pilings must not be more than 10 feet apart.
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:65
11. Grade beams must be a minimum of 18 inches deep and 20 inches
wide and must have eight-and-one-half-inch rods, four of them
three inches from the top, and four of them three inches from the
bottom of the footer."
L. Chapter 19, Section 1905, shall be amended by adding thereto: "Four
inches or greater of concrete floor shall be used in garage areas."
M. Chapter 18, Section 1809, shall be amended by adding to the same the
following: "Beams and girders must be laid on solid masonry or
tempered brick or filled cores if hollow unit masonry is used."
N. Chapter 18, Section 1813.0, shall be amended by adding thereto the
following: "French drains containing four-inch perforated pipe and
gravel around the perimeter (outside house) of the building where
required shall be used in addition to crushed stone."
O. Chapter 23, Section 2305, shall be amended by adding the following:
"Bridging will be used in all construction, two inch by eight inch or
greater." Chapter 15, Section 1502.1, shall be amended by adding to
the definition of roof structure the following: "and shall contain not less
than one-half-inch-by-four-feet-by-eight-feet plywood or greater with
clips."
P. Chapter 23, Section 2305.1, shall be amended by adding thereto the
following: "All framing shall be two inches by four inches by 16 inches
on center. The first floor in two-story dwellings shall have a double top
plate, inside corners solid, and shall contain no drywall clips."
Q. Chapter 23, Section 2305.1, shall be amended by adding thereto the
following: "Such design and construction shall require double two-inchby-
four-inch studs in bearing wall, if plates are cut both sides for heat
duct chase, or return-air bay."
R. Chapter 12, Section 1210.1, shall be amended by adding to the same
the following: "Notwithstanding the foregoing, 50% of the required
ventilating area must be through ridge vents or gable venting; 25% of
the required ventilating area must be through eave or cornice vents on
front, and 25% must be on the rear of the building."
S. Chapter 1, Section 113, is hereby amended by adding to Section 113.5
the following: "All requests for inspection shall require at least a fortyeight-
hour notice."
§ 74-5 BALDWIN CODE § 74-5
1:66
ARTICLE II
Housing Standards
§ 74-6. Purpose; adoption of standards; modification.
Further, in the interest of promoting and protecting the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Baldwin, and for the
purpose of regulating the fabrication, erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration and repair of detached one- and two-family dwellings situate
within the Borough, the Borough of Baldwin does by this chapter ordain and
adopt the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., known and designated as "CABO
(1995 Edition)," modifying the same, however, and amending it in the
following respects:
A. All sections of said code which relate to the code official or other officer
shall be construed so as to mean the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Baldwin; all provisions of the same relating to appeals and
all other administrative sections of the CABO shall be construed in
keeping with the provisions of §§ 74-2, 74-3 and 74-4 of this chapter,
and all succeeding sections shall be applicable thereto likewise.
B. The table set out in Section R-301.2a, which appears as a part of
Section R-301.2a, Design Criteria, is hereby amended to reflect the
following:
(1) Roof snow load: 20 pounds per square foot.
(2) Wind velocity: 70 miles per hour.
(3) Seismic condition: Zone O.
(4) Weathering: severe.
(5) Frost line depth: 36 inches.
(6) Subject to damages from termites: moderate to heavy.
(7) Subject to damage from decay: slight to moderate.
§ 74-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-6
1:67

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 74-7. Construal of provisions.
Whenever a conflict shall occur between the provisions of this chapter and
the codes adopted hereunder and the provisions of any other ordinance
of the Borough of Baldwin, particularly the Zoning Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin,33 then such conflict
shall be resolved by interpreting the ordinances so that the strictest
interpretation of the conflicting ordinance shall be the one that prevails,
and the administration or enforcement of the matter shall proceed under
the provisions of the ordinance containing the strictest standard or
interpretation.
§ 74-8. Administration and enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin
appointed under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance34 of the Borough of
Baldwin or any inspector appointed by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Baldwin under the provisions of this chapter shall be authorized to and
is hereby directed to be the official responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter; he shall be charged with the responsibility of
reviewing applications, plans, specifications and all other data submitted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and he shall inspect the
construction, alteration, demolition or removal of all structures to ascertain
that the same is conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. He
shall issue permits as the same are required, after first having obtained all
necessary approvals, and he shall condemn all unsafe structures and shall
order the same to be razed or repaired and made safe and secure as the
interest of the public safety may require; provided further, however, that in
the event that a property owner or other person having substantial property
interest in the premises may feel aggrieved by such order, such property
owner or aggrieved person may request a hearing before the Borough
Council by requesting, in writing, addressed to the Borough Secretary, that
a hearing be held to determine the propriety of the order issued by the
Zoning Officer or inspector appointed for these purposes. Such request for
a hearing shall be submitted and filed with the Borough Secretary within 30
days of the date of the order from which the property owner or aggrieved
person seeks redress. A hearing shall then be held by the Borough Council
to determine the propriety of the order, and following the hearing, the
Council shall, within 45 days of such date, render a decision in the matter.
A signed copy of the written decision shall be forwarded to the property
owner or aggrieved person within five days of the date of such decision.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority after exhibiting proper
identification and in the discharge of his official duties to enter any building,
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning, and Ch. 142, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-8
1:69
structure or premises at any reasonable hour to enforce all laws relating
to matters covered under the provisions of this chapter, and he shall be
authorized to issue such citations or file such complaints before a District
Magistrate as may be required for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 74-9. Certificate of occupancy.
No occupancy, use or change of use shall take place in a building, home
or structure situate within the Borough of Baldwin until a certificate of
occupancy for the same shall have been issued by the Zoning Officer of the
Borough of Baldwin pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin.35
§ 74-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the codes or of any
ordinance incorporated herein and adopted hereby, or any person who shall
erect, construct, alter, repair, demolish or remove any building, structure
or edifice covered hereunder, or permit, suffer or cause the erection,
alteration, repair, demolition or removal of any building or structure or
portion thereof covered hereunder, in violation of this chapter or of any
ordinance incorporated herein, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter
and shall, upon conviction thereof by a District Magistrate, be punishable
by a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $500 together with costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine or costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days. The owner of any building, structure,
home or edifice or portion of the same or of the premises wherein a
violation of the codes shall exist or shall cause a violation of the same,
or any owner, tenant, contractor, agent or employee who may commit a
violation of this chapter or assist in the commission of such a violation
shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punishable by a fine not less than $300 nor more than $500 and costs
of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days; and provided, further, that each day
that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues shall be
considered a separate offense. The term "person" as used herein shall mean
any individual, member of a partnership or the officer of any corporation,
which officer authorizes or participates in any action or omission to act
which constitutes a violation of this chapter.
§ 74-11. Repealer; exception.
All prior ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin regulating or related to
matters addressed in the code adopted hereby or of any provisions of any
ordinance which conflict with the code or this chapter are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that those provisions contained in prior amendments
to Ordinance No. 42236 (adopted the 25th day of September, 1990) and in
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Fire Prevention.
§ 74-8 BALDWIN CODE § 74-11
1:70
particular to Section 5 of said ordinance, which relate to compliance with
the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act, Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736,
as amended,37 such Act having since been amended and codified at the Act
of June 24, 1996, P.L. 57, and which are set out in Ordinance No. 663 of
1993,38 adopted the 20th day of September, 1993, shall continue in full force
and effect, and are incorporated herein by reference thereto the same as
fully set forth herein.
§ 74-12. Effect on violations of prior regulations.
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights
acquired or liability incurred hereunder, nor any cause or causes of action
accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed herein.
37.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: Said ordinance was superseded by Ord. No. 672, which was in turn
superseded by this chapter.
§ 74-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-12
1:71

ARTICLE IV
Minimum Construction Standards
[Added 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 755]
§ 74-13. Adoption of standards.
From and after the effective date hereof, the minimum construction
standards, Appendix A,39 shall be the standards utilized for future
development and construction.
39.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 74-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-13
1:73
Chapter 77
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 74.
§ 77-1. Examination and report by Building Inspector.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Building Inspector that any structure
completed or in the process of construction or any portion thereof is in
a dangerous condition, the Building Inspector shall immediately cause an
investigation and examination to be made of such structure. If such
investigation or examination indicates that such structure is dangerous in
any respect, the Building Inspector shall report in writing to the Mayor and
to the Council, specifying the exact condition of such structure, setting forth
in such report whether and in what respect he considers such structure to
be dangerous and, if so, whether such structure is, in his opinion, capable
of being properly repaired or whether it should be removed as a dangerous
structure.
§ 77-2. Notice to owner.
§ 77-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-19-1984 by Ord. No.
543; 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
Any owner of any dangerous structure to whom a notice to repair or to
remove such structure shall be sent under the provisions of this chapter
A. If any structure is reported by the Building Inspector, as provided in the
first section of this chapter, to be in a dangerous condition, the Mayor
shall forthwith cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the
structure. Such notice shall require the owner of such structure to
commence the repair and removal of such building within 10 days of
such notice and to complete such repair or removal within 30 days
thereof; provided, however, that in any case where the notice
prescribed the repair of any structure, the owner thereof shall have the
option to remove such structure instead of making the repairs thereto
within the said time limit.
B. The notice required by the second section of this chapter shall be
served personally upon the owner of a structure, if such owner resides
in the Borough, or upon the agent of such owner, if such agent has a
residence or place of business within the Borough. If neither the owner
nor the agent thereof can be served within the Borough as hereby
provided, such notice shall be sent to the owner of such structure by
registered mail, at the last known address thereof, and a copy of said
notice shall be posted on a prominent part of the structure.
§ 74-13 BALDWIN CODE § 77-3
1:74
and who fails to complete such repair or removal within the time limit
prescribed by such notice shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
and costs of prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30 days. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense of this chapter.
§ 77-4. Repair or removal by Borough.
If the owner of any dangerous structure to whom a notice to repair or to
remove such structure shall be sent under the provisions of this chapter
fails to commence or to complete such repair or removal within the time
limit prescribed by such notice, the Mayor shall be empowered to cause
such work of repair or removal to be commenced and/or completed by the
Borough, and the cost and expense thereof, with a penalty of 10%, shall
be collected from the owner of such structure in the manner provided by
law, provided that the recovery of such cost and expense, together with the
penalty, may be in addition to the penalty imposed as provided in § 77-3 of
this chapter.
Chapter 80
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 74.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 80-1. Conspicuous and prominent display of numbers required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, all property owners,
tenants or occupiers of residential, commercial or industrial properties
in the Borough of Baldwin, including apartment complexes, shall display
the street number or address of such residential, commercial or industrial
property in a conspicuous and prominent place which shall be visible from
the street directly in front of said property and which numbers shall be
easily readable by passersby on said street.
§ 80-2. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner, tenant or occupier of any residential, commercial or
industrial property or building within the Borough of Baldwin or any person,
firm or corporation who is owner of said property and who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100 and the cost of prosecution
or, upon failure to pay such fine, to imprisonment for up to five days for
each offense. Each day that such offense shall continue shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:75
§ 80-3. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin and the Department of Police
shall have concurrent jurisdiction in enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
and the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin or any police officer of
the Borough of Baldwin shall have sufficient authority to prosecute such
offenses in the name of the Borough and to file complaints for violations of
the same before the District Magistrate of the Borough of Baldwin.
Chapter 80A
BULK STORAGE CONTAINERS
§ 80A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
BULK CONTAINERS — A portable container designed to assist with moving
and/or storage of household or commercial goods and materials, including,
but not limited to, portable on-demand storage devices ("PODS") and similar
containers, designed for the collection of large amounts of garbage and/or
refuse, including, but not limited to, dumpsters and bagsters, or designed
for the collection of yard waste and debris. Containers, including
dumpsters, used by commercial and multi-family properties for regular
storage of refuse and garbage in connection with normal business activities
shall not be considered bulk containers under this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignor, or any
other legal entity.
§ 80A-2. Use and location of bulk containers.
A. Bulk containers shall be used only in connection with maintenance,
construction and/or moving/relocation activities taking place on the
property upon which the bulk container is placed. It shall be unlawful
and a violation of this chapter for any person.
(1) To cause or permit a bulk container to be placed on public property,
including, but not limited to, roads or streets within the Borough;
(2) To cause or permit a bulk container to be placed in the Borough
right-of-way;
(3) To cause or permit a bulk container to be placed in such a location
as to block visibility or access to a public street;
(4) To cause or permit a bulk container to be placed in such a location
as to block access to a public sidewalk; or
§ 80-3 BALDWIN CODE § 80A-2
1:76
§ 80A-3. Registration and permit required.
§ 80A-4. Condition of bulk containers.
(5) To cause or permit a bulk container to be placed less than six feet
from a curb of a street.
B. The Zoning Officer may grant exceptions to the above for properties
that are physically unable to comply with the regulations.
C. Bulk containers shall not have any electrical wiring, lighting or heating
elements.
D. No advertising shall be permitted on a bulk container except for the
identity of the manufacturer of the bulk container.
A. No bulk container shall be used within the Borough without a permit.
Any person seeking to use a bulk container shall apply for a permit from
the Borough using a form to be hereafter prescribed, identifying the
purpose, placement and proposed location of the bulk container. The
permit shall be valid for 45 days. There shall be no application fee to
obtain a bulk container permit. Upon written request to the Zoning
Officer, the permit may be extended for an additional 30 days. No bulk
container shall be permitted on a property in excess of 150 days within
any twelve-month period. However, upon written request, and with
approval of Borough Council, the 150 days may be exceeded in the
event of an emergency and/or necessary situation.
B. An application for use of a bulk container within the Borough shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Officer or his designee for approval. The Zoning
Officer shall have the right to deny an application if it is deemed that
the placement of the bulk container is contrary to the health, safety and
public welfare of the Borough. A denial of the application by the Zoning
Officer may be appealed by the applicant to the Borough Manager.
C. The continued validity of any bulk container permit issued under this
chapter shall be contingent upon full compliance with the regulations
and requirements set forth in this chapter and any other applicable
rules adopted by the Borough.
A. Any person utilizing a bulk container shall be responsible to insure that
the area in and around the bulk container remains free of all litter and
debris.
B. Any person utilizing a bulk container shall insure that the bulk
container remains in a neat and clean condition and is secure and safe
at all times.
C. The location and utilization of the bulk container shall be in compliance
with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations applicable
thereto.
§ 80A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80A-5
1:77
§ 80A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any Person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$600 per occurrence. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 81
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
§ 81-1. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the
Borough of Baldwin except for the following:
§ 81-2. Restrictions on permitted open burning.
Open burning of wood, trees, logs, brush and/or stumps shall only be
permitted in compliance with the following:
A. It shall not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood,
propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances in an
appropriate container or fireplace.
B. It shall not apply to burning for the purpose of generating heat in a
stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used
for human or animal habitation.
C. It shall not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline
or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities.
A. Only clean, dry wood products may be burned.
B. Burning shall only be permitted in an approved outdoor rated fireplace,
fire pit, chimney or fifty-five-gallon drum.
C. No wood, treated wood or wood product that produces any noxious or
unpleasant odor when it is burned.
D. All burning and fires must be no less than 15 feet distant from the
nearest property line.
E. All outdoor burning shall be attended at all times by an individual not
younger than 18 years of age and shall be extinguished in the absence
of a qualified individual attending the fire.
§ 80A-5 BALDWIN CODE § 81-2
1:78
§ 81-3. Burning of refuse prohibited.
The open burning of refuse is prohibited. Refuse shall include any waste
material, including building supplies, garbage, grass and leaves. It shall not
include dead trees, logs, brush, stumps, and other vegetative matter.
§ 81-4. Authority of the Fire Marshal and/or Code Enforcement
Officer.
The Fire Marshal and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to
prohibit open burning if such burning is contrary to the provisions of this
chapter or the 2006 International Fire Code.
§ 81-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to a civil fine in the amount of $600 for each violation, after issuance of a
citation and conviction before the Magisterial District Judge.
F. Adequate means of fire extinguishment must be immediately available
at all times when outdoor burning is taking place.
G. Burning at construction sites having a valid building permit for the
purpose of providing warmth shall only be permitted if the weather is at
or below 32° F., and said burning shall only take place in a fifty-fivegallon
drum suitable for containing such fire.
H. Persons utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for
all fire-suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage
caused by the fire.
I. All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free
manner, when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse effects
and do not create a health hazard or a visibility hazard for persons at
home, on roadways, railroads or airfields. The person engaging in open
burning shall take all reasonable precaution to stop any smoke and/or
fumes from encroaching in or upon the inhabited structure of another.
Open burning shall be conducted in conformance with all local and
state fire protection regulations and the 2006 International Fire Code.
J. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk or
on the ice of a lake, pond, stream, body of water or on any public
property.
K. No person shall be permitted to create or permit an open fire on
property unless he/she has the legal right to possession of that property.
L. The Fire Marshal or other authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of the Borough of Baldwin who presents credentials may
inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:79
Chapter 82
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 85.
§ 82-1. Purpose; intent.
§ 82-2. Restricted acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person having custody of any
cat(s) to have any cat that becomes a nuisance. Acts of nuisance shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
§ 82-3. Limit on number of cats.
No more than four cats shall be kept or maintained or be in custody for
more than 90 days in any residential housing unit or its grounds. Nothing
contained herein, however, shall be applicable to those persons who have
A. The Council of the Borough of Baldwin is desirous of protecting the
health, safety, welfare and property of others from annoyance and
damage caused by cats and to establish the responsibility and liability
of cat owners arising out of the conduct of their pets.
B. The Council of the Borough of Baldwin is desirous of providing
reasonable regulations for the control, care and maintenance of cats in
the Borough of Baldwin. It is recognized by the Mayor and Council that
cats are generally excellent pets, but they can become a nuisance if not
properly controlled.
C. This legislation is not intended to impair, restrict or otherwise interfere
with the relationship that exists between owners and their pets;
however, it is necessary that these owners exercise responsibility in the
care and control of their animals so that other residents in the Borough
of Baldwin are not offended or unreasonably inconvenienced.
A. Noise disturbance.
B. Viciousness.
C. Digging into flower beds, lawns, sandboxes or gardens or the damaging
of shrubbery, trees, lawns or personal property not belonging to the
owner or the depositing of feces.
D. Entering and running at large in public parks or playgrounds.
E. Not having current rabies vaccinations and a current Borough license.
§ 81-5 BALDWIN CODE § 82-3
1:80
kept or maintained in custody in any residential housing unit or its grounds
more than four cats prior to the adoption of this chapter.
§ 82-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED CAT — A cat of any age which shall be left unattended,
unclaimed, unlicensed or at large for a period of 72 hours or more.
CAT — Any animal of a feline species.
CONTROL OFFICER — The person authorized by the Borough of Baldwin
from time to time, by resolution, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The Control Officer shall have all the powers of a Constable or other peace
officer in the execution of the provisions of this chapter, including the
service of a summons, the service and execution of any other order of
process, notwithstanding any provision of the Uniform Justice Court Act.
OWNER — Every person having a property right in a cat and every person
keeping, having custody or feeding a cat for more than 48 hours, or who
allows a cat to reside or remain about his premises, shall be considered a
"cat owner." This provision shall not include a person who keeps or feeds
a cat on behalf of an owner at the owner's request to accommodate the
owner's temporary needs.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A cat that causes damage to public or private
property or causes harm to any person.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner or custodian.
§ 82-5. Licensing and vaccination requirements; exemptions.
A. License requirements. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any cat over seven months of age within the Borough of Baldwin unless
such cat is licensed. The provisions of this section do not apply to cats
held by any government facility, a veterinary establishment or a
licensed animal shelter, pound, kennel or pet shop. No cat may be
licensed without proof of vaccination as detailed below.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the recommendations for immunization
published by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians, except as provided in Subsection C.
C. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from vaccination requirements
for a specified period by the Control Officer upon presentation of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other
physical condition, the inoculation of such cat is not medically
appropriate.
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-6
1:81
§ 82-6. Issuance of license; fees; registration tag. [Amended
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 802]
All cat licenses shall be issued by the office of the Borough Secretary or
such other person as may be designated by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Baldwin. All licenses shall be issued with a registration number,
and a record of such issuance shall be maintained. A license may only be
issued after a completed application is received along with all required fees.
The license fee shall be $5. The registration tag shall be attached to a collar
to be worn and maintained by the individual cat for whom the license was
issued whenever such cat shall be outdoors. License fees required by this
section shall be due on or before the last day of January in each year. No
license shall be granted for a period exceeding one year, and no license shall
be transferable. Persons applying for a license or renewal after February 1
in each year shall pay the full license fee.
§ 82-7. Prohibited acts.
§ 82-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $500 for each offense and up to 90 days in jail, or
both.
§ 82-9. Interference prohibited.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the Control
Officer or any police officer of the Borough of Baldwin in the performance
of any duty as herein provided.
§ 82-10. Repealer; severability.
A. No cat shall be sheltered, maintained or harbored that is not
domesticated. The area where cats are kept shall be clean and sanitary
and shall not create a disturbance by reason of noise, odor or other
causes. No person shall abandon any cat or permit a cat in his custody
to become a stray.
B. No cat shall cause damage to any person or property. Any person who
owns, maintains or harbors any cat that causes such damage shall be
strictly liable for the damage and may be prosecuted for a violation of
this chapter.
C. No person shall harbor, maintain or feed any unlicensed or stray cat.
Any person who shall do so following receipt of a notice from the
Control Officer advising said person that a violation of this chapter is
occurring may be prosecuted if he continues such activity.
A. All other ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 82-6 BALDWIN CODE § 82-10
1:82
§ 82-11. Safety clause.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby finds, determines and declares that this
chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare of the Borough of Baldwin and the inhabitants thereof.
§ 82-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on the first day of March 1995 and shall
continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the Council
of the Borough of Baldwin. For the remaining portion of year 1995 only, the
license fee shall be $1, and in subsequent years, § 82-6 shall apply.
Chapter 82A
CHICKENS
§ 82A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide of the keeping of chickens in
residential areas by Baldwin Borough residents while ensuring that said
practice does not result in a proliferation of nuisances to surrounding
properties.
§ 82A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
CHICKEN — A member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, a
domesticated fowl.
CHICKEN RUN — An enclosed area where chickens are allowed to walk and
run about.
COOP — A small building for housing poultry.
HEN — A female chicken.
ROOSTER — A male domestic chicken.
§ 82A-3. Use regulations.
The keeping of chicken hens shall be allowed by right in residentially zoned
areas of the Borough (R-1, R-2), provided that the following conditions are
met:
B. If any part of this chapter shall be held invalid, such part shall be
deemed severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the
remaining parts of this chapter.
A. The building lot has been developed as a single-family residence.
§ 82-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82A-3
1:83
§ 82A-4. Running at large prohibited; sanitary requirements;
slaughtering; feed and water.
The following shall apply to all residentially zoned properties that are
keeping chickens as set forth in § 82A-3:
B. No more than four chicken hens shall be kept per one-family dwelling.
C. A minimum lot size either owned, leased or rented of 1/2 acre shall be
required.
D. No person shall keep a rooster.
E. All chicken hens shall be housed in a roofed coop that is stationary,
secure, and enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
F. The coop shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an adjacent
lot.
G. The minimum coop size shall be three square feet per chicken. The
maximum overall coop size shall not exceed 30 square feet.
H. A chicken run is permitted when attached to the coop.
I. If a chicken run is provided, it shall be no bigger than 10 square feet per
chicken and shall be enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
J. The chicken run shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an
adjacent lot.
K. All coops and runs are subject to setbacks for accessory structures.
L. All coops and runs shall be screened from the view at ground level from
adjacent lots by using fencing, landscaping, or a combination thereof.
M. A zoning permit shall be required for keeping chicken hens, coops, and
chicken runs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any chickens to allow the
same to run at large upon any of the common thoroughfares, sidewalks,
passageways, play areas, parks, streets, alleys, or public highways, or
any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public or
private property, without an approved coop and run in Baldwin
Borough. Any chicken not contained within an approved coop or run
shall be deemed at large.
B. Any owner or owners of chickens shall be required to house the same at
all times under sanitary conditions so that the keeping of chickens shall
not become either a public or private nuisance. The following provisions
apply:
(1) Chicken feces on private property shall not be allowed to
accumulate to the degree that it becomes a public health nuisance
or hazard. All chicken feces shall be properly stored and disposed
§ 82A-3 BALDWIN CODE § 82A-4
1:84
§ 82A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500 per occurrence, and in default of payment thereof, to undergo
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 82A-6. Severability.
If a section, provision or part of this chapter shall be judged to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole or any sections, provisions or parts thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 82A-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from the date of its adoption by
the Baldwin Borough Council and upon publication provided by law.
of, so as not to be objectionable due to odor, pests or otherwise,
at the site's property line. The owner or owners of chickens shall
show that adequate provisions are being implemented to collect,
store and dispose of the feces and other litter associated with the
keeping of chickens. The containers used in the process shall be
kept covered and shall be cleaned on a regular basis to avoid the
potential for detectable odors. In cases where chicken feces does
accumulate on private property, the code enforcement officer may
conduct an investigation, after which the accumulation may be
declared a public health hazard or nuisance and the owner shall
be ordered to remove and dispose of the accumulated feces in an
approved manner. The order to remove such accumulated feces
shall be given personally to the owner or shall be sent by registered
mail, and the owner shall be given a period of 48 hours from the
date and time of receipt of the order to clean the property and
remove the accumulated feces.
(2) Coops and runs shall be kept in good repair and must be capable of
being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of vermin
and obnoxious odors.
C. It shall be prohibited to slaughter and/or purposefully kill any chicken,
for any purpose. Excluded from this prohibition is the killing of a
chicken for medical reasons by a licensed veterinarian and/or the offsite
slaughtering by a professional.
D. All feed, water, and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
shall be protected in a way that prevents infestation by rats, mice, or
other rodents or vectors. Failure to keep all feed, water and other items
associated with the keeping of chickens in a clean and sanitary
condition constitutes a violation of this chapter.
§ 82A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82A-7
1:85
Chapter 83
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 83-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, as
amended, from time to time, and its regulations.40
§ 83-2. Adoption of Code.
The Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Baldwin.
§ 83-3. Means of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of Baldwin
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by Council
of the Borough of Baldwin from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Baldwin to serve as
the Borough Code Official to act on behalf of the Borough of Baldwin.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Baldwin.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough of
Baldwin.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103.
§ 82A-7 BALDWIN CODE § 83-3
1:86
§ 83-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of the Borough of Baldwin in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 83-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
§ 83-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Baldwin for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by Council by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 84
DISORDERLY HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage parlors — See Ch. 116. Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
§ 84-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any house, room or premises where frequent
requests for police/ambulance service for noise, assaults, batteries,
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Baldwin on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Baldwin not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 83-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1
1:87
drinking of intoxicating beverages, illegal drug usage and/or sale, loitering,
gaming, fornication or other misbehavior can be documented.
FREQUENT REQUESTS FOR POLICE/AMBULANCE SERVICE — More than
three responses to the same address in the preceding sixty-day period.
§ 84-2. Prohibition against maintenance of disorderly house.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to maintain,
keep, lease or allow a disorderly house, room or other premises in the
Borough of Baldwin.
§ 84-3. Declaration of public nuisance.
Any such disorderly house, room or other premises that shall be disruptive
to the peace and well-being of the surrounding and greater community is
declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 84-4. Notification.
After the third incident as defined above, the Chief of Police shall, within
five days, notify the property resident or owner, in writing, by either
certified mail, posting or personal service, of the Borough's intent to initiate
charges with the District Justice; and further, to allow said property resident
and/or owner an additional five-day period, commencing on the date of
service, to notify the Police Chief, in writing, of said property resident/
owner's desire to meet with the Police Chief in an attempt to rectify the
conditions to be cited. Upon timely receipt of such notification, the Police
Chief shall meet with the property resident/owner within five days
thereafter and attempt to reach an accommodation. Should the parties not
be able to reach an accommodation, the Police Chief will proceed forthwith
to initiate charges before the District Justice.
§ 84-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person and/or legal entity, including, but not limited to, the keeper,
all parties connected with the maintenance of the disorderly house, and
all parties patronizing or frequenting same, found guilty under the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $300 for each
offense and be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
B. Upon a conviction under the terms of this chapter, the Borough may
revoke the occupancy permit of any house or premises found to be a
disorderly house.
§ 84-1 BALDWIN CODE § 84-5
1:88
Chapter 85
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 82.
§ 85-1. Prohibited acts; number of pets limited; disposal of litter.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog to
permit such dog to run at large at any time on any property, either
public or private, within the Borough of Baldwin, excluding, however,
the private property of the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any pet or
other domestic animal to allow said animal to run at large at any time in
any public park located within the Borough of Baldwin, or for such
owner, custodian or keeper of any pet or domestic animal to enter any
public park located within the Borough of Baldwin with a pet or other
domestic animal. The use of a leash or other form of restraint shall not
excuse any owner from the prohibition contained herein. [Added
5-21-1979 by Ord. No. 498]
C. Any household pet which scratches, digs or defecates upon any lawn,
tree shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property, other
than the property of the owner or person in charge or control of such
animal, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. [Added 11-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 716.]
D. Any household pet which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling,
screeching, yelping or baying or in any way or manner injures or
disturbs the quiet of any person or the community or which disturbs or
endangers the comfort, repose or health of persons, is hereby declared
to be committing a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to harbor or permit it
to commit such a nuisance. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 716.]
E. No person being the owner or in charge or control of any household pet
shall allow or permit such animal to commit a nuisance on any school
grounds or other public property or upon any private property other
than that of the owner or person in charge or control of such household
pet without the permission of the owner of said property. Where the
owner or person in charge or control of such animal immediately
removes all feces deposited by such animal and disposes of same in a
sanitary manner, such nuisance shall be considered abated. [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 716.]
F. No more than four household pets over the age of six months may be
kept on any premises in the Borough. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
716.]
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:89
§ 85-2. Application for license; fee. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 801]
Between the first day of January 1969 and the 28th day of February 1969
and between January 1 and February 28 of each and every year thereafter,
the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog more than six months old shall
make application to the Borough of Baldwin for a license for such dog. The
application shall state the breed, sex, age and general colors and markings
of the dog for which a license is desired and the name and address of the
owner thereof. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of $5.
§ 85-3. Veterinarian's certificate required.
An application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a certificate
of a duly authorized veterinarian indicating that the particular dog was
inoculated against rabies within the three years next preceding the date of
application.
§ 85-4. Issuance of license and tag.
Upon receipt of a duly completed application and a veterinarian's
certificate, the Borough of Baldwin shall issue such applicant a dog license
and an official tag. It shall thereafter be the duty of the applicant to affix
the tag upon a collar or harness attached to the dog, and no dog at any time
shall be permitted within the limits of the Borough of Baldwin unless it shall
wear the tag attached to its collar or harness.
§ 85-5. Enforcement officer.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin may appoint a person,
firm or corporation who shall be designated as the enforcement officer for
the terms and provisions of this chapter. The Borough Council shall, by
motion, provide for the compensation of such enforcement officer. Such
enforcement officer shall establish rules and regulations, subject to prior
approval by the Borough Council, for the care, supervision and disposition
of any dogs which may come within the jurisdiction and control of such
enforcement officer. Each and every police officer of the Borough of Baldwin
shall have the power and the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
G. The keeper of every such household pet shall cause the litter and
droppings therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle of
such type that, when closed, it shall be ratproof and fly-tight, and after
every such collection shall cause such container or receptacle to be
kept closed. At least twice a week, every such keeper shall cause all
litter and droppings so collected to be disposed of in such a manner as
not to permit the presence of fly larvae. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 716.]
§ 85-1 BALDWIN CODE § 85-6
1:90
§ 85-6. Impounding and disposition of dogs at large.
Any dog, either licensed or unlicensed, which may be found running at
large upon any public or private property in the Borough of Baldwin (except
the property of the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog), shall be
taken into custody by any police officer of the Borough of Baldwin or
by the enforcement officer. The rules and regulations promulgated by the
enforcement officer and approved by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Baldwin shall be applicable to the disposition of any such dog taken into
custody.
§ 85-7. Dog kennels. [Amended 3-19-1973 by Ord. No. 435]
Any person, firm or corporation which may operate a dog kennel within the
limits of the Borough of Baldwin, as permitted under the zoning ordinances
of the Borough of Baldwin, shall secure a kennel license. The enforcement
officer provided for in this chapter shall periodically inspect such kennels
to determine the safety, sanitary and health conditions of such kennel. No
dog shall be permitted to remain at any kennel unless a certificate of a
duly authorized veterinarian is produced indicating that such dog has been
inoculated against rabies within the past three years. The enforcement
officer may, upon approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Baldwin, establish rules and regulations for the operation of a kennel within
the Borough of Baldwin in such places as are permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin. The fee for the issuance of a kennel
license shall be $10.
§ 85-8. Replacement of lost or stolen tags.
The Borough of Baldwin shall provide for the issuance of duplicate dog
license tags in the event that the original tag has been lost or stolen. Prior
to the issuance of such duplicate license, the owner of the dog shall file
with the Borough an affidavit indicating the reason for the reissuance of a
duplicate tag.
§ 85-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-1979 by Ord. No.
498; 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566; 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 716]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provisions
of this chapter, upon conviction thereof before the District Magistrate, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000 plus costs of
prosecution and, for the failure to pay the same, be imprisoned for a term
not to exceed 30 days, or both.
§ 85-10. Definitions. [Added 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 716]
A. As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:91
Chapter 87
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99.
Mining — See Ch. 119.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal as hereinafter defined as a
household pet, a large animal or a small animal.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat or other domestic animal normally
and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its
owner.
LARGE ANIMAL — Any domestic animal of the bovine, equine, sheep or
hog family.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL — Any domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare, guinea
pig, rat, mouse or chinchilla and any domestic fowl such as a chick,
turkey, goose, duck or pigeon.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, bird, fowl or reptile not normally or
ordinarily domesticated, not normally or ordinarily raised in this area
and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes, or not
normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 85-10 BALDWIN CODE § 85-10
1:92
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 87-1. Purpose.
§ 87-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Ordinance."
§ 87-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivision and land
developments and proposed grading within the Borough of Baldwin unless
otherwise modified herein.
§ 87-4. Authority.
This chapter is adopted in accordance with the authority granted to
municipalities to regulate the earthmoving activities which accompany land
development by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
§ 87-5. Scope; control plan required.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to control accelerated erosion and the
resulting sediment pollution to waters of this commonwealth that occur
on earthmoving sites within the Borough of Baldwin.
B. These regulations are adopted and implemented to achieve the
following general objectives:
(1) To specify the type and size of an earthmoving activity which is or
has been inadequately regulated in the past.
(2) To present and/or control earthmoving activities within
environmentally sensitive areas including wetlands and waterways
of the commonwealth.
(3) To restrict and/or control earthmoving activities in areas with
naturally occurring steep slopes and/or highly erodible soils.
(4) To regulate the earthmoving activities resulting from land
development.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, landowner, business or corporation
to undertake any earthmoving activities in excess of 1,000 square feet
without developing, implementing and maintaining erosion and
sediment pollution control measures and facilities that effectively
minimize accelerated erosion and prevent sediment pollution to waters
of this commonwealth. These controls shall be contained in an erosion
and sedimentation control plan that meets the requirements of the
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-5
1:93
§ 87-6. Definitions.
The following terms and words are used in the Rules and Regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 25, Chapter 102, and shall have the
following meanings for the purpose of the administering and enforcing of
this chapter:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act of July 31, 1968,
Act No. 247, as amended).42
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as defined by this chapter, who
has filed an application for development, including his/her heirs, successors
and assigns.
CHANNEL — A natural stream that conveys water; ditch or open channel
excavated for the flow of water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT (ACCD) — The Allegheny County Conservation
District.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., twenty-five-year storm) and
duration (e.g., 24 hours) and used in computing stormwater management
control systems and erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use
or similar action that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
DISCHARGE — Rate of flow, specifically fluid flow; a volume of fluid flowing
from a conduit or channel or being released from detention storage, per unit
of time; commonly expressed as cubic feet per second (cfs), million gallons
per day (mgd), gallons per minute (gpm); see also "rate of runoff."
DRAINAGE — Interception and removal of excess surface water or
groundwater from land by artificial or natural means.
DRAINAGE AREA — The contributing land area to a single drainage basin,
expressed in acres, square miles or other units of area; also called a
"catchment area," "watershed" or "river basin;" the land area served by
a drainage system or by a watercourse receiving stormwater and surface
water, also called "subarea."
Department of Environmental Resources41 Chapter 102 Erosion Control
regulations. A copy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan must
be available at the earthmoving site at all times.
B. Prior to the approval of any grading plan permit by the Borough of
Baldwin, an erosion and sedimentation control plan must be submitted
to and approved by the Allegheny County Conservation District. This
requirement will be waived upon receipt of a copy of a Department of
Environmental Resources earth disturbance permit for sites involving
more than 25 acres of earthmoving.
41.Editor's Note: Now the state Department of Environmental Protection.
42.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 87-5 BALDWIN CODE § 87-6
1:94
DRAINAGE BASIN — The land area from which water is carried off by a
drainage system, also called a "watershed" or "catchment."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by the action of water, wind or chemical action.
FLOODPLAIN — A normally dry land area adjacent to stream channels that
is susceptible to being inundated by overbank stream flows. For regulatory
purposes, the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act (Act of October
4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166)43 and regulations pursuant to the Act define
the "floodplain" as the area inundated by a one-hundred-year flood and
delineated on a map by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) or
by the applicant in accordance with Borough ordinance requirements.
HYDRAULICS — The branch of science concerned with the mechanics of
fluids, especially liquids; as applied in erosion and sedimentation control,
the study of the characteristics of water flow in and conveyance capacity of
a watercourse, considering such factors as depth, velocity and turbulence.
HYDROLOGY — The science dealing with the waters of the earth and
their distribution and circulation through the atmosphere. "Engineering
hydrology" deals with the application of hydrologic concepts to the design
of projects for use and control of water.
INSPECTOR — The Borough Engineer or a representative of the Borough
as appointed by the Borough or the Borough Engineer.
INTERMITTENT FLOW — Flow that starts and stops again at different
intervals.
LAND DEVELOPMENT SITE — A lot, parcel or tract of land on which
development is taking place or is proposed.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging or
filling or stripping of vegetation or another activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion or changed water flow characteristics.
OUTFALL — Points or areas at which stormwater runoff leaves streams,
storm sewers, swales or other well-defined natural or artificial drainage
features, as well as areas of dispersed overland flows within the site and/or
leaving the site.
PA DER — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.44
PEAK RATE OF RUNOFF OR DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of
water at a given point and time resulting from a predetermined storm.
43.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
44.Editor's Note: The PA DER was split into two and reorganized by Act 1995-18. Now the
Department of Environmental Protection, 71 P.S. § 510-1 or Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources, 71 P.S. § 1340.301 et seq. For purposes of erosion and sediment
control, the PA DEP.
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:95
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end result
or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe specific means
for achieving it. A specification standard, in contrast, is one which
prescribes the exact characteristic to be used, leaving little choice to the
applicant,
POINT OF INTEREST — A point of hydraulic concern such as a bridge,
culvert or channel section, for which the rate of runoff is computed or
measured.
PREAPPLICANT CONFERENCE — A meeting with the Borough prior to a
formal application submittal.
RATE OF RUNOFF — Instantaneous measurement of water flow expressed
in a unit of volume per unit of time, also referred to as "discharge;" usually
stated in cubic feet per second (cfs) or gallons per minute (gpm).
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any watershed
which affect the rate, amount and direction of stormwater runoff. These may
include, but are not being limited to, vegetation, soils, slopes and man-made
landscape alterations.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.45
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been removed from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which sediment is deposited on stream
bottoms.
STORM SEWER — A pipe, culvert or underground open channel that carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters or drainage,
but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Natural or
engineered structures which collect and transport stormwater through or
from a drainage area to the point of final outlet, including but not limited to
any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets and pumping stations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff from a specific development site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Waters resulting from snowmelt or
precipitation within a drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the
ground, collected in channels and conduits and carried by receiving
streams.
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — A portion of the watershed that has similar hydrological
characteristics and drains to a common point; also called a "drainage area."
45.Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 87-6 BALDWIN CODE § 87-6
1:96
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
WATERCOURSE or WATERWAY — Any channel of conveyance of surface
water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on
the boundaries of this commonwealth. (Source: The Clean Streams Law.46)
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 87-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-6
1:97

ARTICLE II
Plan Regulations
§ 87-7. Plan contents.
A. Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be developed in
accordance with the Department of Environmental Resources Chapter
102 regulations. A complete explanation of the regulations and
recommendations for preparing plans is available in DER's publication,
Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. This manual
is available through the offices of the Allegheny County Conservation
District.
B. The erosion and sedimentation plan details shall be in conformance
with the standards set forth in DER's publication, Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual. In addition, if required, a national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit must be
obtained prior to construction.
§ 87-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:99

ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedures
§ 87-8. Specific intent.
It is the purpose of these regulations to prescribe the procedures by which
the administration of this chapter shall take place. Nothing contained within
this article shall be interpreted as limiting the adoption of administrative
regulations which do not supersede required stated procedures.
§ 87-9. Administration.
§ 87-10. Fees.
Fees for the review of the erosion and sedimentation control plan that
will be charged by the Allegheny County Conservation District will be set
by the Allegheny County Conservation District and set by resolution for
the Borough of Baldwin. The applicant will be responsible for all fees
associated with the approval of the plan, such fees to include but not
limited to inspection, engineering, legal and administrative. Said fees are
posted with the municipality. The application and tracking form found in
Attachment A must be filled out and a copy must be submitted to both
the Allegheny County Conservation District and the Borough. The applicant
must determine the amount of the fee that will apply to his/her application.
Anyone requiring an explanation of district charges for plan reviews should
contact the district for such information.
§ 87-11. Enforcement.
A. Applications for approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan
under the requirements of this chapter shall be made by completing all
required spaces on the standard application and tracking form
(Attachment A47) and forwarding the form to the Allegheny County
Conservation District at the address shown. No grading permits will be
issued by the Borough of Baldwin unless and until an approved erosion
and sedimentation control plan is received.
B. The Borough Building Inspector shall serve as Zoning Officer and shall
have the duty of administering the provisions of this chapter. The
Zoning Officer shall have all the powers and duties conferred on him/
her by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.48
A. The Borough and the Allegheny County Conservation District are
hereby authorized and directed to conduct both routine and emergency
site inspections of ongoing earthmoving operations within the
municipal boundaries of the Borough of Baldwin to establish
compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan.
47.Editor's Note: Attachment A appears at the end of this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 87-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-11
1:101
§ 87-12. Violations.
§ 87-13. Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred,
any person must file a written complaint stating fully the causes and basis
of the complaint with the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall record the
complaint immediately and investigate it promptly and take any necessary
action as provided by this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall notify the
complainant of the results of his/her investigation and any action taken.
§ 87-14. Enforcement notice.
The enforcement notice shall contain the following information:
§ 87-15. Violations and penalties.
B. The Borough and/or the Allegheny County Conservation District are
hereby authorized to enforce a cease-of-work directive if the contractor
and/or owner has failed to adhere with the approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The Borough shall notify the Allegheny
County Conservation District of a cease-of-work directive within 48
hours.
A. All violations of the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan
determined during a site inspection shall be listed on an inspection
report which itemizes the following items for each violation:
(1) Specific type of violation, including location and scope.
(2) Provides a period of time during which the person(s) responsible
for the earthmoving activity may correct the violations without the
assessment of any penalties.
B. The completed inspection report shall be signed by the inspector and
person responsible for the earthmoving activity (or a designated
representative) and a copy provided to the latter party and the
Allegheny County Conservation District.
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom
the Borough intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
D. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
E. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Borough of
Baldwin.
§ 87-11 BALDWIN CODE § 87-15
1:102
§ 87-16. Enforcement remedies.
In case any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, the governing body or, with the approval of the
governing body, an officer of the Borough and the Allegheny County
Conservation District's representative, in addition to other remedies, may
institute in the name of the Borough any appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or land or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
A. Should the person(s) responsible for undertaking the earthmoving
operations fail to meet the deadline for correcting violations of this
chapter as specified in the official inspection report, the Borough of
Baldwin will issue a formal notice of violation to said person(s). The
notice will list, for each violation that has occurred, a penalty of not less
than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each day of each violation.
Such fines, penalties and associated costs as are listed in the notice will
be collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected and, in
default thereof, the violator shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not
more than 60 days.
B. The contractor shall be responsible for any or all penalties and
associated costs incurred by the Department of Environmental
Resources, the Allegheny County Conservation District and the
Borough.
§ 87-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-16
1:103
Chapter 88
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 146.
§ 87-16 BALDWIN CODE § 87-16
1:104
ARTICLE I
Delinquent Claims
[HISTORY: Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 848]
§ 88-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Tax, Tax Claim, Tax Lien, Municipal Claim
and Municipal Lien Attorney Fees and Servicing Charges, Expenses and
Fees Ordinance."
§ 88-2. Expenses approved.
§ 88-3. Attorneys fees approved.
A. Title search.
B. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a title search in an
amount not to exceed $250 shall constitute a reasonable expense for
each title search necessary for the initiation of each proceeding and
compliance with Pa.R.C.P. 3129. The sum not to exceed $50 shall
constitute a reasonable expense for each bringdown or update of the
title search in connection with entry of judgment, issuance of execution,
listing for sale, or other action.
C. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement
action, such as for postage, non-sheriff's service of process,
investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
necessary expenses shall constitute reimbursable expenses as part of
each delinquent claim recovered.
A. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorneys fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorneys fees pursuant to Act 1
and Act 20 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to the
municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid delinquent claims. The
property owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for
each phase of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect
of each phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of
the proceeding shall carry over and be due on a cumulative basis
together with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
(1) Filing of municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable Attorney fees for the preparation and filing of a
municipal claim as defined under the Act.
(2) Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in
assumpsit as provided in the Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute
reasonable Attorney fees for the initiation of each proceeding and
shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of scire
facias or complaint in civil action, sheriff's direction for service,
notice pursuant to Pa.R.C.P. 237.1 and the preparation and filing of
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:105
the praecipe to settle and discontinue the proceeding. The above
does not include:
(a) Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable Attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to the court.
(b) Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a
special order of court is necessary to serve original process or
any other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees as
follows:
[1] Investigation of defendant(s) whereabouts and
preparation of affidavit of diligent search - $100.
[2] Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative
service, and delivery of the order of the Court, along with
appropriate directions to the Sheriff for service - $200.
(3) Amicable scire facias or consent judgment. The sum of $400 shall
constitute reasonable attorney fees for the preparation, filing,
monitoring and conclusion of an amicable scire facias or consent
judgment, including negotiation, preparation and filing of the
pleading, acceptance of service, installment payment and/or
forbearance agreement and satisfaction. See 53 P.S. § 7185.
Municipality may, in its sole and absolute discretion, hold the
amicable scire facias or consent judgment and file only in the event
of a default in the terms and conditions of the amicable scire facias
or consent judgment or any related installment or forbearance
agreement. If a consent judgment is entered following the filing of
writ of scire facias or complaint in assumpsit, then the flat fee for
entry of the consent judgment shall be the same as that amount
provided for in Subsection D, Entry of judgment, below.
(4) Entry of Judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorneys fees in connection with entry of judgment which shall
include preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter judgment
notices of judgment, affidavit of non-military status, and the
praecipe to satisfy judgment.
(5) Writ of execution - sheriffs sale of property or execution upon
assumpsit judgment. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorneys fees for preparation of all documents necessary for each
execution upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall
include the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of
execution, all sheriff's documents, preparation and service of
notices of sheriff's sale, staying the writ of execution, and
attendance at one sheriff's sale.
§ 88-3 BALDWIN CODE § 88-3
1:106
(a) Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for each continuance of sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
(6) Sale pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of $700
shall constitute reasonable Attorneys fees for the sale of property
pursuant to § 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281, including preparation
and service of necessary documents, court appearances,
attendance at sale and preparation of proposed schedule of
distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
(7) Sale pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of $500
shall constitute reasonable Attorney fees for a sale of property
pursuant to § 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282, including the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of proposed sheriff's schedule of distribution.
(8) Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorneys fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
(9) Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorneys
fees for the preparation, filing, and presentation of motions, other
than for alternative service, which shall include, but are not limited
to, motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption,
motions to continue the sheriff's sale.
B. Hourly rate matters.
(1) The following schedule of attorneys fees is hereby adopted and
approved as reasonable attorneys fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act
20, which fees shall be awarded to the municipality, its agents,
counsel or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in
all other matters not specifically referenced in § 88-3A above,
undertaken in connection with the collection of delinquent claims:
(a) Senior Attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185
per hour.
(b) Junior Attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160
per hour.
(c) Paralegals: $100 per hour.
(d) Law Clerks: $65 per hour.
(2) Each as recorded and charged in units of 1/10 of an hour for all
time devoted to enforcement and collection of the municipality's
delinquent claims. Counsel, whether duly employed or duly
appointed by the municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not
deviate from this fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance
amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but are not
limited to, any matters where any defense, objection, motion,
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:107
§ 88-4. Procedure.
§ 88-5. Servicing Charges, Expenses and Fees Approved.
petition or appearance is entered in any phase of any proceeding
by or on behalf of any defendant or other interested party.
A. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the municipality, its agent, counsel or assigns.
B. Fees to be accrued and delinquent claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue
for all efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice, or after
the 10th day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended,
53 P.S. § 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the municipality authorized to pursue collection
of delinquent claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the
municipality's agents or assigns and, if not collected in due course with
the debt as by voluntary payment, shall be included in any delinquent
claims filed on behalf of the municipality or by its agents or assigns in
the course of enforcement including any delinquent claims originally
filed with the Department of Court Records, any delinquent claims filed
with the sheriff or in any other delinquent claims filed or statements
provided where attorney fees are due.
C. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to and
become part of the delinquent claim or delinquent claims in each
proceeding as provided by the Act and as provided herein.
A. Pursuant to § 1, § 2 and § 3 of the Act of May 16, 1923, as amended, 53
P.S. § 7101, § 7103 and § 7106, and specifically in the schedule found in
accordance with Act 83 of 2004, the municipality does hereby authorize
the recovery of charges, expenses and fees set forth in Subsection D,
below, that are incurred by the municipality or charged to the
municipality by collectors retained by the municipality in connection
with efforts to collect delinquent claims as a result of any persons'
failure to promptly pay delinquent claims.
B. The following schedule of charges, expenses and fees (hereinafter
referred to as "servicing expenses," "out-of-pocket expenses," and
"postage expenses") is hereby approved and adopted by the
municipality pursuant to Act 83 of 2004 which amends § 1, § 2, and § 3
of the Act of May 16, 1923, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106,
which amounts are the direct result of each person's or property's
failure to pay delinquent claims promptly. The servicing expenses, outof-
pocket expenses and postage expenses established, assessed, and
collected hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, § 88-2,
Expenses approved, and § 88-3, Attorneys fees, associated with legal
§ 88-3 BALDWIN CODE § 88-5
1:108
proceedings initiated by or on behalf of the municipality to collect its
delinquent claims.
C. Servicing of a delinquent claim or delinquent claims may result in
voluntary payment without the initiation of enforcement proceedings. It
is the intent of this section to pass the cost of servicing on to the
delinquent person or property as part of each delinquent claim. The
recovery of servicing expenses, out-of-pocket expenses and postage
expenses established herein shall not be contingent upon the initiation
of enforcement proceedings. However, such servicing expenses out-ofpocket
expenses and postage expenses are due even where
enforcement proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this section is to
pass the entire cost and expense associated with delinquent collection
on to the delinquent person or property and to make the municipality
whole on all delinquent claims collected.
D. Schedule. The following schedule of servicing expenses, out-of-pocket
expenses and postage expenses shall constitute reasonable and
appropriate charges, expenses and fees for each indicated category.
The servicing expenses, out-of-pocket expenses and postage expenses
shall be added to and become part of the municipality's delinquent
claims, together with the face, penalties, interest and costs, if any, and
title search expense, attorney fees and out-of-pocket expenses in
connection with enforcement proceedings, if any, and shall be payable
in full before the discharge or satisfaction of any delinquent claim. The
below schedule of servicing expenses, out-of-pocket expenses and
postage expenses is separate and distinct from any amounts imposed by
the Sheriff, Department of Court Records, court or any other public
office in connection with the collection of the municipality's delinquent
claims.
(1) Out-of-pocket expenses. The expenses of postage, title searches,
investigators, process servers and other necessary expenses
incurred in servicing shall constitute reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses as part of each delinquent claim recovered.
(2) Municipal no-lien letter and tax certification. The sum of $25 shall
constitute a reasonable Servicing Expense for the preparation and
issuance of each municipal no-lien letter relating to the
municipality's delinquent municipal claims. The sum of $10 per
year certified shall constitute a reasonable servicing expense for
the preparation and issuance of each delinquent tax claim
certification.
(3) Postage expense: out-of-pocket expenses shall include the actual
cost of postage related to the collection of the municipality's
delinquent claims.
(4) Servicing expense:
(a) A servicing expense of 10% of gross collections shall constitute
a reasonable servicing expense for all servicing related to the
§ 88-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:109
§ 88-6. Effective date and retroactivity.
collection of the municipality's delinquent claims. Servicing
expenses shall accrue on the first of the month for the entire
month, or part thereof. There is no per diem servicing expense.
Gross collections for the purpose, of calculating servicing
expenses shall include the face together with penalty, interest
and lien costs, if any, for each delinquent claim collected. Lien
costs shall mean charges imposed by the Department of Court
Records and/or by the municipality's collector for the filing,
satisfaction, revival, amendment and transfer of delinquent
claims. Gross collections shall not include any record costs,
attorney fees, or out-of-pocket expenses related to the
collection of the municipality's delinquent claims.
(b) In addition, the following schedule of fees shall constitute a
reasonable and appropriate fee for each indicated service:
[1] Assignments: $5 per delinquent claim;
[2] Preparing/filing tax liens: $5.50 per item;
[3] Satisfactions: $10 per delinquent claim; (for no
consideration passing receipts);
[4] Tax claim revivals (i.e., S and A): $20 per delinquent claim;
[5] Act 1/Act 20 compliance: $35 per Case;
[6] Preparing/filing municipal claims and claim revivals (S and
A): $25 per delinquent claim;
[7] S and As (tax or municipal) prepared but not filed: $10 per
S and A;
[8] Municipal claim/short title examination: $40 per
delinquent claim; and
[9] Sheriff sale claim certificates: $60 per case.
(c) Liability for payment of charges, expenses and fees, including
servicing expenses, out-of-pocket expenses and postage
expenses, shall be for those delinquent claims identified in
§ 88-6 below, regardless of whether the delinquent claims are
filed as claims in the Allegheny County Department of Court
Records Office.
A. This article shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth below
("Effective Date") and with respect to attorneys fees pursuant to §§ 88-3
and 88-4 shall apply to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens, municipal claims,
municipal liens, writs of scire facias, judgments, or executions filed on
or after December 19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 88-5 BALDWIN CODE § 88-6
1:110
B. Liability for payment of servicing expenses, out-of-pocket expenses and
postage expenses authorized in §§ 88-2 and 88-5, above, shall accrue as
follows:
(1) Immediately upon the effective date for all of the municipality's
unpaid delinquent tax claims for calendar years 2011 and prior.
(2) January 15 of each year beginning January 15, 2013, for all of the
municipality's delinquent tax claims for calendar years 2012 and
thereafter if not paid-in-full on or before January 14 of the year
after which the taxes first became payable.
(3) Immediately upon the effective date for all of the municipality's
delinquent municipal claims due in 2012 and prior years originally
billed more than 30 days from the effective date.
(4) On the 31st day from the initial billing date for all of the
municipality's unpaid delinquent claims for calendar years 2012
and thereafter not paid-in-full within 30 days after the date of the
initial billing for the delinquent claims.
(5) For Delinquent Tax Claims following tax bills resulting from
additional assessments:
(a) By December 31st of the current year or on the 121st day from
the initial billing date, whichever is later, for a current year's
additional assessment, billed in the current year;
(b) On the 121st day from the initial billing date for a prior year's
additional assessment, billed in a later year.
C. In no event shall the municipality's right to charge and collect
reasonable Attorney fees pursuant to § 88-3 of this chapter be impaired
by the fact that any delinquent claim may also include an attorney
commission of 5% for delinquent claims filed prior to December 19,
1990. Any attorney fees assessed and collected under this or any prior
ordinances pursuant to Act 1 shall be in addition to any 5% commission
previously included in any delinquent claim or judgment thereon.
D. Attorney fees, servicing expenses and out-of-pocket expenses incurred
in pending enforcement proceedings prior to the effective date of this
article, pursuant to a prior ordinance adopted under Act 1 or Act 20, but
not collected, shall remain due and owing in accordance therewith, and
shall be incorporated in any future statement, delinquent claim,
pleading, judgment, or execution. Attorneys fees, servicing expenses
and out-of-pocket expenses in any pending or new action incurred after
the effective date of this article shall be incurred, charged, and
collected in accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in
this article.
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-6
1:111
E. The charges, expenses and fees set forth in § 88-3 of this chapter to all
unpaid delinquent claims in favor of the municipality, its agents and
assigns, and shall be retroactive to the date of each delinquent claim.
§ 88-6 BALDWIN CODE § 88-6
1:112
Chapter 89
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Collection of costs for services — See Ch. 11,
Art. I.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 62.
Building construction — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 83.
Open burning — See Ch. 81.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 100.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 103, Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
§ 89-1. Bureau of Fire Prevention established.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Borough of Baldwin is hereby
established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the Mayor of
the Borough of Baldwin and of a committee of four, which committee shall
be composed of the chiefs of each individual fire company presently existing
in the Borough of Baldwin: Beck's Run Independent Fire Company, Baldwin
No. 1 Independent Fire Company, Option Independent Fire Company and
South Baldwin Independent Fire Company. The members of the committee
shall serve without compensation, and no additional compensation shall be
payable to the Mayor by reason of his participation in the Bureau.
§ 89-2. Compliance with regulations required; jurisdiction and
duties of Bureau.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of
the laws and ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin as set forth herein
and hereafter, and it shall be the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce all laws and ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin pertaining to the
following:
A. The prevention of fires.
B. The storage and use of explosives and flammables, and issuance of
permits therefor. No commercial building or structure within the
Borough of Baldwin may be maintained in such a manner as to permit
the accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings, straw, excelsior,
packing materials or other easily ignitable, combustible materials
which may cause or contribute to fires resulting in smoke and fumes;
nor shall any commercial building or structure be maintained so as to
permit the obstruction of passageways, halls, stairs, doors, windows,
fire escapes or exits from the premises. It shall be unlawful, except as
hereinafter provided, to store or keep any fuels, chemicals, explosives
and other dangerous liquids or gases which may explode, causing
combustion, or liquids or gases which may explode, causing combustion
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:113
§ 89-3. Adoption of rules and regulations by Bureau.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall adopt regulations implementing the
enforcement of this chapter and establishing standards regarding fire
prevention, storage and use of explosives and flammables and any and all
matters falling under the provisions of this chapter. Such regulations shall
be submitted to the Borough Council from time to time for adoption by
the said Borough Council either by reference to the same or by specific
enactment by the Borough Council. Any such regulations so adopted shall
not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or of any other
ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin, and any such regulations so adopted
may be expressly repealed by resolution by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin. This chapter and any regulations adopted hereunder
shall be filed in the office of the Mayor of the Borough of Baldwin, Beck's
Run Independent Fire Company, Baldwin No. 1 Independent Fire Company,
Option Independent Fire Company and South Baldwin Independent Fire
Company, and copies of the same shall be made available to any interested
party at the cost thereof.
or suffocation of human beings or animals, without obtaining a permit
from the Borough of Baldwin as provided in § 89-6 hereinafter.
C. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire-extinguishing equipment. Where a building or
structure is used commercially or industrially or where such building or
structure shall be used as a place of assembly, the same shall be so
protected as to provide fire extinguishers, sprinkling systems, fire
alarms and fire-detection systems conforming to rules and regulations
which shall be adopted by the Bureau of Fire Prevention or the Borough
of Baldwin.
D. Maintenance and regulation of fire escapes. The Bureau of Fire
Prevention or the Borough Council shall from time to time hereafter
adopt regulations regarding the means and adequacy of exit in case of
fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals,
nursing homes, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other
places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate from time
to time for any purpose. It shall be unlawful to build, construct, alter or
set up any building or structures in such a manner as to be in violation
of the regulations so adopted.
E. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have such powers and perform such
duties as are set forth in this chapter and as may be conferred and
imposed upon it from time to time. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
investigate or cause to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of all fires that occur within the Borough of Baldwin in
such a manner as is provided hereinafter.
F. The adoption of regulations relative to the cause and management of
fires and the prevention thereof.
§ 89-2 BALDWIN CODE § 89-4
1:114
§ 89-4. Preparation of instructions and forms.
The Mayor and the Committee of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
prepare instructions and forms for use in reports required under provisions
of this chapter.
§ 89-5. Investigation of fires.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the Borough of Baldwin by which
property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall
determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such
investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire,
and if it appears to be of suspicious origin, the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the
investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate with the
authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
Every fire shall be reported in writing within two days after the occurrence
of the same in the individual fire company records. Such report shall contain
a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of
such fire and the extent of the damage thereof. The Chief of each individual
fire company shall submit an annual report of all fires that have been
attended by such company during the calendar year.
§ 89-6. Keeping of hazardous substances.
A permit for the storing or keeping of any fuels, chemicals, explosives and
other dangerous liquids or gases which may explode, causing combustion or
suffocation of human beings or animals, as provided in § 89-2B hereof, shall
be obtained by applying for the same with the Secretary of the Borough
of Baldwin on application forms to be furnished for such purpose. The
applications will then be referred to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and
in the event that the application is in order and complies with the
requirements of this chapter and the regulations hereunder, such permit
shall be granted within 10 days following the submission of the application.
§ 89-7. Inspections; removal or remedy of dangerous conditions.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall inspect, as often as may be
necessary, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or
installation of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and
flammable materials, all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler
systems and such other hazards as the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
designate, and shall initiate such action as may be necessary for the
enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for
safeguarding of life and property from fire.
B. It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to inspect, as often
as may be necessary, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares,
except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining
and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-7
1:115
violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of the Borough
of Baldwin affecting fire hazards. Whenever it shall find in any building
or upon any premises or other place combustible or explosive matter
or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation
of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials
especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to endanger property,
or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways,
doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire
companies or egress of occupants in case of fire, it shall order the same
to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied
with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings; any owner
or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable
period after the service of the said order shall be liable to a penalty
as hereinafter provided in § 89-12. The service of any such order may
be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed,
either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally or by
delivering the same to and leaving it with any adult person in charge
of the premises or, in case no such person is found upon the premises,
by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the
entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served
whether by delivering to and leaving with the said person a copy of the
said order or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction, by mailing
such copy to the owner's last known post office address.
C. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, upon the complaint of any person or
whenever it shall deem it necessary, shall inspect all buildings and
premises within its jurisdiction. Whenever it shall find any building or
other structure which for want of repairs, lack of or insufficient fire
escapes, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire-extinguishing
equipment or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any
other cause is especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to
endanger other property of the occupants thereof, and whenever it
shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or flammable
conditions dangerous to the safety of such building or the occupants
thereof, it shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be
removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with
by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings. Such owner or
occupant may, within five days of the date of such order or within such
lesser time as may be prescribed in such order by reason of the
existence of some immediate danger or hazard, request the Mayor and/
or a majority of the Committee of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
review such decision. Such requests shall be reviewed by the Mayor
and/or a majority of the members of the Committee of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention within not less than one nor more than 10 days
thereafter, and a decision shall be filed thereon and, unless the order is
revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be complied with
within the time fixed in said order.
§ 89-7 BALDWIN CODE § 89-7
1:116
§ 89-8. Fire drills.
It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to require teachers
and administrators of public, private and parochial schools and educational
institutions to have fire drills as required by the Pennsylvania School Law
and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours or other hours
of assembly.
§ 89-9. Keeping of records.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall keep a record of all fires and of all the
facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires
and the damage caused thereby.
§ 89-10. Annual report.
An annual report shall be submitted by the Chief of each individual fire
company to the Baldwin Borough Council. It shall contain all proceedings
under this chapter, with such statistics as the Chief may wish to include
therein. The Chief shall also recommend any amendments to this chapter
which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 89-11. Fire lanes.
When a building or structure is used commercially or industrially, or where
such building or structure is used as an apartment house, or any
combination of buildings or structures comprising four or more units for
family or individual residences, or where such building or structure shall
be used as a place of assembly, the owners and/or developers and/or their
rental agents, officers and employees or any other persons connected with
such buildings in some managerial capacity shall provide, mark off and
restrict certain parking area or areas used by vehicles so as to provide
the highest possible public safety regarding the passage of fire vehicles,
police cars and other vehicles used in fighting or preventing fires or other
disaster, and the said owner and/or developers, rental agents, officers and
employees or any other persons connected with such buildings in some
managerial capacity shall restrict parking in those areas so designated and
shall maintain such areas so designated so as to be clear of obstruction
to the passage by any fire vehicles or police vehicles or other emergency
vehicles.
§ 89-12. Violations and penalties; correction or removal by
Borough.
D. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, its agents, servants or employees may,
at all reasonable hours, enter any commercial building or premises
within its jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or
investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, the Bureau of
Fire Prevention may deem necessary to be made.
§ 89-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-12
1:117
Chapter 92
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commissions — See Ch. 38.
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 83.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 87.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or neglecting to comply with any order issued
pursuant to any section thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction before a District Justice of the district in which the
offense or offenses occurred, shall pay a fine of not more than $300 plus
costs of prosecution or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days for
each offense. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
B. Where any person shall refuse, after an order, to make such correction
or removal, the Borough Council shall authorize the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or any other person to remove same and charge the costs
thereof to the owner or occupant, or both, and such costs may be liened
where allowed by law and shall be collected as are other debts by the
Borough Solicitor. The term "any person or persons, firm or
corporation," as used herein, shall mean any individual person,
responsible partner or partners of a partnership or responsible officers
of any corporation.
§ 89-12 BALDWIN CODE § 89-12
1:118
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 92-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Baldwin does hereby
order as follows.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-1
1:119

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 92-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 92-3. Applicability.
§ 92-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 92-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared in valid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 92-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Baldwin unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 92-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-6
1:121
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Baldwin or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 92-6 BALDWIN CODE § 92-6
1:122
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 92-7. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-8. Permits required.
A Permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 92-9. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator may: fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations; delegate duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Mayor.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
§ 92-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-9
1:123
§ 92-10. Application procedures and requirements.
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA and the annual report to DCED concerning
community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Baldwin.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 92-9 BALDWIN CODE § 92-10
1:124
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 92-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-10
1:125
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood; and
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and floodway area § 92-19A when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 92-19B) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 92-25, Storage, and § 92-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 92-25F and 92-26, which are
§ 92-10 BALDWIN CODE § 92-10
1:126
§ 92-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a Permit. The recommendations of the conservation district shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 92-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 92-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 92-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 92-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-14
1:127
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 92-15. Start of construction.
§ 92-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the chapter and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time
the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
§ 92-14 BALDWIN CODE § 92-16
1:128
§ 92-17. Appeals.
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Borough of Baldwin of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
§ 92-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-17
1:129

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 92-18. Identification.
§ 92-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Baldwin, classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 26, 2014 and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Borough of Baldwin and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
§ 92-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-19
1:131
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
D. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
E. Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Borough of Baldwin has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 92-19 BALDWIN CODE § 92-20
1:132
§ 92-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the Special Flood Hazard Area by submitting technical or
scientific data § 92-23B for situations where FEMA notification is required.
§ 92-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Baldwin and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 92-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 92-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-22
1:133

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 92-23. General.
§ 92-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments,
including: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges); the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 92-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-24
1:135
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 92-19C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 92-19C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
§ 92-24 BALDWIN CODE § 92-24
1:136
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405 as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 92-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-24
1:137
§ 92-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of flood waters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters.
A. Fill. Within any Identified Floodplain Area the use of fill shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of flood waters.
§ 92-24 BALDWIN CODE § 92-25
1:138
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into flood waters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and
"The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 92-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 92-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-25
1:139
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges
from the system into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood water
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof:
Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
§ 92-25 BALDWIN CODE § 92-26
1:140
§ 92-26. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described
this subsection shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted. In
accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and Economic
Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially improved
structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity
requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage, or use
of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to the provisions of
this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following list
of materials and substances are considered dangerous to human life:
A. Acetone.
B. Ammonia.
C. Benzene.
D. Calcium carbide.
E. Carbon disulfide.
F. Celluloid.
G. Chlorine.
H. Hydrochloric acid.
I. Hydrocyanic acid.
J. Magnesium.
K. Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
L. Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
M. Phosphorus.
N. Potassium.
O. Sodium.
P. Sulfur and sulfur products.
Q. Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
R. Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated.
§ 92-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-27
1:141
§ 92-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 92-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 92-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII then the following provisions apply:
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must: be on the site
for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for
highway use.
§ 92-27 BALDWIN CODE § 92-29
1:142
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 92-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified, floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 92-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-30
1:143

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 92-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 92-32 shall apply.
§ 92-32. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within an AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 92-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-32
1:145

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 92-33. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Baldwin may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 92-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Baldwin in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 92-17 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. No variance shall be granted for any development regulated by
prohibited activities § 92-28 and Article VI, or to § 92-26, Development
which may endanger human life.
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Borough of Baldwin shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Baldwin shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such varices may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Baldwin shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will neither:
§ 92-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-34
1:147
(a) Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Baldwin. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 92-34 BALDWIN CODE § 92-34
1:148
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 92-35. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 92-36. Specific definitions.
ACCESSORY USE or STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent annual chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
§ 92-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-36
1:149
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or lowland area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 92-36 BALDWIN CODE § 92-36
1:150
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 92-18
and 92-19 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in the
identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 26, 2014 and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after August 15,
1978 and before September 26, 2014 is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
§ 92-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-36
1:151
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974 or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974 or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated August 15,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 92-36 BALDWIN CODE § 92-36
1:152
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, The Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
§ 92-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-36
1:153
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 92-36 BALDWIN CODE § 92-36
1:154
Chapter 96
(RESERVED)
Chapter 99
GRADING, EXCAVATIONS AND FILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 83.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 87.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Mining — See Ch. 119.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Trees, shrubs and bushes — See Ch. 142.
§ 99-1. Title; purpose.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Inspector pursuant
to the provisions of the Baldwin Building Code49 for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
ENGINEER — The appointed Engineer of the Borough of Baldwin.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Baldwin
Borough Grading Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards
to safeguard persons and to protect and to promote the public welfare
by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, use, location and maintenance of grading, excavation and fill.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Building Construction, and Ch. 83, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 92-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-2
1:155
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under § 99-4 hereof.
PERSON — A natural person but shall also include a partnership or
corporation.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land or a series of lots, tracts or parcels of
land which are adjoining where grading work is continuous and performed
at the same time.
§ 99-3. Conformance required; exceptions.
New grading, excavations and fills or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing excavations and fills shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter, except that this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 99-4. Grading permit required; exceptions.
No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation or fill
without first having obtained a grading permit from the Building Inspector
on approval of the Engineer. A separate grading permit shall be required for
each site. One permit may cover the grading, excavation and any fill made
on the same site. A grading permit will not be required, however, in any one
of the following situations, but in all other respects the provisions of this
chapter shall apply:
A. Work in a public street or alley or in a Borough park, playground or
recreation area or on other public property.
B. The mining, quarrying, excavation, processing or stockpiling of rock,
sand, aggregate or clay unless such work affects the support or safety
of adjacent or contiguous property or structures.
A. No grading permit will be required for any excavation which does not
exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from
the natural ground surface; provided also, however, that such
excavation does not exceed 1,000 square feet in area.
B. No grading permit will be required when a fill is to be made which does
not exceed 10 cubic yards in amount on any one site.
C. No grading permit will be required when a fill is to be made which is
less than four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point as measured
from the top of such fill to the natural ground surface; provided also,
however, that such fill does not exceed 1,000 square feet in area and
that the slope of such fill does not exceed a maximum at any point of
three horizontal to one vertical.
§ 99-2 BALDWIN CODE § 99-4
1:156
§ 99-5. Application for permit; special conditions.
D. No grading permit will be required for any excavations and backfill
made below finished grade for basements or footers, swimming pools or
underground structures for new construction authorized by a building
permit properly issued by the Borough of Baldwin, and no grading
permit shall be required for the temporary stockpiling of the material
from such excavation on the same site; provided, however, that if the
material from such excavation is thereafter to be used for fill purposes
for which a grading permit is required, such permit must be obtained
prior to such use in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
In addition, if excavated material is stockpiled on a site for a period
longer than 120 days, then a permit shall be necessary when disposing
of the fill material.
E. Where residential construction for single-family houses does not fall
within the limits of the table below, then a grading permit shall be
required in addition to the building permit:
Site Size
(square feet) Gradient
Amount of Excavation or
Fill
(cubic yards)
Less than 6,000 12 in 100 feet 75
6,000 to 10,000 15 in 100 feet 100
10,000 to 18,000 17 in 100 feet 200
18,000 to 30,000 20 in 100 feet 300
Over 30,000 22 in 100 feet 400
A. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Building Inspector. Such application shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
(2) Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared by a
registered engineer, including a contour map showing the present
contours of the land and the proposed contours of the land after
completion of the proposed grading and a plan showing cross
sections of the proposed cut of fill at fifty-foot intervals which show
the method of benching both cut and/or fill. However, under no
circumstances shall there be less than three cross sections for each
site involved under said permit. In addition, a plot plan showing the
location of the grading, boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets or
ways, buildings, trees over eight inches in diameter which are two
feet above the ground and sufficient dimensions and other data to
show the location of all work; a description of the type and
classification of the soil; details and locations of any proposed
§ 99-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-5
1:157
§ 99-6. Approval or disapproval of application; bond; fees; escrow.
drainage structures and pipes, walls and cribbing; the nature of fill
material and such other information as the Engineer may require
to carry out the purposes of this chapter. All plans shall be dated
and bear the name and seal of the registered professional engineer
who prepared the same; the name of the applicant; and the name
of the owner of the land. Plans shall be submitted in triplicate, one
set of which shall be of a reproducible nature.
(3) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
grading work.
(4) State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
B. Where, owing to special circumstances and conditions, compliance with
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship,
Council may make special reasonable exceptions thereto as will not be
contrary to the public interest and may impose such conditions as it
deems necessary to adequately protect the public interest.
A. The Building Inspector shall receive all applications and shall collect all
fees. The Building Inspector shall transmit all applications to the
Borough Engineer who shall indicate his approval thereon. The
Borough Engineer shall provide findings and determinations in writing
to the Building Inspector within 10 working days of receipt.
B. Before issuance of a grading permit, all applicants who have applied for
a permit for excavation, grading or fill the sum of which equals or
exceeds 300 cubic yards shall post a bond, with corporate surety, or
other approved security in the amount of 100% of the estimated cost of
the grading work to guarantee the completion of said work, including
slope treatment and drainage contemplated under the permit. Such
bond shall be executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the
principal, and shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor
as to form. The bond shall inure to the benefit of the Borough and be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work required under
the terms and conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the
Borough Engineer. In lieu of such bond, a cash deposit or a certified
check in the same amount may be made with the Borough Treasurer.
The estimated cost of the grading work to be done on which the bond
shall be calculated must be prepared by a professional engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and should be
attached to the application.
C. Before issuance of a grading permit, all applicants who have applied for
a permit for excavation, grading or fill the sum of which is less than 300
cubic yards shall post a bond, with corporate surety, or other approved
security in the amount of 25% of the estimated cost of the grading work
to guarantee the completion of said work, including slope treatment
and drainage contemplated under the permit. Such bond shall be
§ 99-5 BALDWIN CODE § 99-6
1:158
executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and shall
be subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor as to form. The
bond shall inure to the benefit of the Borough and be conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the work required under the terms and
conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer. In lieu of such bond, a cash deposit or a certified check
in the same amount may be made with the Borough Treasurer. The
estimated cost of the grading work to be done on which the bond shall
be calculated must be prepared by a professional engineer registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and should be attached to the
application.
D. Before issuing a grading permit, the Building Inspector shall collect a
permit fee based upon the volume of material to be graded, as follows:
Volume of Material
(cubic yards) Fee
Not more than 100 $25
More than 100, but not more than
300
$30
More than 300, but not more than
500
$35
More than 500, but not more than
1,000
$40
More than 1,000, but not more
than 10,000
$40, plus $3 for each additional
1,000 cubic yards or portion
thereof above 1,000 cubic yards
More than 10,000, but not more
than 100,000
$70, plus $1 for each additional
1,000 cubic yards or portion
thereof above 10,000 cubic yards
More than 100,000 $160, plus $0.50 for each
additional 1,000 cubic yards or
portion thereof above 100,000
cubic yards, except that no fee
shall be more than $600
E. In addition, before issuing a grading permit, the Building Inspector
shall require an escrow account to be established by the person
proposing to perform the grading in an amount established by the
Borough Engineer. Said amount shall not be less than $50 nor more
than 2 1/2% of the estimated grading and improvement cost.
F. When calculating the volume of material for purposes of this chapter,
the volume of material shall be considered cumulatively with regard to
prior applications relative to the property. Thus, if grading, excavation
or fill work has been performed on a property, the volume of material
shall be the sum of all grading excavation or fill work previously
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-6
1:159
§ 99-7. Expiration of permit; extension of time limit.
Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void
if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within
three months or is not completed within one year from the date of issue,
provided that the Borough Council, acting upon the recommendation of the
Borough Engineer, may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed
within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time, and
provided further that the application for the extension of time is made
before the date of expiration of the permit.
§ 99-8. Denial of permit; appeals.
§ 99-9. Inspections; plans to be maintained at site.
performed as well as the sum of the grading, excavation and fill work
which is currently under consideration.
A. Where, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the work as proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person or any street
or alley or create hazardous conditions, he shall deny the grading
permit. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
property or streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the
Borough Engineer shall give due consideration to possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, runoff surface waters and subsurface
conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock, aquifers,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
B. The Council of the Borough shall consider promptly appeals from the
provisions of this chapter or from the determinations of the Borough
Engineer, and the Council shall make determinations of alternate
methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion, strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision or determination of the Council of the
Borough.
A. The Borough Engineer shall, when contacted by the permit holder as
required in this chapter, make the inspections hereinafter required and
shall either approve that portion of the work which has been completed
or notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Where it is found by inspection that the soil
or other conditions are not as stated or shown in the application, the
Borough Engineer may refuse to approve further work until approval is
obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to existing conditions.
B. Plans for grading work bearing the stamp of approval of the Borough
Engineer shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the
grading work and until the work has been approved.
§ 99-6 BALDWIN CODE § 99-9
1:160
C. The permit holder shall notify the Borough Engineer in order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule and at least 24
hours before the inspection is to be made. The permit holder shall notify
the Borough Engineer at least five working days before the final
inspection is to be made.
(1) Initial inspection. When work on the excavation or fill is about to be
commenced.
(2) Rough grading. When all rough grading has been completed.
(3) Drainage facilities. When drainage facilities are to be installed and
before such facilities are backfilled.
(4) Special structures. When excavations are complete for retaining
and crib walls and when reinforcing steel is in place and before
concrete is poured.
(5) Final inspection. When all work, including the installation of all
drainage and other structures, has been completed.
D. If at any state of the work the Borough Engineer shall determine by
inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as
authorized by an existing permit is likely to endanger property or
streets or alleys or create hazardous conditions, the Borough may
require as a condition to allowing the work to be done that such
reasonable safety precautions are taken as the Borough Engineer
considers advisable to avoid such likelihood of danger. Safety
precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a flatter
exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction or cribbing.
E. Upon conclusion of the work but prior to final inspection by the
Borough Engineer, the professional engineer who designed the grading
plan shall sign and stamp the work guaranteeing that the work has
been performed in accordance with the submitted and approved plans.
Further, the professional engineer who signed and stamped the work
referred to above must show any changes on the drawings that differed
from the approved plans.
F. Upon conclusion of the work but prior to final inspection by the
Borough Engineer, all applicants who have applied for a permit for
excavation, grading or fill the sum of which equals or exceeds 300 cubic
yards shall have a professional engineer validate, through submission
of a signed and stamped document to the Borough Engineer that any fill
material used for a validly permitted project has been compacted within
the ranges established through moister density testing (using either
standard or modified proctor). All tests must be performed by an
accredited laboratory that possesses the necessary state or federal
certifications.
§ 99-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-9
1:161
§ 99-10. Excavation standards.
G. The Borough Engineer shall not proceed with the final inspection and
shall not grant authority to release any performance bond until the
items required under this chapter prior to final inspection are provided
to him.
H. Following final inspection, all applicants who have applied for a permit
for excavation, grading or fill the sum of which equals or exceeds 300
cubic yards shall be required to post a two-year maintenance bond with
corporate surety, or other approved security in the amount of 100% of
the estimated cost of maintaining said work, including slope treatment
and drainage contemplated under the permit. Such bond shall be
executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor as to form. The bond
shall inure to the benefit of the Borough and be conditioned on the
maintenance of the work performed under the terms and conditions of
the grading permit to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer. In lieu
of such bond, a cash deposit or a certified check in the same amount
may be made with the Borough Treasurer. The estimated cost of the
maintenance work on which the bond shall be calculated must be
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and should be reviewed by the Borough Engineer.
A. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than one
vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal, except under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of one
vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal and passing in any portion of the plane
of the cut face will be entirely inside a line three feet inside the
property lines of the property on which the excavation is made.
(2) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than one vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal,
and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Borough Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified above will
not result in injury to persons or damage to property.
(3) A retaining wall or other approved support design by a registered
engineer and approved by the Borough Engineer is provided to
support the face of the excavation and prevent injury to persons or
damage to property.
B. The Engineer may require an excavation to be made with a cut face
flatter in slope than one vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal if he finds the
material in which the excavation is to be made unusually subject to
§ 99-9 BALDWIN CODE § 99-10
1:162
§ 99-11. Fill standards.
erosion, or if other conditions exist which make such flatter-cut slope
necessary for stability and safety.
C. Excavations shall not extend below the angle of repose or natural slope
of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any
building or structure unless such footing or foundation is first properly
underpinned or protected against settlement.
D. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making or causing
the excavation to be made shall notify in writing the owners of the
adjacent property or buildings not less than 30 days before such
excavation is to be made that the proposed excavation is to be started.
Adjoining properties and structures shall be protected as provided in
the Borough Building Code50 as is then on file in the office of the
Building Inspector and/or as required by the Engineer.
A. No fill shall be made in a residentially zoned area of the Borough or
with an exposed face adjacent to such a district which creates a slope
steeper than one vertical to two horizontal. Fill slopes in lower zoned
districts shall not be steeper than one vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal,
except under one or more of the following conditions:
(1) The fill, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, is located so that
settlement, sliding or erosion of the fill material will not result in
property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets, ways
or buildings.
(2) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in soil
engineering, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the standard specified slopes will not
endanger any property or result in personal hazard or property
damage is submitted to and approved by the Engineer.
B. In issuing permits, the Borough, on the advice and recommendation of
the Borough Engineer, may impose conditions requiring that a fill be
constructed with an exposed surface flatter than 1 1/2 horizontal to one
vertical if the Borough Engineer advises that under the particular
circumstances involved, such flatter surface is necessary for stability
and for the safety of persons and property.
C. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or earth,
the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Building Construction, and Ch. 83, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 99-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-11
1:163
§ 99-12. Compaction of fill.
(1) The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time as
determined by the Engineer and so specified on the grading permit.
(2) Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials used in the fill other than clean soil or earth. If the filling
operation is intermittent, the Engineer may require that the top
and exposed surfaces of the fill are so covered at the completion of
each lift.
(3) No fill of any kind shall be placed over trees, stumps or other
material which could create a nuisance or be susceptible to
attracting rodents, termites or other pests.
(4) No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until the performance bond referenced in
§ 99-6B above is posted. Such bond shall be executed by a
corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and shall be subject to
the approval of the Borough Solicitor as to form. The bond shall
insure to the benefit of the Borough and be conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the work required under the terms and
conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer. In lieu of such bond, a cash deposit or a certified check in
the same amount may be made with the Borough Treasurer.
A. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill material and to
prevent undesirable settlement or slippage.
B. The fill shall be installed in a series of layers each not exceeding 12
inches in thickness, and each layer shall be compacted by passing a
sheep's-foot roller or other approved equipment across the layer in a
minimum of four passes as the layer is spread.
C. Pieces of rock or boulders having a thickness of more than six inches or
a cross-sectional area in any plane of more than 1 1/2 square feet shall
not be permitted in fills.
D. No fill material that will support combustion shall be permitted.
E. Where fills are placed on any existing slope greater than 5%, the toe of
the fill shall be prepared by cutting a bench 10 feet wide on a reverse
slope of one vertical to 10 horizontal.
F. For fills higher than 10 feet above the toe of the proposed slope there
shall be constructed benches at eight-foot intervals measured vertically
from the base of the fill. Said benches shall be six feet in width and shall
have a floor cut to a reverse slope of one vertical to six horizontal.
§ 99-11 BALDWIN CODE § 99-12
1:164
§ 99-13. Drainage.
§ 99-14. Maintenance and repair.
G. The Borough Engineer, with the approval of the Borough Council, may
require tests or other information if, in his opinion, the conditions or
materials of fill are such that the additional information is necessary.
A. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from
damaging:
(1) The cut face of an excavation.
(2) The sloping surface of a fill.
(3) Adjacent property affected by the change in the existing natural
runoff.
B. Excavations cut at the normal one vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal and
deeper than 10 feet from the top of the cut shall have six-foot-wide
benches installed at ten-foot intervals measured from the top. Said
benches shall have reverse floor slopes of one vertical to six horizontal.
C. Excavations cut at slopes in excess of the normal set forth in Subsection
B above, and deeper than 10 feet from the top of the cut, shall have
similar benches installed at eight-foot intervals measured from the top.
D. All drainage provisions shall be of such a design as to carry surface
waters to the nearest practical street storm drain, storm sewer or
natural watercourse, as approved by the Engineer as a safe place to
deposit and receive such waters.
E. The Borough Engineer shall require such drainage structures or pipes
to be constructed or installed as may be necessary to prevent erosion
damage and to satisfactorily carry off accumulated surface waters.
F. Constructed benches in fills or cuts or at the top of slopes shall have
horizontal gradients of at least 2% for the purpose of carrying off
surface waters.
G. The planting of sod, shrubs or other vegetation on slopes to prevent
erosion may be required where the condition of the grading is such that
planting is necessary to protect against erosion, in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer.
A. The owner of any property on which an excavation or fill has been made
shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation or fill
permitted, and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures,
fences, ground cover and any other protective devices as may be a part
of the permit requirements.
B. If, at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work, the
cut face or fill slope shall evidence signs of deterioration, erosion or
§ 99-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-14
1:165
§ 99-15. Distance from adjacent properties; fences; cleanup;
landscaping.
§ 99-16. Violations and penalties.
other evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above
or below the grading site, the Borough of Baldwin Council, upon the
recommendation of its Engineer, may direct the property owner to take
whatever necessary remedial steps are deemed necessary to restore
the grading area to a safe condition and to do so in a reasonable period
of time.
C. If, after such notification, the property owner has not made the
necessary repairs within the allotted time, then the Borough Council
may direct Borough employees to make the required repairs and the
cost thereof shall be borne by the property owner by a lien filed as
provided by law.
A. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be at least three feet from
adjacent property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to permit
the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property or street.
B. At the top of all cut or fill slopes which are in excess of 1 1/2 horizontal
to one vertical, and six or more feet in total height, a fence not less than
four feet in height, and of a design meeting the Borough standards,
shall be erected.
C. The owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to protect
and clean up lower properties of silt and debris which have washed
down onto the lower properties as a result of the grading work on the
high property.
D. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending development work shall be preserved.
A. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill or cause the same to be done contrary to or in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Building Inspector on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $300, plus costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment for up to 30 days for each and every
offense. Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Borough
Engineer by service of summons in a prosecution or in any other way
that he is committing such violation after such notification shall
§ 99-14 BALDWIN CODE § 99-16
1:166
§ 99-17. Other remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officer of the Borough, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Borough any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 100
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
§ 100-1. Dumping prohibited.
The Borough of Baldwin does hereby prohibit the dumping of any hazardous
materials or substances upon or into properties or facilities, streets, roads
and alleys and other properties within the municipal boundaries of the
Borough of Baldwin.
§ 100-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES — Any material or substance
which may have a direct or identifiable effect on persons or property within
the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Baldwin or any such substances
or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the
Borough Secretary or her authorized representative, poses an unreasonable
or imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, and shall include but not be limited
to such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products
or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables, corrosives or
materials listed in the Hazardous Substance List of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry.
§ 100-3. Duties of Borough employees; liability.
constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such
fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by
law collected.
A. The Borough of Baldwin hereby authorizes and directs its various
emergency services, Borough employees or any other persons
employed by the Borough for such purposes to clean up or abate or
§ 99-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:167
§ 100-4. Costs incurred by Borough.
For purposes of this chapter, costs incurred by the Borough of Baldwin
shall include, but are not limited to, actual labor cost of Borough personnel,
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of special fire-extinguishing
agents used and cost of any contracted labor and materials and, further, any
costs incurred by volunteer fire companies, emergency medical companies,
the Department of Police of the Borough of Baldwin and any other agency
or contractor engaged in the abating or cleaning up of the effects of any
such hazardous materials or substances deposited upon or into properties,
facilities, roads or streets of the Borough of Baldwin.
Chapter 102
HUNTING AND SHOOTING
§ 102-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful at any time for any person to hunt for wild birds or wild
animals of any kind or to shoot or discharge any firearm or other deadly
weapon within the area of the Borough of Baldwin while engaged in the
hunting of wild birds or wild animals.
§ 102-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $300 plus costs of
prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30 days.
Chapter 103
INSURANCE
cause to be cleaned up or abated the effects of any hazardous materials
or substances deposited upon or into properties or facilities within
the municipal boundaries of the Borough of Baldwin, including such
properties and activities as but not limited to traffic control, evacuation,
relocation, substance monitoring and establishment of medical care
facilities, and to recover from such persons responsible for the same
all other costs incurred in the mitigation of the situation. Any person
or persons who intentionally or accidentally or negligently caused such
deposit shall be liable for all costs incurred by the Borough of Baldwin
or incurred by the Borough in the cleanup or abatement activities.
B. The remedy provided by this chapter shall be in addition to all other
remedies provided by other laws or ordinances of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 100-3 BALDWIN CODE § 102-2
1:168
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 82151]
§ 103-1. Designated officer.
The Borough Manager of Baldwin Borough or such official's designee is
hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out
all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 103-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Baldwin (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$5,000, unless the insurance agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer,
Tax Collector, or Borough Manager with a municipal certificate pursuant
to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 199252 and unless there is compliance with
Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 199253 and the provisions of this article.
§ 103-3. Claims payment procedure.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,54 the Municipal
Treasurer, Tax Collector or Borough Manager issues a certificate indicating
that there are not delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges
against real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named
insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named
insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate
limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedure must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of $1,000 for
each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this section to be applied such that if the claim is $20,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the municipality shall be $1,000; or
B. If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the insuring agent shall transfer to the
municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Fire Insurance Claims, adopted
1-18-1993 by Ord. No. 654, as amended.
52.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
53.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
54.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i).
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:169
C. The transfer or proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
D. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the estimate to the
named insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair or secure the building or other structure.
E. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall do
the following:
(1) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative cost incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or security of
the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have be
received by the municipality and notify the named insured that the
procedures under the subsection shall be followed; and
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure has been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that proceeds are returned.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in the
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
§ 103-3 BALDWIN CODE § 103-3
1:170
§ 103-4. Establishment of procedures and fees.
The Borough Council of Baldwin may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 199255 and this article and may by
resolution fix reasonable fees to be charges for municipal activities or
services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including but
not limited to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections
and operating separate fund accounts.
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties; jurisdiction.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation. Original jurisdiction regarding any violations of this article shall
be with the District Magistrate.
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
55.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 636 et seq.
§ 103-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-5
1:171
Chapter 105
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 96.
§ 105-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 105-2. License required; fee.
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in the Borough of
Baldwin without first having obtained a license from the Borough Secretary,
for which license the fee shall be $120 for each and every calendar year,
such fee to be for the use of the Borough. Such license shall be renewed
annually on or before the first day of January of each year, provided that in
any case where a junk dealer's business shall be established in the Borough
on or after the first day of July in any year, the license fee payable by such
junk dealer for the remainder of such year shall be at 1/2 the yearly rate.
§ 105-3. Issuance and display of license.
The license provided for in § 105-2 of this chapter shall be issued by the
Borough Secretary after application shall have been made therefor by the
person desiring to be licensed. Such license shall state the name of the
person to whom such license is issued and the premises from which such
business is to be conducted. Such license shall be posted conspicuously
upon the premises licensed thereunder. The name of the licensed junk
dealer and the number of the license under which he operates shall be
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any discarded material or article such as is not ordinarily
disposed of as rubbish or refuse and shall include, but is not limited
to, scrap metal and scrapped motor vehicles and shall not include
any garbage or other organic waste or any papers, rubbish, rags or
other flammable article or material or new motor vehicle parts or used
serviceable motor vehicle parts which have been removed from a motor
vehicle or motor vehicles and placed in a stack of merchandise for
sale.[Amended 4-22-1963 by Ord. No. 248]
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage
in the business of selling, buying and dealing in junk.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 103-5 BALDWIN CODE § 105-3
1:172
placed in a conspicuous place on the outside of every vehicle used for
business purposes by such dealer.
§ 105-4. Restrictions on business.
No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license, keep
more than one place of business within the Borough of Baldwin for the
purpose of buying, selling and dealing in junk nor shall any such person
engage in business as a junk dealer in any place other than the place
designated upon his license nor shall any such person or any other person
operate upon any of the streets of the Borough, whether from a vehicle or
upon foot, as a scavenger or an itinerant buyer or seller of junk.
§ 105-5. Transfer of license.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another person, except when the ownership of a licensed premises shall
change. In any such case, the new owner shall apply for a transfer of such
license to him and shall pay a transfer fee of $10.
§ 105-6. Keeping of records.
Every junk dealer shall constantly keep a permanent written record which
shall contain the time of the purchase of any junk, a description of every
article or material purchased or received by him, the date and hour of such
purchase or receipt, and the person from whom such article or material
was purchased or received. Such book and all junk purchased, received or
handled by any junk dealer shall at all times be subject to the inspection of
the Chief of Police and any other official of the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 105-7. Property to be retained for minimum period.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep and retain upon
the licensed premises, for a period of 48 hours after the purchase or receipt
thereof, all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall not disturb or
reduce the same or alter the original shape, form or condition until such
period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
§ 105-8. Maintenance of premises; hours of operation.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall constantly maintain the
licensed premises in the manner prescribed by this section as follows:
A. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to constitute a
nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of residents
nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste, and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be stored in such premises.
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-8
1:173
§ 105-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution or imprisoned for up to 30 days. Each day's violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 109
LEASING OF PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property registration — See Ch. 133,
Art. I.
§ 109-1. Furnishing of names and addresses required; certification
fee. [Amended 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 770]
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk,
all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom, and none
shall be permitted to remain upon the premises.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. No work shall be done on such premises in connection with the storage,
dismantling, processing, transporting or removal of junk, nor shall such
premises be open for business for the purchase or sale of junk at any
time on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday, or on any
other day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. [Amended
4-22-1963 by Ord. No. 248]
F. The junkyard, salvage yard or other places used and maintained for the
collection, storage and disposal of used and secondhand goods and
materials shall be confined to an area enclosed by a tightly built solid
fence or wall constructed of wood, brick, stone, concrete, cement block
or other similar matter or materials which shall be of a minimum height
of eight feet.
G. No advertising of any nature shall be displayed on the enclosure, fence
or wall.
A. Every person, firm or corporation owning or managing any residential
property within the Borough of Baldwin which is rented, in whole or in
part, to one or more persons shall certify to the Borough, for each rental
§ 105-8 BALDWIN CODE § 109-1
1:174
§ 109-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-19-1984 by Ord. No.
541; 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566; 7-15-2002 by Ord. No. 770]
Any person, partners or principal officers of any firm or such officer
responsible for the performance of the duties required in this chapter or the
chief executive officer of such corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Magistrate,
be fined not less than $50 not more than $600 for each offense together
with any costs of the proceedings against the person.
§ 109-3. Posting and notice of provisions.
In addition to the normal advertising requirements of law, a copy of this
chapter will be posted in the lobby of the Borough Building for a period of
30 days, and the Secretary of the Borough shall give written notice of the
contents of this chapter to all rental agencies and real estate agencies in
the Borough of Baldwin, South Hills Multi-List, Inc., and to any and all other
real estate agencies situate outside the Borough of Baldwin but known to be
leasing or renting properties on behalf of owners, which property is located
in the Borough of Baldwin.
Chapter 112
property address, the name, mailing address and telephone number of
the owner and all of the tenants occupying the rental property.
B. Certifications shall be made on or before January 31, annually, on rental
property information forms that may be obtained, upon request, at the
Borough Municipal Building.
C. The annual certification shall be accompanied by a filing fee, which
shall be initially established at a fee of $10 to cover the administrative
costs of the Borough relating to the identification of renters for public
safety, emergency, garbage, sewer and tax purposes. If a change in
tenant's occupancy occurs midyear, the owner shall provide to the
Borough the new tenant information within 15 days of the change
occurring but shall not be subject to a new filing fee except at the
annual certification.
D. Borough Council may amend the amount of the fee in a fee resolution
from time to time.
E. Any person, firm or corporation owning any residential rental property
within the Borough of Baldwin who fails to certify the names and
mailing addresses of the tenants to the Borough of Baldwin, or fails to
cause their agent or management corporation to file such a
certification, shall also be liable for all unpaid, nonlienable Borough
services provided to the property until the person owning the property
complies with the requirements of Subsections A through C of this
section hereinabove listed.
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-3
1:175
MANHOLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 134. Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
139, Art. I.
§ 109-3 BALDWIN CODE § 109-3
1:176
ARTICLE I
Work Affecting Manholes
[Adopted 9-19-1957 by Ord. No. 136]
§ 112-1. Permit required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to alter and grade any property in
such a way as to affect the elevation of any manhole located in a publicly
dedicated easement in the Borough of Baldwin or affect any such manhole
in any respect shall, prior to such action, make application to the Borough
Council in writing for a permit to perform the work which may affect the
elevation of any such manhole or affect any such manhole in any other
manner. The said written application shall indicate thereon the name of the
street, highway or road and the place at which the digging or opening will
take place or the location and type of work about to be performed which
may so affect any such manhole.
§ 112-2. Permit fee; issuance of permit.
Upon payment of a fee of $5 by the applicant for the said permit, the
Borough Council, if it shall find that the terms of this article have been
complied with, may issue said permit to the applicant, which permit shall
indicate thereon the name of the street, highway or road and the place at
which the digging or opening will take place or the location and type of work
about to be performed which may so affect any such manhole.
§ 112-3. Conduct of work; restoration.
Any person, firm or corporation receiving a permit for the altering of any
grade of any property which may affect the elevation of any manhole located
in a publicly dedicated easement in the Borough of Baldwin or affect any
such manhole in any other way shall take proper precautions for the proper
elevation and construction of any such manhole so that the manhole is
raised or lowered to accord with the altered grade, all at the expense
of the person, firm or corporation doing the work. Such person, firm or
corporation shall restore the surface of any publicly dedicated easement
to a condition substantially the same as it was before the surface was
disturbed in order to change the elevation of or otherwise alter any manhole
located therein.
§ 112-4. Bond or cash deposit required.
Any person, firm or corporation, prior to the issuance of any permit
provided for in this article, shall deposit with the Borough Secretary a bond
in proper form approved by the Borough Solicitor in a sum of not less than
$1,000 conditioned for the faithful compliance with the terms of this article.
In lieu of the said bond, said person, firm or corporation may, on approval of
the Borough Secretary, deposit cash in the amount of $100 as security for
the compliance with the terms of this article.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:177
§ 112-5. Failure to comply; work by Borough.
Should any person, firm or corporation, after having altered the surface
of any property so as to interfere with the elevation or otherwise affect
any manhole located in a publicly dedicated easement of said Borough, fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of this article or the instructions
or directions of the Borough Council or Building Inspector pertaining to the
said work, the proper Borough officials shall proceed to have the street,
road or easement placed in proper condition at the cost of the person, firm
or corporation to whom the permit was issued, said cost to be deducted
from the cash deposited aforesaid or, in the event of a bond, the cost is to be
billed to the person, firm or corporation. Under failure to pay, the Solicitor
shall be authorized and directed to proceed on the bond for the collection
of any amount due.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $300 and the costs of prosecution or be imprisoned for up to 30
days.
§ 112-5 BALDWIN CODE § 112-6
1:178
ARTICLE II
Opening or Entering Manholes
[Adopted 4-17-1961 by Ord. No. 220]
§ 112-7. Definitions.
When the following words or phrases are used in this article, the following
definitions shall apply:
ENTERING MANHOLE — The act of removal of a manhole cover and
entrance into the manhole for any reason.
MANHOLE — An underground cavity containing public utility facilities with
access to same accomplished by the removal of a manhole cover at the
street, sidewalk or street level.
§ 112-8. Required precautions.
No person, firm or corporation, nor any employee thereof, shall remove or
cause to be removed or ordered to be removed a manhole cover and enter or
cause to be entered or order another person to enter such manhole within
the Borough of Baldwin for any purpose without requiring another person
to stand guard in the immediate vicinity of said manhole.
§ 112-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person, firm or corporation, or any employee thereof, who violates the
provisions of this article shall be liable, upon conviction thereof, to a fine or
penalty not exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution or to imprisonment for
up to 30 days for each offense.
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:179
Chapter 116
MASSAGE PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pornography — See Ch. 130.
§ 116-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEWDNESS — Tending to excite lust; lewd; indecent; obscene; or sexual
impurity.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the female
breasts with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of covered
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural and shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, buttocks or breasts.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
§ 116-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall own, operate or maintain any massage parlor or model
studio open to the public which as a regular course of business is used for
the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or which shall engage
in providing massages, body rubs or other bodily stimulations by any means
if such massages, body rubs or other bodily stimulations, whether by direct
contact or by the performance of any act, includes nudity, sexual conduct or
sexual excitement by any party.
§ 116-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage treatments given:
A. In the office of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor.
B. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium.
C. In a residence of a person under a doctor's care, by the direction of the
doctor.
§ 112-9 BALDWIN CODE § 116-3
1:180
§ 116-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined
a sum not exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution or imprisoned for up
to 30 days. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
Chapter 119
MINING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99. Natural gas extraction — See Ch. 121.
§ 119-1. Prohibited acts.
All mining or recovery of coal or other minerals of all types, except for
water, by strip mining or otherwise that disturbs the surface of land upon
which any mining may be conducted is hereby prohibited within the
Borough of Baldwin.
§ 119-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership who violates any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$300 plus costs of prosecution or imprisonment for up to 30 days. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 121
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION
§ 121-1. Findings and intent.
D. Upon the written order of a licensed physician, osteopath or
chiropractor.
A. The Borough Council of Baldwin finds that the commercial extraction of
natural gas in Baldwin Borough violates the rights of residents and
neighborhoods and poses a significant threat to their, health, safety and
welfare. Moreover, widespread environmental and human health
impacts have resulted from commercial gas extraction in other areas.
Regulating the activity of commercial gas extraction automatically
means allowing commercial gas extraction to occur within the Borough,
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-1
1:181
§ 121-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORPORATIONS — For purposes of this chapter, shall include any
corporation, limited partnership, limited-liability partnership, business
trust, or limited-liability company organized under the laws of any state
of the United States or under the laws of any country, and any other
business entity that possesses state-conferred limited liability attributes for
its owners, directors, officers and/or managers.
EXTRACTION — The digging or drilling of a well for the purposes of
exploring for, developing or producing natural gas or other hydrocarbons,
whether either the well site, or any part of the piping or well or removal
process is located on or under the geographic boundaries of the Borough of
Baldwin on either the surface or underground.
thus violating the rights of residents and neighborhoods and
endangering their health, safety and welfare by allowing the deposit of
toxins into the air, soil, water, environment and the bodies of residents
within our Borough.
B. Meaningful regulatory limitations and prohibitions concerning
Marcellus Shale natural gas extraction, along with zoning and land use
provisions, are barred because they conflict with certain legal powers
claimed by resource extraction corporations. The Borough Council
recognizes that environmental and economic sustainability cannot be
achieved if the rights of municipal majorities are routinely overridden
by corporate minorities claiming certain legal powers. The Borough
Council also recognizes that sustainability cannot be achieved within a
system of preemption which enables those corporations to use state
governments to override local self-government and which restricts
municipalities to only that lawmaking specifically authorized by state
government.
C. The Borough Council believes that the protection of residents,
neighborhoods and the natural environment constitutes the highest and
best use of the police powers that this municipality possesses. The
Borough Council also believes that local legislation that embodies the
interests of the community is mandated by the doctrine of the consent
of the governed and the right to local, community self-government.
Thus, the Borough Council hereby adopts this chapter, which
establishes a bill of rights for the residents and communities of the
Borough; bans commercial extraction of Marcellus Shale natural gas
within Baldwin Borough because that extraction cannot be achieved
without violating the rights of residents and communities or
endangering their health, safety and welfare; removes certain legal
powers from gas extraction corporations operating within Baldwin
Borough; and nullifies state laws, permits and other authorizations
which interfere with the rights secured by this chapter.
§ 121-1 BALDWIN CODE § 121-2
1:182
NATURAL GAS — Any gaseous substance, either combustible or
noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarified state at standard temperature or
pressure conditions, and/or gaseous components or vapors occurring in or
derived from petroleum or natural gas.
§ 121-3. Statements of law.
Rights of Baldwin residents and the natural environment:
A. Right to water. All residents, natural communities and ecosystems in
Baldwin Borough possess a fundamental and inalienable right to
sustainably access, use, consume and preserve water drawn from
natural water cycles that provide water necessary to sustain life within
the Borough.
B. Rights of natural communities. Natural communities and ecosystems,
including, but not limited to, wetlands, streams, rivers, aquifers and
other water systems, possess inalienable and fundamental rights to
exist and flourish within Baldwin Borough. Residents of the Borough,
along with the municipality, shall possess legal standing to enforce
those rights on behalf of those natural communities and ecosystems.
C. Right to a sustainable energy future. All residents, natural
communities, and ecosystems in Baldwin Borough possess a right to a
sustainable energy future which includes, but is not limited to, the
development, production and use of energy from renewable fuel
sources.
D. Right to self-government. All residents of Baldwin Borough possess the
fundamental and inalienable right to a form of governance where they
live which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that all
free governments are founded on the people's authority and consent,
and that corporate entities and their directors and managers shall not
enjoy special privileges or powers under the law which make
community majorities subordinate to them.
E. People as sovereign. Baldwin Borough shall be the governing authority
responsible to, and governed by, the residents of the Borough. Use of
the "Baldwin Borough" municipal corporation by the sovereign people
of the Borough to make law shall not be construed to limit or surrender
the sovereign authority or immunities of the people to a municipal
corporation that is subordinate to them in all respects at all times. The
people at all times enjoy and retain an inalienable and indefeasible right
to self-governance in the community where they reside.
F. Rights as self-executing. All rights delineated and secured by this
chapter shall be self-executing, and these rights shall be enforceable
against corporations and governmental entities.
§ 121-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:183
§ 121-4. Statements of law.
Prohibitions necessary to secure bill of rights' protection:
§ 121-5. Enforcement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any corporation to engage in the extraction of
natural gas within Baldwin Borough, with the exception of gas wells
installed and operating at the time of enactment of this chapter,
provided that the extraction of gas from those existing wells does not
involve any practice or process not previously used for the extraction of
gas from those wells.
B. Corporations in violation of the prohibition against natural gas
extraction or seeking to engage in natural gas extraction shall not have
the rights of "persons" afforded by the United States and Pennsylvania
Constitutions, nor shall those corporations be afforded rights under the
First or Fifth Amendments to the United States Constitution or
corresponding sections of the Pennsylvania Constitution, nor shall
those corporations be afforded the protections of the commerce or
contracts clauses within the United States Constitution or
corresponding sections of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
"Corporations," for purposes of this chapter, shall include any
corporation, limited partnership, limited-liability partnership, business
trust, or limited-liability company organized under the laws of any state
of the United States or under the laws of any country, and any other
business entity that possesses state-conferred limited liability
attributes for its owners, directors, officers and/or managers.
C. Corporations engaged in the extraction of natural gas shall not possess
the authority or power to enforce state or federal preemptive law
against the people of Baldwin Borough, or to challenge or overturn
municipal ordinances adopted by the Borough Council of Baldwin, when
that enforcement or challenge interferes with the rights asserted by
this chapter or interferes with the authority of the municipality to
protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents.
D. No permit, license, privilege or charter issued by any state or federal
agency, commission or board of supervisors to any person or any
corporation operating under a state charter, or any director, officer,
owner or manager of a corporation operating under a state charter,
which would violate the prohibitions of this chapter or deprive any
Borough resident(s), natural community, or ecosystem of any rights,
privileges or immunities secured by this chapter, the Pennsylvania
Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be
deemed valid within Baldwin Borough.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity that violates any prohibition of
this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof by a Magisterial District Judge, shall be sentenced to pay the
maximum fine allowable under state law for a summary offense and
§ 121-4 BALDWIN CODE § 121-5
1:184
§ 121-6. Effective date and existing DEP permit holders.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the date of its enactment, at
which point the chapter shall apply to any and all extractions of natural gas
in Baldwin regardless of the date of any applicable DEP permits.
§ 121-7. People's right to self-government.
The foundation for the making and adoption of this chapter is the people's
fundamental and inalienable right to govern themselves and thereby secure
their rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Any attempts to use
other units and levels of government to preempt, amend, alter or overturn
this chapter, or parts of this chapter, shall require the Borough Council
to hold public meetings that explore the adoption of other measures that
expand local control and the ability of residents to protect their fundamental
and inalienable right to self-government. Such consideration may include
actions to separate the municipality from the other levels of government
used to preempt, amend, alter or overturn the provisions of this chapter
or other levels of government used to intimidate the people of Baldwin
Borough or their elected officials.
Chapter 123
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 154.
shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for a summary offense.
A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which
a violation occurs and for each section of this chapter found to be
violated.
B. Baldwin Borough may also enforce this chapter through an action in
equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County. In
such an action, Baldwin Borough shall be entitled to recover all costs of
litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorney's fees.
C. Any Borough resident shall have the authority to enforce this chapter
through an action in equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County. In such an action, the resident shall be entitled to
recover all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and
attorney's fees.
§ 121-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-7
1:185

ARTICLE I
Operation of Vehicles in Parks
[Adopted 9-21-1959 by Ord. No. 186]
§ 123-1. Prohibited acts.
From and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to
operate within the confines of public parks, which are now or which may
hereafter be owned, maintained and/or operated by the Borough of Baldwin,
any commercial motor vehicle, motor bus, motor omnibus, truck, tractor,
trailer, truck tractor or similar motor vehicle.
§ 123-2. Posting of signs.
The proper Borough officials are hereby authorized and directed to
immediately purchase, install and maintain official signs, in accordance
with the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,56 giving notice
of the prohibition set forth in § 123-1 hereof.
§ 123-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 plus costs of
prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30 days.
56.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-3
1:187

ARTICLE II
Elm Leaf Park Regulations
[Adopted 4-16-1973 by Ord. No. 436]
§ 123-4. Use of swimming pool.
The use of the Elm Leaf Park Swimming Pool be and hereby is restricted to
residents of the Borough of Baldwin, full-time employees of the Borough of
Baldwin and guests of residents of the Borough who are season pass holders
as hereinafter set forth.
§ 123-5. Admission fees.
Prior to each swimming season, the Council will establish admission fees
to be paid by those persons using the swimming pool. The admission fees
may be altered by the Council during the swimming season to meet changed
conditions. The admission fees established by the Council will be posted in
a conspicuous place and will be enforced by the Swimming Pool Manager.
§ 123-6. Application for season pass.
Any resident of the Borough of Baldwin desiring a season pass for use of
the Elm Leaf Park Swimming Pool shall make application therefor to the
Borough on forms provided by the Borough Secretary and shall pay the
appropriate fees as established by the Council.
§ 123-7. Use of pool by Borough employees.
Nonresidents who are full-time employees of the Borough shall have the
same swimming pool privileges as residents of the Borough and may obtain
season passes for themselves and their immediate families upon application
therefor and payment of the appropriate fees.
§ 123-8. Use of pool by nonresidents.
Nonresidents of the Borough may use the pool upon payment of the
appropriate admission fee when they are guests of and accompanied by
a resident season pass holder, subject to regulations established by the
Council. It is understood that the Council may from time to time suspend all
nonresident guest privileges because of crowded conditions at the pool.
§ 123-9. Regulations for use of pool.
The Borough Council shall, from time to time, adopt regulations for the
use of the Elm Leaf Park Swimming Pool, which regulations shall be posted
in a conspicuous place and enforced by the Swimming Pool Manager. All
admissions shall be subject to the aforesaid regulations.
§ 123-10. Passes nontransferable.
No season pass issued pursuant to this article will be transferable.
§ 123-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-11
1:189
§ 123-11. Use of tennis courts. [Added 4-15-1974 by Ord. No. 447]
The use of the Elm Leaf Park tennis courts shall be under the same rules
and regulations as shall be established from time to time by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Baldwin. Admission fees shall be established
by the Council by resolution from time to time and will be posted in a
conspicuous place. Failure to pay the admission charges shall subject such
person to the penalties provided in § 123-12.
§ 123-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 566]
Any person violating the provisions of this article or any person who
knowingly supplies false information in an application for a season pass
under § 123-6 hereof shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $300 plus costs
of prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30 days.
§ 123-11 BALDWIN CODE § 123-12
1:190
ARTICLE III
Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 8-15-1988 by Ord. No. 598]
§ 123-13. Use and possession prohibited.
From and after the effective date hereof, the use and/or possession of
alcoholic beverages of any kind, including liquors, wines, beers, coolers
and any other alcoholic beverages intended for consumption and commonly
known as "alcoholic beverages," is prohibited in any public park or
recreational area of the Borough at all times.
§ 123-14. Permits.
Excluded from the provisions of this article shall be all park areas or
recreational areas or buildings of the Borough leased or used by persons
having permits for the same, which permits shall have been approved by the
Council of the Borough and issued by the Borough officers; and provided
further, however, that any persons seeking permits for the use of such park
areas or recreational areas or buildings wherein alcoholic beverages may
be served shall make known the same to the Borough Council in their
application for use of the areas or buildings, and provided further that such
alcoholic beverages shall be served in a lawful manner and only during the
hours for which the permit is issued.
§ 123-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 and the
costs of prosecution or, upon failure to pay such fine, to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding five days.
§ 123-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-15
1:191

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 626]
§ 123-16. Council to establish rules and regulations.
From and after the effective date hereof, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin shall be authorized to adopt rules and regulations
governing the administration of the parks and recreation areas of the
Borough and regulating and restricting the activities of persons using the
same parks and recreation areas. Such rules and regulations shall be
adopted in the form of a resolution.
§ 123-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article or of any
regulation or rule adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Baldwin adopted under the provisions of § 123-16 hereof shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 and the
cost of prosecution or, upon failure to pay such fine, to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding five days.
§ 123-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-17
1:193

ARTICLE V
Smoking and/or Tobacco Use
[Adopted 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 839]
§ 123-18. Use prohibited.
The smoking or use of any tobacco-based products is prohibited within
the confines of any outdoor recreational space in the Borough of Baldwin,
including, but not limited to, Revo Field, Romanus Field, Municipal Field,
Elmleaf Park, McGowan Field, Colewood Park, Overland Trail, Leland Field
and the Baldwin Borough Municipal Complex (tennis, basketball and
swimming).
§ 123-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this article shall, after issuance of a summary
offense citation and conviction of same before the District Judge, be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $300 plus costs of court.
§ 123-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-19
1:195
Chapter 127
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 127-1. Permit or registration required; application; issuance.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell or offer to
sell, by personal solicitation or by printed or written cards, circulars or
any other artifices whatsoever, any goods, wares, merchandise, literary
products, magazines, periodicals, fruit, fish, vegetables, produce,
oysters, milk or any other article of trade whatsoever from house to
house or in the public streets or alleys within the limits of the Borough
of Baldwin, or to circulate, distribute, and/or indiscriminately deliver
from house to house advertising flyers or pamphlets (except in the
ordinary course of mail) without first having procured a permit or
license from the Department of Police of the Borough of Baldwin for
such privileges. Nothing in this section shall preclude the distribution
of political or religious flyers, pamphlets or tracts at no cost, or require
that individuals merely engaging in religious or political speech be
required to register under this act. In addition, the solicitation of funds
on residential property from Borough residents for any religious,
charitable, or nonprofit cause is not precluded by this section, nor is
there a requirement for these individuals to register under this act.
B. For the protection of the public against fraud and imposition, all
persons making sales or soliciting orders of goods, wares or
merchandise as set forth heretofore shall first provide to the
Department of Police with the following information in order to obtain
an identification card for these purposes.
(1) Full identification, including proof thereof by a voter's registration
card, vehicle operator's license or some other accepted method of
identification, with residence and an office address.
(2) The name of the organization for which the applicant is soliciting,
together with the address of that organization.
(3) The purpose of the solicitation in the Borough.
(4) The periods and times during which the solicitation is to be
conducted.
(5) A certified Pennsylvania police criminal records check and a
certified police criminal records check from the state the applicant
currently resides. Both criminal records checks shall be current,
that is they shall have been obtained within 30 days of the date of
the solicitation application.
C. The application shall be accompanied by two photographs of the
applicant not larger than two inches by two inches, one of which shall
§ 123-19 BALDWIN CODE § 127-1
1:196
§ 127-2. Exceptions.
be attached to the written request or application and the other to be
attached to the certificate given by the Department.
D. (Reserved)
E. After examination of the applicant and his application and, where
deemed necessary, after verification of the references or other means,
the Department of Police may issue to the applicant the required
certification.
F. The application for a permit shall be kept on file by the police and shall
be available for public inspection. Permits issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be valid for no more than three months from the date of
issuance.
G. The Chief of Police may deny the application for a Borough Permit if the
application is incomplete, is not accompanied by a fee, or if applicant or
applicant's organization has been convicted of or has plead guilty or
nolo contendere to i) violating the provisions of this Chapter 127 within
a period of one year prior to the date of the application, or ii) any
burglary, violent crime, or any felony or misdemeanor involving fraud or
misrepresentation.
H. An application for a Borough permit shall be approved or rejected
within a period of five days from the date it is submitted. If an
application for a Borough permit is rejected, the Chief of Police shall set
forth the reasons therefore in writing.
I. The police department shall keep a permanent record of all permits
issued and all applications rejected under this chapter.
A. There shall be exempt from the provisions of § 127-1 hereof persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, and
the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to newsboys nor to the acts
of merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular
course of business, nor shall the terms of this chapter be held to include
or apply to any farmer or truck gardener who shall vend, sell or dispose
of or offer to sell, vend or dispose of the products of the farm or garden
occupied and cultivated by him; nor shall it apply to any manufacturer
or producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat
products or milk or milk products. Nothing contained in this chapter
shall be held to prohibit any sale required by statute or by order of any
court or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale
pursuant to law.
B. In addition, this chapter shall not apply to boys or girls under the age of
18 years who take orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards,
candy and the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or
similar organizations and take orders for and deliver cookies and the
like.
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-2
1:197
§ 127-3. Conduct of Solicitations.
In the course of a solicitation, each solicitor shall comply with the following:
§ 127-4. Revocation of permit.
C. Individuals who are seeking or the taking of orders by insurance agents
or brokers licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania are expressly exempt from registration under § 127-1
hereof.
D. Any person soliciting funds for any religious, charitable, or nonprofit
cause is not required to register under this act.
A. No solicitor shall solicit at any residence which has a "No Solicitation"
sign posted on the residence.
B. If no signs pursuant to § 127-3A are posted at a residence, no solicitor
shall solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
C. The solicitor shall:
(1) If requested by a resident of the Borough, provide to the resident
the name and address or telephone number of a representative of
the soliciting organization to who inquiries can be addressed; and
(2) Provide to each resident a full and fair description of the purpose
for which the solicitation is being made.
D. The solicitor shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes, regulations,
rules or ordinances of the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Allegheny County, and the Borough of Baldwin.
E. No solicitor shall make any untrue statement or misrepresentation in
the course of soliciting, or omit to state any material fact necessary to
prevent any statement made from being misleading. No solicitor shall
utilize any unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the course of
soliciting. In determining whether or not a practice is unfair or
deceptive under this subsection, definitions, standards or
interpretations relating thereto under the Pennsylvania Unfair Trade
Practices and Consumer Protection Law, as amended from time to time,
shall apply.
F. Persons regulated by this chapter shall carry their identification cards,
which shall be issued by the Chief of Police, at all times while soliciting
within the Borough and shall show their identification cards to
residents or police when requested in order to identify themselves prior
to any actual solicitation of funds. Any loss of such identification card
shall be immediately reported to the Department of Police by the person
to whom such card was issued.
A. Borough permits issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief
of Police, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 127-2 BALDWIN CODE § 127-4
1:198
§ 127-5. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the denial of
a Borough permit as provided in § 127-1 shall have the right of appeal to
the Borough Council of Baldwin. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with
the Borough Manager, within 14 days after notice of denial has been mailed
to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal. The Borough Council shall set a time and place
for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to
appellant in the same manner as provided in § 127-4 for notice of hearing
on revocation.
§ 127-6. Fees.
Concurrently with the submission of the solicitation application, the
applicant shall pay a fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 127-7. Noise restrictions.
No licensee or any person in his or her behalf shall shout, cry out, blow
a horn, ring a bell or use any sound or amplifying device upon any of
the streets, alleys, parks or other public places in the Borough of Baldwin
or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes
to sell.
(1) Fraud misrepresentation, or false statement contained in, or
material fact omitted from, the application for a Borough permit;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, false statement, or material omission
made in the course of soliciting;
(3) Failure to observe a "No Solicitation" notice posted by a resident or
"No Solicitation" list provided by the Borough;
(4) Any other violation of this Chapter 127;
(5) Conviction, whether before issuance of the Borough permit or
during the term of the Borough permit, of any burglary, violent
crime or any felony or misdemeanor involving fraud or
misrepresentation.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a Borough permit shall be given
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be transmitted by certified
mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at
least seven days prior to the date set for hearing.
§ 127-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-8
1:199
§ 127-8. Location of business.
No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon nor shall
any be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation
might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets or sidewalks.
§ 127-9. License required for business premises.
Every person, whether principal or agent, entering into or desiring to
conduct a transient retail business in the Borough for the sale of the goods,
wares or merchandise and who hires, leases or occupies a room, apartment,
store, shop, building or other place or structure for the exhibition and
sale of such goods, wares or merchandise shall, before commencing such
business, take out a license to do so from the Chief of Police. The fee for
such license shall be $25 per month or fractional part thereof, and shall be
paid monthly in advance to the Department of Police.
§ 127-10. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, words used herein shall have
the following definitions:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, firm, or corporation,
however styled.
SOLICIT — To go from door to door in the Borough i) soliciting contributions
or pledges for contributions, or ii) selling or attempting to sell subscriptions,
products or services, or taking orders or attempting to take orders for
subscriptions, products or services from or to an occupant of a residence.
SOLICITATION — Acts of individual solicitors on behalf of a particular
person.
SOLICITOR — A person who solicits.
TRANSIENT VENDOR — Includes any person, corporation, partnership,
association or any agent thereof who conducts a business in the Borough,
either from door to door or in any other manner where the vendor does not
have either a residence or a business office within the geographic limits of
the Borough.
§ 127-11. Refuse and waste; stopping longer than necessary.
No transient vendor shall deposit any refuse or waste on the streets or
alleys or any private or public property in the Borough, nor may be or she
be parked or stopped for a longer time than is necessary for the reasonable
conduct of his or her business.
§ 127-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to prosecution before a Magisterial District Judge and, upon
§ 127-8 BALDWIN CODE § 127-12
1:200
conviction, shall be fined not more than $300 plus costs of prosecution.
Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a separate
offense. Violations may also result in the revocation of the violator's permit,
as specified in § 127-4.
§ 127-13. List of homes not wishing to be solicited.
Any resident of the Borough of Baldwin may register with the Borough
of Baldwin Police Department by signing a registration list or application
indicating that such owner or resident of such home does not wish to be
solicited. The Borough of Baldwin shall place the name of such individual
upon a registration list for the same and provide that individual with a "NO
SOLICITATION" sticker, which that party may display on the upper lefthand
side of his or her front door. Any person seeking a licensing permit
under the provisions of this chapter shall, in signing the application to
obtain the same, agree that he or she will not solicit homes whose owners
or residents have signed a registration list which indicates that such owner
or resident of such home does not wish to be solicited. Such a list shall
be made available to the residents of the Borough and shall be held by
the Department of Police, and a copy thereof shall be given to each person
obtaining a license and identification card under the provisions of this
chapter. In the event that such person soliciting within the boundaries of
the Borough shall fail to recognize the wishes of the homeowner or the
resident of such home as expressed in the notice, then any such attempt to
solicit such home shall result in a revocation of the solicitor's license and
identification card after a hearing held before the Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin.
Chapter 130
PORNOGRAPHY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Massage parlors — See Ch. 116.
§ 130-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
other content which appears in the motion-picture film, publication or live
theater production, or knowledge of the acts of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution which occur in any place.
LEWD MATTER — Any matter which the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, would find, when considered as a
§ 127-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:201
whole, appeals to the prurient interest and which depicts or describes
patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or exhibition of the genitals or genital area. Nothing herein
contained is intended to include or proscribe any matter which, when
considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses
serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
LIVE THEATER PRODUCTION — Any dramatic, musical or comedic
production performed in the presence of a live audience.
MATTER — A motion-picture film, live theater production, publication, or all
three.
MODEL STUDIO —
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any film or plate negative, film or plate
positive, film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition, films, glass
slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive form, designed for
exhibition by projection on a screen or videotape or any other medium used
to electronically reproduce images on a screen.
NUDE — Completely without clothing or with the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing figure
models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being observed or
viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a
fee or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity for the right
or opportunity so to depict the figure model or for admission to or for
permission to remain upon or as a condition for remaining upon the
place.
A.
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing or
providing or procuring for a fee or other consideration or compensation
or gratuity figure models who pose in the nude to be observed or
viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
B.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public or private school or any governmental agency wherein the
person, firm, association, partnership or corporation or operation
has met the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma.
(1)
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection C(1) of this definition.
(2)
C.
§ 130-1 BALDWIN CODE § 130-1
1:202
any portion thereof below the top of the nipple or the covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or a motion-picture film
which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited
in a coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of or transfer of possession of lewd
matter.
§ 130-2. Lewd motion-picture films or live theater productions.
§ 130-3. Lewd publications.
A. Any and every place in the Borough where lewd motion-picture films or
live theater productions are publicly exhibited or possessed for the
purpose of such exhibition and any and every place in the Borough
where a lewd motion-picture film or live theater production is publicly
or repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the purpose of such exhibitions
is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd motion-picture film which is publicly exhibited or
possessed for such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under
Subsection A above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 130-8 hereof, all moneys paid
thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions or productions are
also declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Any and every place in the Borough where lewd publications constitute
a part of the stock-in-trade is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd publication possessed at a place which is a public
nuisance under Subsection A above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-3
1:203
§ 130-4. Model studios.
§ 130-5. Notice of nuisance; abatement.
§ 130-6. Appointment of Community Standards Board.
summary abatement provided for in § 130-8 hereof, all valuable
consideration received for the sale of such lewd publications is also
declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Every model studio which, as a regular course of business, is used for
the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution and every such
model studio in or upon which acts of lewdness, assignations or
prostitution are held or occur is a public nuisance which shall be
enjoined, abated and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in § 130-8 hereof, all moneys or other
valuable consideration paid for services rendered to customers are also
declared to be a public nuisance as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this chapter and a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in § 130-8 hereof, any and
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Borough which is declared to
be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in § 130-2, 130-3 or 130-4 of
this chapter is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such
nuisance for the purpose of this chapter and is, thereafter, responsible
for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.
B. The places and matters declared to be public nuisances under § 130-2,
130-3 or 130-4 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. The Council shall appoint a Community Standards Board consisting of
up to seven adult residents at large of the Borough of Baldwin.
Members of said Board shall be laypersons. Members of Council or
other elected or appointed Borough officials serving their current terms
of office shall not be eligible to serve on the Community Standards
Board. [Amended 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 777]
B. Two of the initially appointed Board members shall serve for a term of
three years, and two of the initially appointed members shall serve for a
period of four years. All other appointees and all subsequent appointees
shall serve for a term of five years.
§ 130-3 BALDWIN CODE § 130-6
1:204
§ 130-7. Investigation and recommendation by Board.
The Baldwin Borough Community Standards Board shall investigate all
complaints that activity constituting a public nuisance, as defined in
§§ 130-2, 130-3 and 130-4 of this chapter, exists in the municipality and
make recommendations to the Council as to the application of this chapter
to such activity.
§ 130-8. Actions by Council.
Upon the recommendation of the Community Standards Board and upon the
Council's specific finding that a public nuisance exists in the municipality,
the Council in applying the provisions of this chapter to such nuisance shall
provide for the following by resolution:
C. The duties of the Community Standards Board will be to administer and
carry out the provisions of §§ 130-7 and 130-8 of this chapter.
A. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
B. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes the nuisance.
C. Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Council in arriving at
its factual determination.
(1) In the case of a motion-picture film or live theater production, such
shall include a recitation of the particular sexual conduct and acts
which the Council finds are patently offensive, and the basis for the
finding by the Council that such motion-picture film or live theater
production is publicly exhibited or produced in the course of
business or that such motion-picture film or live theater production
is publicly or repeatedly exhibited or produced or held for such
exhibition or production at the place declared to be a nuisance.
(2) In the case of a publication, such shall include a recitation of the
particular publications or types of publications considered by the
Council and those which the Council finds to be patently offensive,
and the basis for the finding by the Council that such publications
are displayed, sold or held for sale at any place found by the
Council to be a public nuisance, and the basis of the finding by the
Council that such publications constitute a part of the stock-intrade
of such place of business or other place.
(3) In the case of a model studio, such shall include a recitation of the
particular acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution which have
occurred, and the basis for the finding by the Council that such acts
occur in the course of business.
D. Order all persons described in § 130-5A hereof to summarily abate such
public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order on any such
persons by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession for sale of
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-8
1:205
such lewd matter or by ceasing to use the place where the nuisance
is declared to exist or by terminating the use of said place for the
purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or causing the same
to be terminated, and notifying the Council of compliance therewith
by sworn affidavit as ordered by the action of the Council in such
resolution.
E. Order the Borough Solicitor to proceed to do all of the things necessary
to abate such public nuisance through judicial proceedings and to
conclude such proceedings as expeditiously as is permissible under the
law, including requesting the court to advance such proceedings on the
calendar of the court.
F. Inform and give notice to persons designated in § 130-5A:
(1) That the Council has determined that a public nuisance presently
exists at such place and address and that, under § 130-5A of this
chapter, they are deemed to have knowledge thereof and are
responsible therefor.
(2) That in the event that the order of the municipality is not complied
with within 24 hours the Council has ordered the Borough Solicitor,
as provided for under § 130-10 hereof, to commence necessary
legal proceedings naming such persons as defendants in a civil
action to abate the public nuisance judicially under § 130-8 of this
chapter and that, under § 130-9 of this chapter, the costs of
abatement of such civil abatement action filed, including
investigative costs, court costs, attorneys' fees and other expenses,
are made a special assessment against the parcel of land upon
which such nuisance is being maintained and, upon their
determination in such court action, will be separate legal
procedure and will be made a lien against such property and a
personal obligation against any person deemed to be in violation of
this chapter.
(3) All lewd motion-picture films or lewd publications being used in
conducting and maintaining such public nuisance are contraband
and the subject of forfeiture.
(4) From and after service on the place or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such a place of a true and
correct copy of this chapter and a true and correct copy of such
resolution, any and all moneys paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films of
production of such lewd live theater productions and valuable
consideration received for services rendered in such model studios
are a public nuisance as personal property used in conducting and
maintaining such nuisance and, as such, are the subject of
forfeiture.
G. Order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true and
correct copy of this chapter be delivered forthwith in any manner
§ 130-8 BALDWIN CODE § 130-8
1:206
§ 130-9. Forfeiture of moneys; costs of abatement.
§ 130-10. Action by Borough Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Council that a public nuisance
exists at a particular location, the Borough Solicitor, with the approval of
the Council, is authorized to take whatever action is appropriate to carry
out this chapter.
§ 130-11. Severability.
If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this chapter is unconstitutional, the court shall
first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional provision so as
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property and to
the regular or acting manager or persons in charge of the place therein
declared a public nuisance.
A. Upon judgment for the Borough in legal proceedings brought pursuant
to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by such defendant or
defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration received by them
which have been declared to be a public nuisance under § 130-2C,
130-3C or 130-4B of this chapter. Such moneys or their equivalent and
any valuable consideration received shall be forfeited to the general
fund of the Borough or to the Borough as property of the Borough if any
valuable consideration received is not money.
B. The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(1) Investigative costs.
(2) Court costs.
(3) Reasonable attorneys' fees arising out of the preparation for and
trial of the cause and appeals therefrom, and other costs allowed
on appeal.
(4) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed
in such proceeding.
C. Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment against
the parcel of land upon which such nuisance is maintained. Upon its
determination in a civil action, it shall, by separate legal proceeding, be
made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against any
person and shall be collected at the time and in the same manner as
ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to
such special assessment.
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-11
1:207
to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed or construed. If the
court cannot so limit or construe such word or provision narrowly so as to
render the same constitutional, it shall strike or modify only the minimum
number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or paragraphs as will be
absolutely necessary to render the remainder constitutional. In no case
shall a clause or phrase or word or other portion hereof render any other
word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph or section unconstitutional, but
instead shall be severed therefrom entirely, with the balance of this chapter
in its entirety remaining in full force and effect.
Chapter 131
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 62.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 77.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 80.
Open burning — See Ch. 81.
Uniform construction codes — see Ch. 83.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
Trees, shrubs and bushes — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 131-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Baldwin."
§ 131-2. Adoption of standards. [Amended 9-19-1994 by Ord. No.
673; 9-19-1996 by Ord. No. 702; 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 742;
4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 863]
To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough of Baldwin and for the purpose of codifying and
regulating the design, construction, alteration, demolition, execution,
repair, maintenance, mechanicals, energy use and fuel gas usage, fire safety
and removal of all buildings, homes, structures and/or edifices in the
Borough of Baldwin and to prescribe reasonable standards for the use of
materials, roofing and construction components in such structures in the
borough, the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin hereby adopts
those certain codes known as the International Building Code 2009; the
International Fire Code 2009; the International Fuel Gas Code 2009; the
International Energy Conservation Code 2009; the International
Mechanical Code 2009; the International Residential Code 2009, the
International Property Maintenance Code 2009, the American National
Standards Institute 117 - Accessibility Code 2009, and National Electrical
§ 130-11 BALDWIN CODE § 131-2
1:208
Code 2014, herein referred to as the 'codes,' as hereinafter modified. Copies
of the code have been and are now on file in the office of the Borough
Manager of the Borough of Baldwin. The provisions, standards,
specifications and interpretations of the aforesaid codes are hereby adopted
by reference to the same and they are incorporated herein as fully as if they
had been set out at length herein.
§ 131-3. Construal of references.
Any references in the aforesaid codes to terms such as "municipality," "city"
or any other reference to a governmental authority shall be held to mean
the Borough of Baldwin; any terms used in the codes referring to building
inspection, inspector, code officer or other person authorized to enforce the
codes shall be held to mean the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin
or any inspectors hired by the Borough to accomplish the purposes set out
in this chapter. The Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin is hereby
authorized to appoint and hire inspectors to carry out the provisions of
this chapter, but the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin shall be the
primary official responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 131-4. Definitions.
All terms used in this chapter shall be defined as the same are more fully
defined in the codes, except that in the event there is a conflict between
the definition contained in the codes and the terms that are defined in the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin, Ordinance No. 440, adopted
the 29th day of September 1972, as amended, then the definition as set
forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin shall prevail.57
For these purposes, the definitions section of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Baldwin is incorporated herein by reference thereto, the same
as though it had been fully set forth herein at length.
§ 131-5. Amendments and revisions.
The Property Maintenance Code adopted herein is hereby modified in the
following respect:
A. Sections 111.1 through 111.3 are deleted in their entirety from the
code, and substituted therefor shall be the following:
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning, § 168-12, Definitions.
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-5
1:209
§ 131-6. Conflicts with other provisions.
Whenever a conflict shall occur between the provisions of this chapter and
the code adopted hereunder and the provisions of any other ordinance
of the Borough of Baldwin, particularly the Zoning Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin,58 then such conflict
shall be resolved by interpreting the ordinances so that the strictest
interpretation of the conflicting ordinance shall be the one that prevails,
and the administration or enforcement of the matter shall proceed under
the provisions of the ordinance containing the strictest standard or
interpretation.
§ 131-7. Enforcing official.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Baldwin appointed under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin or any
inspector appointed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin
under the provisions of this chapter shall be authorized to and is hereby
directed to be the official responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter; he shall be responsible to inspect the
construction, alteration, demolition or removal of all structures to ascertain
that the same is conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. He
shall issue permits as the same are required, after first having obtained
all necessary approvals, and he shall condemn all unsafe structures and
shall order the same to be razed or repaired and made safe and secure as
the interest of the public safety may require. He shall have authority after
exhibiting proper identification and in the discharge of his official duties to
enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hours to enforce
all laws relating to matters covered under the provisions of this chapter,
and he shall be authorized to issue such citations or to file such complaints
before a District Magistrate as may be required for the enforcement of this
chapter.
PM-111.1: Any person shall have the right to appeal by requesting
the Zoning Officer to seek an interpretation of the ordinance from
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.; in
the event that such a decision is adverse to the applicant or not
forthcoming, the applicant may then request that an arbitrator be
appointed to determine the issue and to render a decision. The
arbitrator shall be an architect selected by the Borough and the
applicant. All costs of the arbitrator shall be paid for by the applicant.
PM-111.2: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the arbitrator
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County within 30 days of the date of the arbitrator's decision
in accordance with the rules of court.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning, and Ch. 142, Subdivision and Land Development,
respectively.
§ 131-5 BALDWIN CODE § 131-8
1:210
§ 131-8. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the penalties set forth in the code adopted hereunder, any
person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code or of any
ordinance incorporated herein and adopted hereby or any person who shall
erect, construct, alter, repair, demolish or remove any building, structure
or edifice covered hereunder or permit, suffer or cause the erection,
alteration, repair, demolition or removal of any building or structure or
portion thereof covered hereunder in violation of this chapter or of any
ordinance incorporated herein shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter
and shall, upon conviction thereof by a District Magistrate, be punishable
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 together with costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine or costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days. The owner of any building, structure,
home or edifice or portion of the same or of the premises wherein a
violation of the code shall exist, or who shall cause a violation of the same,
or any owner, tenant, contractor, agent or employee who may commit a
violation of this chapter or assist in the commission of such a violation
shall each be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $300
and costs of prosecution or, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
shall be imprisoned for not more than 10 days; and provided, further, that
each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues
shall be considered a separate offense. The term "person," as used herein,
shall mean any individual, a member of a partnership or the officer of
any corporation, which officer authorizes or participates in any action or
omission to act which constitutes a violation of this chapter.
§ 131-9. Effect on pending proceedings.
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights
acquired or liability incurred hereunder nor any cause or cause of action
accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed herein.
Chapter 131A
PROPERTY, VACANT AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Dangerous buildings and structures — See
Ch. 77.
Disorderly houses — See Ch. 84.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
§ 131-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131A-1
1:211
§ 131A-1. Title, purpose and intent.
The title of this chapter is the "Borough of Baldwin Vacant and Abandoned
Property Ordinance." It is the purpose and intent of the Borough of Baldwin
to establish a process to address the deterioration and blight of our
neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or
distressed properties located within the Borough, and to identify, regulate,
limit and reduce the number of abandoned properties located within the
Borough. It is the Borough's further intent to establish a registration
program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted
due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and
foreclosed properties.
§ 131A-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any real property located in the Borough,
whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage, has had a lis
pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on the property,
is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is subject to
an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has
been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The
designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a comprised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is
unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — Includes, but not limited to, the Borough's Property
Maintenance Code, the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code and Fire Code, the
Pennsylvania Building and Fire Codes, the UCC, and the Borough's Codified
Ordinances.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighborhood properties; or
B.
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the applicable codes;
or
C.
§ 131A-1 BALDWIN CODE § 131A-2
1:212
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, Building Official,
Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal, Building
Inspector, planner, or other person authorized by the Borough to enforce
the applicable code(s).
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity, or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
VACANT —
§ 131A-3. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the Borough above and beyond any state, county or
local provisions for same.
§ 131A-4. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 131A-5, the Borough of Baldwin or designee
shall establish a registry cataloging each abandoned property and vacant
property within the Borough, containing the information required by this
chapter.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties are vacant and abandoned or improvements thereon
are dilapidated, deteriorated, or violate minimum health and safety
standards or lack maintenance as required by the applicable codes.
D.
Any building or structure that is not legally occupied and is not
currently being offered for sale, rent or lease evidenced by a sign
posted on the subject property advertising the property for sale, rent
or lease with contact information, ownership information, and current
phone number and/or an active listing on an electronic database
accessible to Borough staff. If there is no posted sign and the listing
is not accessible to Borough staff, a realtor may submit a written
confirmation of listing to avoid the requirement of registration. This
shall also include those properties subject to the provisions of § 169-5
of this chapter, which also shall be defined as vacant and abandoned
and subject to the requirements of registration and other provisions of
this chapter.
A.
Exception: This definition shall not apply to properties where owners
have, for reasons such as extended vacations, nursing home care, or
temporary employment, not occupied their homes for over 90 days
but intend to return and have notified the Baldwin Borough Police
Department of their intentions.
B.
§ 131A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131A-5
1:213
§ 131A-5. Registration of abandoned and/or vacant real property.
A. Upon default by the mortgagor of the mortgage, any mortgagee
(lender) who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
Borough of Baldwin shall perform an inspection of the property to
determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The
mortgagee (lender) shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register all
vacant and abandoned property with the Department of Code
Enforcement, or designee, on forms or website access provided by the
Borough and pay the fee required for registration. A separate
registration is required for each property.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected
by the mortgagee (lender) or his designee monthly until:
(1) The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
(2) It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time
it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of
that inspection, update the property registration to a vacancy
status on forms provided by the Borough.
C. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the servicer, the direct mailing address of the
mortgagee and the servicer, a direct contact name and telephone
number for both parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for both
parties, the PIN or tax number, and the name and twenty-four-hour
contact phone number of the property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property.
D. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee (lender),
servicer, trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the Borough and/or its authorized designee.
E. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
F. Properties subject to this section shall remain under an annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
G. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
H. Failure of the mortgagee (lender) and/or owner to properly register or
to modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this chapter is a violation of the chapter
and shall be subject to enforcement.
§ 131A-5 BALDWIN CODE § 131A-5
1:214
§ 131A-6. Maintenance requirements.
I. The provisions of this section shall also apply to owners, servicers,
trustees, property managers, and agents of all vacant and/or
abandoned property whether or not the subject of a mortgage. All
property must be registered immediately upon vacancy.
J. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this chapter, the Borough may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and
bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, any accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices,
except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal
items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration was
required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal
of all trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
G. Failure of the mortgagee (lender) and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance
of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with the applicable
code of the Borough. Pursuant to a finding and determination by either
the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer, Magisterial District Judge, or
a court of competent jurisdiction, the Borough may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
§ 131A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131A-6
1:215
§ 131A-7. Security requirements.
§ 131A-8. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Borough.
§ 131A-9. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this chapter does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable code(s), which may
apply to the property. Upon offer for sale or transfer of title to the property,
the owner shall be responsible to apply to the Borough's Department of
Code Enforcement for an occupancy permit.
§ 131A-10. Additional authority.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, Building
Code, Fire Code, and other applicable code(s) of the Borough.
A. Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window.
C. If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become
vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee, owner, trustee, or legal entity to perform the work
necessary to bring the property into compliance with the applicable
code(s), and the property manager must perform regular inspections to
verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any other
applicable laws.
A. If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property subject
to the provisions of this chapter is posing a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or
owner, and may bring the violations before the Magisterial District
Judge as soon as possible to address the conditions of the property.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or Magisterial District Judge shall have
the authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any
property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance
and/or security measures, including, but not limited to, securing any
§ 131A-6 BALDWIN CODE § 131A-10
1:216
§ 131A-11. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this chapter, shall be punishable as provided in the applicable
code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 131A-12. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the Borough to enforce
the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal,
for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge
of duties imposed by this chapter.
§ 131A-13. Fees and penalties.
§ 131A-14. Amendments.
Registration and penalty fees outlined in this chapter may be modified by
resolution, passed and adopted by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 131A-15. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council of the Borough
of Baldwin that several provisions of this chapter are separable. If any
and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site
security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to help
prevent further decline of the property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Borough may
abate the violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the
abatement.
D. If the mortgagee, owner, trustee or legal entity does not reimburse the
Borough for the cost of temporarily securing the property, or of any
abatement directed by the Code Enforcement Officer or Magisterial
District Judge, within 30 days of the Borough sending the mortgagee
the invoice, then the Borough may lien the property with such cost,
along with an administrative fee as determined in the Borough's fee
ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services.
A. A nonrefundable registration fee in the amount of $200 per property
shall accompany the initial registration form.
B. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter may be cited
and fined. Failure to register abandoned real property on an annual
basis and/or any violation of the sections stated within this chapter shall
result in a fine of $500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which such noncompliance or violation shall
continue.
§ 131A-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131A-15
1:217
court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any words, sentences, sections
or provisions of this chapter to be invalid, such a ruling shall not affect
any other words, sentences, sections or provisions of this chapter not
specifically included in said ruling.
§ 131A-16. Repealer.
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 131A-17. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from the date of its adoption by
the Baldwin Borough Council and upon publication provided by law.
Chapter 132
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
§ 132-1. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Borough of Baldwin Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 132-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used throughout this chapter, shall
have the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act of 1988.59
ALUMINUM — All empty aluminum beverage or food cans.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
COLLECTOR — The entity or entities authorized by the Borough to collect
recyclable materials from residences or authorized by commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments that do not receive collection
services from the Borough to collect recyclable materials from those
properties.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 131A-15 BALDWIN CODE § 132-2
1:218
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes, and those multiple-dwelling residential
buildings containing more than two dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of either clear, green or
brown glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass,
automotive glass, light bulbs, blue glass and porcelain and ceramic
products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, day-care centers, schools and universities.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Includes but shall not be limited to automotive,
truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residues, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES and PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having three or
more dwelling units per structure and shall include apartments, hotels, inns
and other like facilities.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the Borough
and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Baldwin.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or other
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge
not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste
Management Act60 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
60.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 132-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-2
1:219
supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not
include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are newspapers which have been soiled, color comics,
glossy advertising inserts and advertising inserts printed in color other than
black and white, often included with newspapers.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers. Due
to the wide variety of types of plastics, the Borough may stipulate specific
types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by residences and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which are specified
by the Borough and can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products.
"Recyclable materials" may include but are not necessarily limited to clear
glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office
paper, newsprint, corrugated paper, leaf waste, plastics and any other items
selected by the Borough or specified in future revisions to Act 101. The
recyclable materials selected by the Borough may be revised from time to
time as deemed necessary by the Borough.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste, other than through
combustion, and the creation and recovery of reusable materials.
RESIDENCES — Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwellings having
up to two dwelling units per structure for which the Borough provides
municipal waste collection service.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources for
beneficial use.
§ 132-3. Program established; grant of power.
A. The Borough hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory
separation of recyclable materials and the separation, collection and
composting of leaf waste from all residences and all commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments located in the Borough for
which waste collection is provided by the Borough or any other
§ 132-2 BALDWIN CODE § 132-3
1:220
§ 132-4. Disposal of lead-acid batteries.
Disposal by persons of lead-acid batteries with other municipal wastes is
prohibited and shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 132-5. Separation and collection.
collector. Collection of the recyclable materials shall be made at least
once per month by the Borough, its designated agent or any other solid
waste collectors operating in the Borough and authorized to collect
recyclable materials from residences or from commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments. The recycling program shall also
contain a sustained public information and education program.
B. Specific program regulations are provided in the form of a resolution as
an attachment to this chapter.61 The Borough Council is empowered to
make changes to program regulations as necessary, as described in
§ 132-10. Subsequent changes in the program regulations may be made
through approval of the Borough Council and public notice and
notification of all affected parties.
A. All persons who are residents of the Borough shall separate all of those
recyclable materials designated by the Borough from all other
municipal waste produced at their homes, apartments and other
residential establishments, shall store such materials for collection, and
shall place the same for collection in accordance with the guidelines
established hereunder.
(1) Persons in residences must separate recyclable materials from
other refuse. For those residences utilizing the Borough's
authorized agent, recyclable materials shall be placed at the
curbside in containers provided by the Borough for collection. Any
containers provided to residences for collection of recyclable
materials shall be the property of the Borough and shall be used
only for the collection of recyclable materials. Any resident who
moves within or from the Borough shall be responsible for leaving
the allocated container within the residence or shall pay the
replacement cost of said container(s). Use of recycling containers
for any purpose other than the designated recycling program or
use of the recycling containers by any person other than the person
allocated such container(s) shall be a violation of this chapter.
(a) Residents may, if necessary, purchase additional containers of
their choosing for recyclable materials. However, any such
container must bear the self-adhesive recycling logo label. The
labels are available at the Borough office free of charge.
(b) If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than
the Borough or its authorized agent (owners, landlords and
61.Editor's Note: Said resolution is on file in the Borough Secretary's office.
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:221
agents of owners or landlords, but excluding individual
residents), such collector shall submit an annual report to the
Borough reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during
the previous year.
(2) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a
multifamily rental housing property with three units or more must
comply with his recycling responsibilities by establishing a
collection system at each property. The collection system must
include suitable containers for collecting and sorting the recyclable
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collections system.
(a) If recyclable materials are collected by a collector other than
the Borough or its authorized agent (owners, landlords and
agents of owners or landlords, such collector shall submit an
annual report to the Borough reporting the tonnage of
materials recycled during the previous year.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper, leaf waste and such other materials as may be designated by the
Borough and is generated at commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and from community activities and store the recyclable
materials until collection. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if that person submits documentation to the Borough
annually indicating that the designated recyclable materials are
collected by a collector other than the Borough or its authorized agent.
Occupants of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the
Borough reporting the tonnage of materials recycled during the
previous year, provided that such person shall submit, at a minimum, an
annual recycling report to the Borough Secretary.
(1) The report shall document the amount of municipal waste
generated per year as well as the type and weight of materials that
were recycled in the previous calendar year.
(2) Valid documentation shall include information from an end-user,
recycler or waste hauler which describes the type and weight of
each recyclable material that was collected and marketed.
(3) Documentation may be in the form of one of the following:
(a) Copies of weight receipts or statements which consolidate
such information;
§ 132-5 BALDWIN CODE § 132-5
1:222
(b) A report from the provider of recycling collection services
which identifies the amount of each material collected and
marketed (the type and weight of recyclables generated by an
individual establishment may be approximated based on a
representative sample of its source-separated materials); or
(c) A report from the provider of waste collection services that
identifies the type and weight of each recyclable material
collected and marketed in cases where recyclables are
commingled with the establishment's waste. The type and
weight of recyclables generated by an individual establishment
may be approximated based on a representative sample of its
waste.
(4) For Subsection C(3)(b) and (c), where recyclables from several
establishments are collected in the same vehicle, an individual
establishment's contribution to the load may be apportioned.
(5) Only the weight of materials marketed for recycling purposes can
be credited to an establishment.
D. All employees, users (patrons) and residents of commercial, municipal
and institutional establishments shall be informed by their employers of
the recycling program. The education program shall describe the
program's features and requirements and should include, at a
minimum, an annual program meeting and an orientation to the
program upon the arrival of a new employee or resident. Receptacles
should be clearly marked with the recycling symbol and the type of
recyclable material that is to be placed in the receptacle, and signs
should be prominently displayed stating the requirements of the
program.
E. Waste minimization.
(1) Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments which
generate more than 2,200 pounds of municipal waste per month
should also implement a waste minimization opportunity
assessment which includes:
(a) Waste characterization, including source, generation rate,
management techniques and management costs. The
assessment should expressly consider high-grade office paper,
aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste, clear, green and
brown glass and any other materials generated in significant
quantities.
(b) A description of all possible waste minimization options,
including use and waste reclamation.
(c) An evaluation of the economic and technical feasibility of each
option and a ranking of each option.
§ 132-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:223
§ 132-6. Ownership of recyclables.
All recyclable materials placed by persons for collection by the Borough or
authorized collector pursuant to this chapter shall, from time of placement
at the curb, become the property of the Borough or the authorized collector,
except as otherwise provided by § 132-8 of this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to impair the ownership of separated recyclable
materials by the generator unless and until such materials are placed at
the curbside for collection. Nothing contained herein, however, shall be
construed so as to create liability on the part of the Borough because of the
placement of such recyclable materials at curbside.
§ 132-7. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Borough or one authorized by the Borough Council, or other
entity responsible for providing for collection of recyclable materials, to
collect recyclable materials placed by residences or commercial, municipal
(d) An estimate of the payback period for each feasible option.
(e) A statement of which options will be implemented, including an
explanation and a timetable.
(f) Identification of the individual(s) who will be responsible for
implementing the plan.
(2) The waste minimization plan should be periodically updated.
(a) Implementation of the plan should include:
[1] Recycling or composting of materials, to the greatest
extent feasible, either privately or through a municipal
recycling program.
[2] Use, to the greatest extent feasible, of products and
materials which are recyclable or made of post-consumer
materials.
[3] Substitution, to the greatest extent feasible, of durable
and reusable products and materials for products that are
not durable or reusable.
(b) Appropriate education materials and signs should be made
available to employees or the public to encourage participation
in recycling and waste reduction.
F. All recycling collection activity shall be conducted from Monday
through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or on
Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless prior
approval or any exception has been granted by the Borough. No
collection, hauling or transporting of recyclables shall be permitted on
Sunday.
§ 132-5 BALDWIN CODE § 132-7
1:224
and institutional establishments for collection by the Borough or an
authorized collector unless such person, firm or corporation has prior
written permission from the generator to make such collection. In violation
hereof, unauthorized collection from one or more residences or commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments on one calendar day shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 132-8. Existing recycling operations.
Any residence or commercial, municipal or institutional establishment may
donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, firm or corporation,
whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving person,
firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from
the collection point of a residence or commercial, municipal or institutional
establishment without prior written permission from the Borough or other
entity responsible for authorizing collection of recyclable materials to make
such a collection.
§ 132-9. Disposal of recyclables.
Disposal by persons of recyclable materials with wastes is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this chapter. The collected recyclable materials shall
be taken to a recycling facility. Disposal by collectors or operators of
recycling facilities of source-separated recyclable materials in landfills or
to be burned in incinerators is prohibited unless markets do not exist and
the collectors or operators have notified the Borough Secretary, or her
designee, in writing.
§ 132-10. Administration and enforcement.
A. The Borough Council shall make reasonable rules and regulations for
the operation and enforcement of this chapter as deemed necessary,
including but not limited to:
(1) Establishing recyclable materials to be separated for collection and
recycling by residences and additional recyclable materials to be
separated by commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(2) Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
(3) Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
(4) Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
(5) Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of leaf waste.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
chapter shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
§ 132-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-10
1:225
§ 132-11. Collection agreements authorized.
The Borough may enter into an agreement(s) with public or private agencies
or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials
from curbside.
the first and second offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced as follows:
(1) Summary offense. Any person, other than a municipal official
exercising his official duties, who violates any provision of this
chapter, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any order issued
hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal
waste management plan shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000.
(2) Misdemeanor offense. Any person, other than a municipal official
exercising his official duties, who violates any provision of this
chapter, any regulation promulgated hereunder, any order issued
hereunder or the terms or conditions of any approved municipal
waste management plan commits a misdemeanor of the third
degree and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $1,000 but not more than $10,000 per day for each
violation.
(3) Second or subsequent offense. Any person, other than a municipal
official exercising his official duties, who, within two years after a
misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter, violates any
provision of this chapter, any regulation promulgated hereunder,
any order issued hereunder or the terms or conditions of any
approved municipal waste management plan commits a
misdemeanor of the second degree and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than
$25,000 for each violation.
D. Violations to be separate offense. Each violation for each separate day
and each violation of any provision of this chapter, any regulation
promulgated hereunder, any order issued hereunder or the terms or
conditions of any approved municipal waste management plan shall
constitute a separate offense under Subsection C(1), (2) and (3).
E. The Borough reserves the right not to collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable
materials or not to collect municipal waste from any residence not
being registered as having obtained a Borough recycling container.
§ 132-10 BALDWIN CODE § 132-12
1:226
§ 132-12. Modifications.
The Borough may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the
standards and regulations herein and as authorized in § 132-10.
Chapter 133
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 83.
Disorderly houses — See Ch. 84.
Leasing of property — See Ch. 109.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
§ 132-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-12
1:227

ARTICLE I
Residential Rental Property Registration, Occupancy Permits and
Transfer Inspections
[Adopted 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 820]
§ 133-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the Borough of Baldwin "Rental and Real
Estate Transfer Inspection Ordinance."
§ 133-2. Purpose and policy.
It is the purpose of this article and the policy of the Council of the Borough
of Baldwin, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupancy relating to the rental and sale of residential units in the Borough
of Baldwin and to encourage owners and occupants to maintain and
improve the quality of housing within the community. It is also the policy
of the Borough that owners, managers and occupants share responsibilities
to obey the various codes adopted to protect and promote public health,
safety and welfare. As a means to those ends, this article provides for a
system of inspections, issuance and renewal of occupancy permits and sets
penalties for violations. In addition, there is a greater incidence of violations
of various codes of the Borough of Baldwin in residential rental properties
where owners rent properties to tenants. This article shall be liberally
construed and applied to promote its purposes and policies. In considering
the adoption of this article, the Borough of Baldwin makes the following
findings.
§ 133-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH OF BALDWIN — The Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in and
for the Borough of Baldwin concerning fitness for habitation or the
construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance for
any premises or residential unit. Included within, but not limited by, this
definition are the following which are in effect as of the date of the
enactment of this article: the Uniform Construction Code (hereafter "UCC"),
International Property Maintenance Code, International Plumbing Code,
International Fire Prevention Code, International Electrical Code,
Floodplain Management Ordinance, International Building Code and any
duly enacted amendment or supplement to any of the above and any new
enactment falling within this definition.
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-3
1:229
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Borough
of Baldwin and any assistants or agents.
COMMON AREA — Any open area within a structure by occupants or
that the occupants have the right to share, including, but not limited to,
kitchens, bathrooms, living rooms, dining rooms, attics, basements and
any room used for parties, social events or the congregation of people,
excepting bedrooms.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of
a residential unit that is so loud, untimely (as to the hour of the day),
offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons of reasonable
sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such that a report
is made to police and/or to the Code Enforcement Officer complaining of
such conduct, action, incident or behavior. It is not necessary that such
conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal offense, nor that
criminal charges be filed against any person, in order for a person to have
perpetrated, caused or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct,
as defined herein; provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be
deemed to have occurred unless the Code Enforcement Officer or police
shall investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and keep
written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of such occurrence.
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a residential rental unit (same
as "owner").
LANDLORD-TENANT ACT — The Landlord and Tenant Act of 1951, 68 P.S.
§ 250.101 et seq.
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a residential
rental unit.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The permit issued to the owner of residential
rental units under this article, which is required for the lawful occupancy of
residential units.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a residential rental unit,
whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal
relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a lease or by the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a residential rental unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED RENTAL UNIT — A rental unit in which the owner
resides on a regular, permanent basis.
§ 133-3 BALDWIN CODE § 133-3
1:230
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.
POLICE — The Police Department of the Borough of Baldwin or any
properly authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction within the Borough of Baldwin.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in the Borough, including the land
and all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements, on
which one or more rental units are located.
REAL ESTATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property consisting of a singlefamily
detached home and land.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use
and occupancy of a specified residential rental unit or premises.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — Any structure within the Borough of
Baldwin which is occupied by someone other than the owner of the real
estate as determined by the most current deed and for which the owner of
the said parcel of real estate received any value, including but not limited
to money, or the exchange of services. Each apartment within a building is
a separate structure requiring inspection and a license.
STRUCTURE — Any human-made object, the use of which requires an
ascertainable stationary location on land, whether or not it is affixed to the
land. Each apartment within a building is a separate structure.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a rental unit, whether or not he
or she is the owner thereof, with whom a legal relationship with the owner/
landlord is established by a lease or by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania (same as "occupant").
§ 133-4. Owner's duties.
A. It shall be the responsibility of every owner to register with the Borough
of Baldwin a contact name and twenty-four-hour telephone number for
emergency purposes.
B. Disclosure.
(1) The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant in writing on
or before the commencement of the tenancy:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if
applicable.
(b) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
(2) Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a rental unit, the owner or manager shall furnish the
occupant with the most recent inspection report relating to the
property.
§ 133-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:231
C. Maintenance of premises.
(1) The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable codes of the Borough of Baldwin and shall regularly
perform all routine maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice
and snow removal and shall promptly make any and all repairs
necessary to fulfill this obligation.
(2) The owner and occupant may agree that the occupant is to perform
specified repairs, maintenance tasks, alterations or remodeling. In
such case, however, such agreement between the owner and
occupant must be in writing. Such an agreement may be entered
into between the owner and occupant only if:
(a) The agreement of the parties is entered into in good faith and
not for the purpose of evading the obligations of the owner or
occupant.
(b) The agreement does not diminish or affect the obligation of the
owner to other occupants in the premises.
(3) In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this article or
other ordinances or codes for maintenance of the premises.
D. Registration. Every owner of a residential rental unit must register the
unit with the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) All owners of residential units must register the units with the Code
Enforcement Officer within 30 days after the effective date of this
article.
(2) Any individual, entity or firm which converts any structure to a
residential rental unit or units shall register the residential rental
unit or units with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Baldwin within 30 days of the completion of the conversion of the
unit or units; within 30 days of the time when any rent, including
the exchange of other services for the unit or units, is obtained; or
within 30 days of the date within which a tenant or tenants occupy
the unit or units, whichever time period is sooner.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the grantee and the grantee's agent
in the purchase of the said real estate, including the grantee's
attorney or title company, to notify Baldwin Borough within 72
hours of any purchase or transfer of a rental unit building or real
estate residential property.
(4) The owner of a residential rental unit must update the registration
information on record with the Code Enforcement Officer within 10
days of any changes of the information set forth below.
§ 133-4 BALDWIN CODE § 133-4
1:232
(5) Registration information shall be provided by all owners and shall
include the following:
(a) Owner name, address, telephone number.
(b) Name, address, telephone number of an emergency contact
person.
(c) Property address and number of units.
(d) Maximum occupancy per unit.
(e) Emergency telephone number.
(f) Actual number of occupants.
(g) Names and addresses of current tenants.
(6) Any owner of a residential rental unit shall notify the Borough of
Baldwin within 10 days of a new tenant occupying, renting or
residing in the landlord's or owner's residential rental unit.
(7) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the names and
addresses of a tenant shall not be disclosed by any Borough
personnel in the event that the tenant is the subject of a court order
requiring that this information be kept confidential.
E. Complaints. The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints
and inquiries from occupants.
F. Landlord-Tenant Act. The owner shall comply with all provisions of the
Landlord-Tenant Act.
G. Enforcement.
(1) Within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Code
Enforcement Office that an occupant of a residential rental unit has
violated a provision of this article, the owner shall take immediate
steps to remedy the violation and take steps to assure that there is
not a reoccurrence of the violation.
H. Code violations. Upon receiving notice of any code violations from the
Code Enforcement Officer, the owner shall promptly take action, or
cause the necessary action to be taken, to abate the offending condition
and eliminate the violation.
I. Borough can make repairs. In case the owner of premises shall neglect,
fail or refuse to comply with any notice from the Borough or its Code
Enforcement Officer to correct a violation relating to maintenance and
repair of the premises under any code in effect in the Borough of
Baldwin within the period of time stated in such notice, the Borough
may cause the violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon
the owner a charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs
for each time the Borough shall cause a violation to be corrected, and
§ 133-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:233
§ 133-5. Noncompliance.
the owner of the premises shall be billed after same has been
completed. Any such bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after
the time specified therein for payment shall be grounds for the
imposition of a municipal lien upon the premises as provided by law.
Such a lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced and collected
as provided by law, together with interest at the legal rate and court
costs. The remedies provided by this subsection are not exclusive,
and the Borough and its Code Enforcement Officer may invoke such
other remedies available under this article or the applicable codes,
ordinances or statutes, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or declaration of premises as unfit for habitation, or
suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
J. Inspections. The inspection provisions of this section shall also pertain
to any real estate residential property in which ownership is being
transferred, provided that it has been at least one year since the
previous inspection. The owner shall permit inspections of any premises
by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times upon reasonable
notice. The inspections shall be completed as follows:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Baldwin shall
inspect at the time of transfer of occupant, provided that it has
been at least one year since the previous inspection.
(2) A list of the items for the Code Enforcement Office to inspect for
the transfer of rental or real estate residential property shall be on
display in the Code Enforcement Office. This list of items may be
modified from time to time commensurate with residential UCC
codes. The noncompliance provisions of this section shall also
pertain to any real estate residential property in which ownership
is being transferred.
A. Any parcel of real estate containing a residential rental unit which has
been found to be in noncompliance with this article shall be subject to
reinspection by the Code Enforcement Officer as follows:
(1) Each residential rental unit referred to above shall be inspected at
the time of transfer, provided it has been at least one year since the
previous inspection.
(2) In addition, each residential rental unit shall be inspected each
time one of the residential rental units is vacant.
B. In the event of a violation, a residential rental unit cannot be occupied
unless and until the unit is approved as meeting the criteria of this
article and any other applicable codes of the Borough of Baldwin as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Notice of violation.
§ 133-4 BALDWIN CODE § 133-5
1:234
(1) If, after inspection of one or more of the residential rental units as
set forth above, the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
there are violations of any code of the Borough of Baldwin, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a notice of violation, which
shall at a minimum set forth the following:
(a) Street address of the property.
(b) Date of the inspection.
(c) Name of the inspector.
(d) List of violations.
(2) Within 10 days after receipt of a written notice from the Borough of
Baldwin Code Enforcement Officer that there has been a violation
of this section or any other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Baldwin, the owner shall take immediate steps to remedy the
violation and take steps to assure that there will not be a
reoccurrence of the violation.
(3) Within 20 days after receipt of a notice of violation the owner of a
residential rental unit shall file with the Code Enforcement Officer
a report on a form provided by the Borough of Baldwin setting forth
what action the owner has taken to remedy the violation and what
steps he or she has taken to prevent a reoccurrence of the violation.
The report shall also set forth a plan as to steps the owner will take
in the future if the violation reoccurs.
D. All owners of any real estate containing or upon which are erected any
residential rental unit which are in noncompliance with this article and
who desire to sell the parcel of real estate shall notify the purchasers, in
writing, prior to the sale of the parcel of real estate, that the parcel of
real estate is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this
article. Further, any property owner selling a parcel of real estate upon
which is erected a residential rental unit or units which are found to be
in noncompliance under the terms and conditions of this article shall
notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in writing, within 30 days prior to
closing on the sale of said parcel of real estate.
E. All owners of any parcels of real estate containing residential rental
units shall permit access to the property so that the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Baldwin shall be able to complete all
inspections necessary to determine compliance with this article and any
other applicable ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin. Refusal to allow
entry of the residential rental unit by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Borough of Baldwin to inspect the said unit shall be a violation of
this article.
F. The owner of any property containing or upon which is erected a
residential rental unit shall pay a fee of $60 for each and every
reinspection to cover the cost of a reinspection each time a reinspection
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-5
1:235
§ 133-6. Occupant duties.
§ 133-7. Occupant permit and inspection.
§ 133-8. Delivery of notification.
is required under the terms of this article or each time a reinspection
is requested by the Code Enforcement Officer to determine compliance
with this article or any other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Baldwin. The fee set forth herein may be increased or decreased by a
resolution of Baldwin Borough Council.
A. Inspection of premises. The occupant shall permit inspections by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the premises at reasonable times, upon
reasonable notice.
A. Occupancy permit requirement. The occupancy permit provisions of
this section shall pertain to any real estate residential property in which
ownership is being transferred.
(1) As a prerequisite to entering into a rental agreement or permitting
the occupancy of any rental unit, the owner of every such rental
unit shall be required to apply for and obtain an occupancy permit
for each rental unit.
(2) An occupancy permit shall be required for all residential rental
units.
(3) The application for the occupancy permit shall be in a form as
determined by the Borough.
(4) The owner shall maintain a current and accurate list of the
occupants in each rental unit which shall include their name and
current telephone number, which shall be available to the Borough
for inspection upon reasonable notice. The owner shall notify the
Borough of changes in the occupancy or of contact information
within 10 days of the change and shall provide the name of the
person who is no longer residing in the premises in the event a
person departs and the name, current address and current
telephone number of new occupants in the event a new person is
added.
(5) No occupancy permit shall be issued if the owner has not paid any
fines and costs arising from enforcement of this article or any of the
ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin relating to land use and/or
code enforcement or if any permit fees under this article are due
and owing the Borough.
A. All notices shall be sent to the owner and manager, if applicable, by
certified mail. In the event that the notice is returned by the postal
authorities marked "unclaimed" or "refused," then the Code
Enforcement Officer shall attempt delivery by personal service on the
§ 133-5 BALDWIN CODE § 133-8
1:236
§ 133-9. Notices; change in ownership; multiple owners;
confidentiality.
owner or manager, if applicable. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
also post the notice at a conspicuous place on the premises.
B. If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable attempt
to do so, then the notice may be sent to the owner or manager at the
addresses stated on the most current occupancy permit application for
the premises in question, by regular first-class mail, postage prepaid. If
such notice is not returned by the postal authorities within five days of
its deposit in the U.S. Mail, then it shall be deemed to have been
delivered to and received by the addressee on the fifth day following its
deposit in the U.S. Mail, and all time periods set forth above shall
thereupon be calculated from said fifth day.
A. Notices. For purposes of this article, any notice required hereunder to
be given to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
(1) There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to
be given to the owner under this article shall have been received by
such owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner
provided by this article.
(2) A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder cited shall be no defense to occupancy permit
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation proceedings as long as all
notices prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been
given and deemed received in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this article.
B. Changes in ownership occupancy. It shall be the duty of each owner of a
residential rental unit to notify the Code Enforcement Officer, in
writing, of any change in ownership of the premises or of the number of
residential rental units on the premises. It shall also be the duty of the
owner to notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of any increase
in number of occupants in any rental unit or of the changing of a rental
unit from owner-occupied to non-owner-occupied, which thereby
transforms the dwelling into a residential rental unit for purposes of
this article.
C. Owners severally responsible. If any rental unit is owned by more than
one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership or otherwise,
each person shall be jointly and severally responsible for the duties
imposed under the terms of this article and shall be severally subject to
prosecution for the violation of this article.
D. Confidentiality. All registration and contact information shall be
maintained in a confidential manner by the Code Enforcement Officer
and shall be utilized for the purpose of enforcement of this article by the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Borough Manager.
§ 133-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:237
§ 133-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties; severability.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Baldwin.
B. Basis for violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner
or manager of a residential rental unit for which an occupancy permit is
required, to operate without a valid, current occupancy permit issued
by the Borough of Baldwin authorizing such operation. It shall be
unlawful for any person, either owner or manager, to allow the number
of occupants of a residential rental unit to exceed the maximum limit
asset forth on the occupancy permit or to violate any other provision of
this section.
C. Penalties. Any landlord or owner of a residential unit which violates any
of the provisions (coordinate with our code), together with all of the
subsections thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of $500 for each and every offense. Each day of the said
violation shall be a separate offense.
D. Fines as imposed through this article shall be collected as allowable by
law.
E. Each day during which any owner of a residential rental unit violates
any provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
F. This article and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the Borough of Baldwin or its agents or
representatives to such equitable or other remedies as may otherwise
be available with or without process of law.
G. In addition to the fines set forth herein, the Borough of Baldwin shall be
entitled to reasonable attorney's fees incurred in enforcing this article.
The said fees shall be added to any penalties set forth above.
H. The owners of all residential rental units in the Borough of Baldwin
shall have the responsibility of making sure that all occupants within
their rental units comply with and abide by this article of the Borough of
Baldwin.
I. If any section or provision of this article is adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, void or unenforceable, all the
remaining sections and provisions of this article shall remain in full
force and effect.
§ 133-10 BALDWIN CODE § 133-10
1:238
Chapter 134
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Manholes — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Tree, shrub root interference with public
sewers — See Ch. 150.
§ 133-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:239

ARTICLE I
Rents and Charges
[Adopted 3-16-1959 by Ord. No. 170; amended in its entirety
1-21-1963 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 134-1. Adoption of schedule of charges.
The schedule of charges for sewer service set forth in § 134-3 is adopted
as the basic rate schedule of charges to be imposed, billed and collected
from the owner of or user of water in each property served by the sewer
system leased by the Borough from the Municipal Authority of the Borough
of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
§ 134-2. Rentals and penalties to be a lien.
The sewer rentals and penalties hereby imposed shall be a lien on the
property served, and all delinquent bills therefor shall be entered as a
lien against such property, and such lien shall be filed in the office of
the Prothonotary of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal liens.
§ 134-3. Schedule of charges.
A. The Borough of Baldwin does hereby impose upon users of the sewer
system of the Borough of Baldwin the following basic rates and charges:
[Last amended 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 825]
(1) Basic rate per unit per month: $3 per unit.
(2) Per 500 gallons, or fraction thereof, of water used per month:
$3.22.
(3) Per 1,000 gallons: $11.52. [Amended 12-29-2010 by Ord. No.
832; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 84362; 12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
866; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 87663; 12-19-2017 by Ord. No.
88764; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 89465]
(4) Monthly surcharge: $6.75. [Amended 12-29-2010 by Ord. No.
832; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 84366; 12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
866; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 87667; 12-19-2017 by Ord. No.
88768; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 89469]
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2012.
63.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2017.
64.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2018.
65.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2019.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2012.
67.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2017.
68.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2018.
69.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-1-2019.
§ 134-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:241
B. The charges in Subsection A are subject to the following terms and
conditions:
(1) For the purpose of determining charges to be imposed, billed and
collected pursuant to the above race schedule, the term "unit" as
employed in this article is defined to mean a single-family dwelling
or each separate apartment or dwelling unit in a multiple-family or
apartment or double house or each store, restaurant, office, shop or
similar commercial establishment, irrespective of whether the
same is individually located or constitutes a part of a larger
shopping center building or kindred structure.
(2) (Reserved)70
(3) Consumers with private springs, private wells or other unmetered
water sources will pay a flat rate annual charge of $50 or install a
meter at their own expense.
(4) Any charges imposed by the Pleasant Hills Authority or the
Allegheny County Sanitary Authority for the nature or
characteristic of the sewage, for example, the BOD demand, the
suspended solids or similar commercial or industrial wastes, etc.,
will be assessed, at a rate in conformity with said charge, to the
Baldwin consumers contributing such sewage.
(5) Metered water which is not discharged to the sanitary sewerage
system may be distinguished from metered water that is
discharged to the sanitary sewerage system by the installation of
an additional meter or meters at the consumer's expense. Such
nonsanitary wastewater will not be subject to the above rate
schedule when so metered. No meter shall be installed or used for
such purpose without the prior approval of the Municipal Authority
of the Borough of Baldwin.
(6) That sewage bills shall be issued each month. All sewer usage
charges billed shall be payable on or before the due date as stated
on the bill. After such due date, the bill shall be deemed delinquent
and a penalty of 10% shall be added to the sewer usage charges for
that given monthly usage period. Interest, at the rate of 10% per
annum, shall accrue on the day after the due date and shall be
computed on both the amount of the sewer usage charges bill
added to the amount of the penalty. All unpaid sewer fees, charges
and/or assessments, together with penalty, interest, costs, fines,
expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney fees, shall
become a lien on the realty charged with the payment thereof and
shall remain a lien until fully paid and satisfied. [Amended
1-18-1971 by Ord. No. 401; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 630;
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 803; 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 868;
5-17-2016 by Ord. No. 871]
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), establishing charges for garbage grinder/disposal
units, as amended, was repealed 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 803.
§ 134-3 BALDWIN CODE § 134-3
1:242
(7) Where there exists no public sanitary sewer to provide service to
the basement area of a unit and the Borough Engineer has certified
to the Borough that flow by gravity from the basement area to the
existing sanitary sewer main servicing those floors above the
basement area is for all practical purposes not feasible, then there
shall be granted said consumer or user a thirty-three-and-onethird-
percent reduction in the total amount of the sewage service
charge as computed under the basic rate schedule.
§ 134-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:243

ARTICLE II
Sewer Revenue Account
[Adopted 3-16-1959 by Ord. No. 171]
§ 134-4. Depositary designated; authorized signatures.
Western Pennsylvania National Bank be and it hereby is designated as
depositary of the funds to be derived by the Borough from the operation of
the sewer system which is to be leased by the Borough from the Municipal
Authority of the Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and
is authorized to accept for deposit in an account to be known as the "Sewer
Revenue Account Fund" in the name of the Borough, subject to clearance or
collection, moneys, checks, drafts, notes, bills of exchange, acceptances or
other orders for the payment of moneys which may at any time come into its
possession with or without endorsement thereof by the Borough, payment
thereof to the depositary being hereby guaranteed, and said depositary is
authorized and directed to honor and pay and to charge to the accounts
of this Borough all checks, drafts, bills of exchange, acceptances, notes
or orders for the payment of money withdrawn on or addressed to said
depositary and signed on behalf of this Borough by the following officers:
President or Vice President and Secretary and Treasurer, whether the same
is payable to the order of or in favor of the officer or person signing them or
to any of said officers in his individual capacity or otherwise.
§ 134-5. Word usage.
The words used herein which are defined in the agreement of lease, dated
as of April 1, 1959, between the Municipal Authority of the Borough of
Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the Borough of Baldwin are
used meanings as so defined.
§ 134-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-5
1:245

ARTICLE III
Nonpayment of Charges
[Adopted 2-19-1973 by Ord. No. 431]
§ 134-6. Notice of nonpayment; shutoff authorized.
The Secretary of the Borough of Baldwin is by these presents authorized
and directed to forward to any water utility situate within or without the
Borough of Baldwin notice of nonpayment of any rental, rate or charge for
sewer, sewerage or treatment service by the owner or occupant of premises
by such utility wherein payment of said rental, rate or charge for sewer,
sewerage or sewage treatment service shall be delinquent for a period of
180 days or more. In addition thereto, said Secretary of the Borough shall
cause to be forwarded to the owner or occupant of said premises notice
of the nonpayment of said rental, rate or charge for sewer, sewerage or
sewage treatment service and that, unless the same shall be paid, the water
utility serving said owner or occupant of said premises shall be directed
to shut off the supply of water to such premises. In the event that the
delinquent rental, rate or charge for sewer, sewerage or sewage treatment
service shall not be paid within 10 days of the date of notice, then the said
Secretary shall notify the water utility serving the said owner or occupant
of the premises to shut off the supply of water to such premises. In addition
to the written notice by mail required hereinbefore, the Secretary of the
Borough shall cause to be posted at the main entrance to the premises
of such owner or occupant written notice of the intention of the Borough
that the water supply shall be shut off by the water utility serving the said
premises.
§ 134-7. Costs of shutoff; restoration of service.
The Secretary of the Borough is hereby authorized and directed to pay to
the water utility serving said premises the costs of such shutoff service and
the estimated loss of water revenues resulting from said shutoff; provided,
however, that if a dispute shall arise between the said water utility
regarding the costs of such service or the amount of such revenues lost
or regarding the provisions of any agreements with the said water utility,
then the Secretary shall not execute any such agreement but shall refer
the matter to Council for its determination. In determining the reasonable
costs of such shutoff service and estimated loss of revenues, the Secretary
shall review the use of water revenues and billing of the same for a period
of one year prior to such request for shutoff. The owner or occupant of
the premises thus affected may obtain the restoration of water service by
paying to the Secretary of the Borough all delinquent rentals, rates or
charges for sewer, sewerage or sewage treatment service owing by the
owner or occupant of said premises and, in addition, shall pay all costs
incurred by the Borough for such shutoff service and estimated loss of water
revenues paid to the water utility involved.
§ 134-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-8
1:247
§ 134-8. List of delinquent accounts; hardship cases.
Prior to the Secretary of the Borough taking the actions referred to in
§§ 134-6 and 134-7 hereof, the said Secretary shall first submit to the
Council of the Borough of Baldwin at its regular monthly meeting a list of
those accounts which are delinquent for a period of 180 days or more and
which would be subject to action under the provisions of this article. In
cases where a known hardship exists, the Council may excuse the Secretary
from enforcing the provisions of this article as against the owner or
occupant of the premises.
§ 134-8 BALDWIN CODE § 134-8
1:248
ARTICLE IV
Discharges Into Sewer System
[Adopted 10-15-1984 by Ord. No. 551; amended in its entirety
2-20-1995 by Ord. No. 685]
§ 134-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
hereafter designated:
ALCOSAN — The Allegheny County Sanitary Authority, including its
treatment facility and any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature.
CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the following
properties:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous under the
regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act as
specified in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 261.71
IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire hazard
in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN treatment facility which
has any of, but is not limited to, the following properties:
INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Borough which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater than
or equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
A.
It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than 6.35
millimeters 0.250 inch per year at a test temperature of 55° C. (130°
F.).
B.
It is liquid with a flash point less than 60° C. (140° F.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
A.
B. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151.
Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of ALCOSAN'S
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter referred
to as "NPDES") permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
B.
71.Editor's Note: The provisions of 25 Pa. Code Ch. 261 reserved April 30, 1999, effective May
1, 1999, 29 Pa.B. 2367. See now 25 Pa. Code Ch. 261a. Identification and Listing of
Hazardous Waste.
§ 134-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-9
1:249
PASS-THROUGH — The term "pass-through" shall mean any discharge of
a pollutant through ALCOSAN into the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with other discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of ALCOSAN's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged
into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of water.
REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create
an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALCOSAN
treatment facility, which has any of but is not limited to the following
properties:
or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulation): Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title 2 or more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" and
including state regulations contained in and the State Sludge
Management Plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating.
A.
B. It reacts violently with water.
C. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
When mixed with water, it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
D.
It is a cyanide- or sulfide-bearing waste which can generate toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human
health or the environment.
E.
§ 134-9 BALDWIN CODE § 134-9
1:250
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
"Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by EPA, pursuant to Section 307(A) of the
Act.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed
directly or indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any portion thereof.
§ 134-10. General discharge prohibition.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or indirectly
into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other conveyance
located in the Borough and transmitting substances into the facilities of
ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other wastewater which will:
§ 134-11. Specific discharge prohibition.
No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped sewer, pipe or
other conveyance located in the Borough and transmitting substances into
the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the following:
It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to a
strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
F.
It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or reaction
at standard temperature and pressure.
G.
It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51, or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53, or a Class B explosive as defined
in 49 CFR 173.88.
H.
A. Cause interference with the operation or performance of ALCOSAN's
treatment plant or other facilities; or
B. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
A. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel or
which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any portion of
the treatment plant.
§ 134-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-11
1:251
§ 134-12. Violation of standards, rules and regulations prohibited.
B. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive or hazardous waste, except
as provided for by ALCOSAN's Rules and Regulations.
C. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140° F. (60° C.).
D. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background levels for
either Alpha, Beta or Gamma radiation and/or any wastewater
containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration not in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
E. Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations of
ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN system.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, may create a public nuisance or
adversely affect public health or safety.
G. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
H. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food waste
garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer
type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good operating
condition.
I. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or from
sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water treatment
plants, unless the discharge of such sludges and other materials is
specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
J. Any pollutant including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
K. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities, such as residues, sludges or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any substance
which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines or regulations developed
under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state laws or regulations
applicable to the treatment or disposal of such effluent or such product.
A. No person shall take any action or do or cause to be done anything in
violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
B. The Pretreatment Regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this article by reference as though fully
set forth herein.
§ 134-11 BALDWIN CODE § 134-13
1:252
§ 134-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000 for each offense,
recoverable with costs, and in default of payment of the fine and costs
shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is continued shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition, any person violating any provision of the
ALCOSAN pretreatment regulations may be subject to administrative and
civil penalties as provided for by the Pretreatment Regulations and
administered by ALCOSAN. Such penalties may include, but are not limited
to, injunctive relief and penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation
as provided for by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35
P.S. § 752.1 et seq. Authority to so enforce the pretreatment regulations is
granted to ALCOSAN and is in addition to but not in place of any other
remedy available to the Borough.
§ 134-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-13
1:253

ARTICLE V
Sewer Connections; Private Systems
[Adopted 3-16-1959 by Ord. No. 172]
§ 134-14. Connection required of abutting properties.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Baldwin whose property abuts
upon any line of the sanitary sewers of the Municipal Authority of the
Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, shall connect, at his
own cost, the building, buildings or other structures located on said
property with the sanitary sewers of the Authority for the purpose of
disposing of all drainage as is customarily disposed of in a system of
sanitary sewers.
§ 134-15. Use of private systems by abutting properties prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupier of any property
abutting on any line of the sanitary sewer system of said Authority to employ
any means, either by septic tank, mine hole or otherwise, for the disposal
of sanitary sewage other than into and through the sanitary sewers of said
Authority.
§ 134-16. Notice to connect.
Where any structure is now or hereafter may be connected to any septic
tank or using any method by which sanitary sewage is disposed of or
eliminated other than through the sanitary sewer system of said Authority, it
shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or the Secretary of the Authority
or other person authorized by the Borough Council to notify the owner,
lessee or occupier of such structure in writing, either by personal service,
certified mail or registered mail, to disconnect the same and make proper
connections for the discharge and disposal of sewage through the sanitary
sewer system of the Authority as hereinafter provided, within 90 days after
receipt of such notice.
§ 134-17. Failure to comply; work by Borough.
In case any owner of property adjoining or adjacent to such sewer shall
neglect or refuse to connect with and use said sewers for such period of
90 days after notice to do so has been served upon him, either by personal
service, certified mail or by registered mail as aforesaid, the Borough or
its agents or the Authority or its agents may enter upon such property
and construct such connection. In such case, the Borough Secretary or
the Authority Secretary or other authorized person shall forthwith upon
completion of the work send an itemized bill of the cost of construction of
such connection to the owner of the property to which connection has been
so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal
by the owner of such property to pay said bill, a municipal lien for said
construction shall be filed within six months of the date of completion of the
§ 134-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-17
1:255
construction of said connection, the same to be subject in all respects to the
general law providing for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 134-18. Tapping permit required.
Any person required to connect with the sewer system of the Authority shall
make application for a tapping permit on forms furnished by the Borough
or the Authority and shall set forth in said application the character of
structure and use, the lot number and location and the name of the person
who is to make the connection.
§ 134-19. Connection of private systems prohibited.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at any time, now or hereafter, be connected with the
sanitary sewers of the Authority.
§ 134-20. Abandonment of private systems.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall hereafter be maintained upon any premises from
which connection with any of the Authority sewers shall have been made.
The Borough may, at its discretion, require every such privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle within 30 days after final
enactment of this article, in the case of premises now connected with a
sewer, and within 30 days after connection with a sewer, in the case of
premises hereafter so connected, to be abandoned, cleansed and filled
under the direction and supervision of the Borough or the Authority. Any
such privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or other receptacle not
abandoned, cleansed and filled as required by this section shall constitute a
nuisance and such nuisance may be abated on order of the Borough or the
Authority as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such property.
§ 134-21. Other prohibited connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation connected to the
Authority sewer system to connect any roof drain thereto or to permit, allow
or cause to enter into said sewer system any stormwater or surface water
or any sewage from any property other than that for which the permit was
issued, or any other substance, liquid, gas or solid, which is prohibited by
the terms of any other rule, regulation or ordinance adopted by the Borough
or the Authority for the operation of the sewer system.
§ 134-22. Plans and specifications.
The construction of all private sewers or laterals and their connections with
any lines of the sewer system shall be done in accordance with the plans
and specifications established by the Borough and the Authority, as the
same may be from time to time amended, copies of which are on file at
the Borough of Baldwin Municipal Building, and shall be inspected by the
Authority engineers before being covered.
§ 134-17 BALDWIN CODE § 134-23
1:256
§ 134-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 566]
Any person, persons, partnership or any agents or executive officers of any
corporation violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, for
each and every violation, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution or imprisonment for up to 30 days.
§ 134-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-23
1:257

ARTICLE VI
Connection Permits and Fees
[Adopted 4-1-1958 by Ord. No. 151; amended in its entirety
12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 771]
§ 134-24. Permit required.
No connection or reconnection shall be made by property owners with the
sanitary or trunk line sewers of the Borough of Baldwin until a written initial
permit for connection, or permit for reconnection, as applicable, has been
obtained from the Building Code Inspector of the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 134-25. Conditions for issuance of permit; fees.
A. Conditions for issuance of initial permit for connection; fees.
(1) An initial permit for connection. An initial permit for connection
shall be secured for the connection of sanitary facilities to said
sanitary or trunk line sewers in all cases where the sewer abutting
said property has been constructed by the Borough of Baldwin and
where the property abutting the said sewer has not been
heretofore assessed for the costs of the installation of said sewers,
or where the property owner or owners refuse to pay such
assessment or where a court of competent jurisdiction has declared
that the assessment of benefits against said property is of no legal
effect, provided that the owner of the property desiring to make
said connection shall pay into the treasury of the Borough of
Baldwin the sum of $2,000 per EDU.
B. Conditions for issuance of permit for reconnection; fees.
(1) Permit for reconnection. A permit for reconnection shall be secured
for the connection of sanitary facilities to said sanitary or trunk line
sewers, including but not limited to lateral lines intersecting
therewith, in all cases where the sewer abutting said property has
been constructed by the Borough of Baldwin and where the owner
of the property abutting said sewer, or any person acting on said
owner's direction, has or will cause any disturbance to be made at
or about said connection, or where any replacement is made of,
work is conducted upon, or repair is performed at or about said
sanitary facilities, which will result in the disconnection and
reconnection of any sanitary or trunk line sewers, including but not
limited to lateral lines intersecting therewith.
(2) No person shall cause any work to be performed at or about any
connection to the sanitary facilities of the Borough of Baldwin,
including but not limited to its sanitary sewer lines, trunk line
sewers, or any lateral lines intersecting therewith or joined thereto,
except after making application to the Building Code Inspector of
the Borough of Baldwin and upon issuance by said Inspector of a
permit therefor, and no such connection or excavation, once
§ 134-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-25
1:259
§ 134-26. Exceptions and/or adjustments to fees.
The Council of the Borough of Baldwin reserves the right to make
exceptions to and/or adjustments of the sums of money provided to be paid
to the treasury of the Borough of Baldwin in § 134-25A above.
commenced following issuance of a permit as provided in this
subsection, shall be made or covered over until final inspection and
certification thereof has been made and approved by the Inspector.
(3) A fee of $10 for tapping charges and permit and inspection fees
shall be due and payable to the Borough of Baldwin at the time
written application is made for a permit for reconnection.
(4) All applications for a permit for reconnection, and all requests to
the Building Code Inspector of the Borough of Baldwin to make any
inspection as required hereunder, shall be made at least three days
prior to the date on which construction is scheduled to commence
or certification is required.
§ 134-25 BALDWIN CODE § 134-26
1:260
ARTICLE VII
Disturbance or Interference with System
[Adopted 8-17-1959 by Ord. No. 182]
§ 134-27. Prohibited acts.
§ 134-28. Permission required to disturb vicinity of system.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or owner of lands
within said Borough desiring to change the contour of land over, above or
in the immediate vicinity of any storm or sanitary sewer installation shall
made written application to the Borough Secretary for permission so to do
and shall submit a plan of the proposed changes. Permission shall not be
granted unless and until the Borough Engineer shall have examined the
application and plan and made written certification to the Borough that the
proposed change will not be detrimental to the sewer installation or the
maintenance thereof.
§ 134-29. Restoration.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or any owner
of lands within said Borough who or which shall violate or fail to observe
the provisions of this article, insofar as it relates to the placement and/
or removal of earth and/or other fill over and in the immediate vicinity
of sanitary and storm sewer installations, shall forthwith restore the land
to its original condition at his or their own cost and expense, and if said
condition is not corrected within 10 days after written notification so to do
by the Borough Secretary or the secretary of any authority created by said
Borough, the Borough of Baldwin or any authority created by said Borough
may enter upon and restore said land to its original condition, and the cost
and expense thereof, together with a penalty of 10%, shall be collected from
the owner or owners of such land and/or those violating this article in the
manner provided by law; provided, however, that the recovery of such costs
A. No person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or owner of
lands within the Borough of Baldwin shall in any manner whatsoever
disturb, interfere with or otherwise hamper the location, position,
stability and/or operation of any storm or sanitary sewer installation
owned and/or maintained by the Borough of Baldwin or any authority
created by said Borough.
B. No person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or any owner
of lands within said Borough shall in any manner whatsoever disturb
the contour of land over, above or in the immediate vicinity of any storm
or sanitary sewer installation owned and/or maintained by said Borough
or any authority created by said Borough, either by adding earth or
other fill or by removing earth or other fill in the vicinity of such
installations, without having preliminarily obtained written
authorization in the manner hereinafter provided for.
§ 134-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-29
1:261
and expenses may be in addition to the penalties otherwise provided by this
article.
§ 134-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 566]
Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or any owner of
lands who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of prosecution or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days; provided,
however, that each day's continuance of a violation after notice has been
given by the individuals above authorized shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 134-29 BALDWIN CODE § 134-30
1:262
ARTICLE VIII
Inspection and Certification of Sanitary and Storm Sewers
[Adopted 5-1-1989 by Ord. No. 606]
§ 134-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DYE TEST — A test conducted on real property by the use of colored
innocuous substances that will reveal the direction and flow of stormwater
or surface water.
ILLEGAL STORMWATER OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The
discharge of basement seepage or groundwater of the connection of
downspouts, roof drainage, driveway drainage or surface or areaway
drainage into the sanitary sewer system.
MORTGAGE — The transfer, assignment, pledge or hypothecation of any
interest in real property to a lender for value, which transfer, assignment,
pledge or hypothecation is evidenced by a mortgage, deed of trust or other
security instrument.
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the Borough concerning municipal liens and real
property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation or the chief executive officer of any corporation, institution,
agency, authority, partnership or member of such partnership or other
lawful entity.
SALE — The transfer or assignment, with or without consideration, of any
interest in real property situate within the Borough, whether or not the
same is to a person or persons related by blood to the transferor.
SANITARY SEWER CERTIFICATION — An official statement from the
Borough stating that there are no illegal storm sewer or surface water
connections to the sanitary sewer lines on the real property to be sold,
transferred, assigned or mortgaged.
TEMPORARY SANITARY SEWER CERTIFICATION — A temporary
statement of certification from the Borough issued pursuant to the
provisions of § 134-34 of this article.
VIDEO CAMERA INSPECTION — Any commonly accepted method of
testing whereby a video camera is inserted into and travels throughout
the private lateral sewer line of real property to determine if any illegal
stormwater, groundwater, or surface wetter is entering the sanitary sewer
system.[Added 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 844]
§ 134-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-32
1:263
§ 134-32. Sanitary sewer certification.
After the effective date of this article, any person or persons selling or
mortgaging any interest in real property situate within the Borough of
Baldwin, as those terms are defined herein, shall be required to provide
to the purchaser and to the appropriate Borough officials, designated
hereafter a sanitary sewer certification, which certification shall be
provided to the purchaser or designated Borough officials on the time or
times designated in § 134-33 of this article.
§ 134-33. Application; dye test; fee.
Any person selling or mortgaging real property (hereinafter "applicant")
located within the Borough shall make application on a form furnished by
the Borough at least 21 days before the date of sale or mortgage. The
applicant shall then have a plumber who is registered and licensed by the
Allegheny County Health Department perform a dye test on the property to
be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged or refinanced. Such plumber shall
complete the appropriate portions on the form and certify that the property
has been dye tested and certify the results of such test. In the event that
there are no illegal stormwater or surface water connections or discharges,
the Borough Secretary, or his or her designate, shall issue a sanitary sewer
certification upon payment of a fee of $25. When an illegal stormwater or
surface water connection or discharge is discovered by means of the abovementioned
dye testing, no sanitary sewer certification will be issued until
the illegal connections or discharges are removed and certification of such
removal by a registered licensed plumber is received.
§ 134-34. Temporary certificate.
A. A temporary sanitary sewer certification may be issued at the
Borough's sole discretion when either:
(1) The applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because
of weather conditions. When such is the case, the applicant shall
provide the Borough with security in the amount of $200 to
guarantee that the dye test will be performed. The applicant will
cause to have performed the dye test within 14 days of written
notification from the Borough which will be given at such time as
weather conditions make the dye test possible. In addition, the
applicant shall provide a signed, written acknowledgment from the
purchaser agreeing to correct, at the purchaser's sole expense, any
violations that may be discovered as a result of such subsequent
dye tests. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit any purchaser
from requiring the applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any
costs incurred; provided, however, that the primary responsibility
shall run with the land and no such agreement shall affect the
Borough enforcement powers or excuse the seller, mortgagor or
purchaser from performance hereunder.
(2) Illegal stormwater or surface water connection or discharge.
§ 134-32 BALDWIN CODE § 134-34
1:264
§ 134-35. Municipal lien and tax verification letter.
(a) When an illegal stormwater or surface water connection or
discharge is discovered and the necessary remedial activities
to correct such connection or discharge would require a length
of time such as would create a practical hardship for the
applicant, the applicant may apply to the Borough Secretary
for a temporary sanitary sewer certificate which may only be
issued when the applicant provides the Borough with all of the
following:
[1] A bona fide, executed contract between the applicant and
a registered licensed plumber to complete the necessary
remedial work with the Borough listed therein as a third
party beneficiary.
[2] Cash security in the amount of said contract posted with
the Borough.
[3] An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all
cost overruns related to the remedial work, together with
a license to enter upon the property to complete work in
case of default of the contractor.
B. The temporary sanitary sewer certification shall expire within 30 days
after its issuance, and at the expiration of the same the security thus
posted shall be applied by the Borough to have the necessary remedial
work completed. Any excess of funds remaining as security shall be
refunded to the applicant, but in the event that, the security posted is
insufficient to complete the remedial work, the purchaser, or, in the
case of a refinance, the property owner, shall be charged for the same
and shall be responsible for payment thereof.
A. A request for a municipal lien or tax verification letter must be
accompanied by a valid sanitary sewer certification and the following
fees, which shall be delivered at least seven days before such letters are
to be provided:
(1) Municipal lien letter: $10.
(2) Tax verification letter: $10.
B. The Borough shall, from time to time, have the authority to change the
fees required for the issuance of such letters by resolution which shall
be adopted from time to time by the Borough Council of the Borough.
C. Where requested by a property owner or his agent and subject to time
availability as determined solely by the Borough Secretary, the Borough
may issue municipal lien and tax verification letters on two days' notice
upon the payment of a priority service fee of $10 in addition to the fees
set forth above.
§ 134-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-35.1
1:265
§ 134-35.1. Video camera inspection. [Added 3-20-2012 by Ord. No.
844]
§ 134-36. Adoption of rules and regulations by Borough Council.
§ 134-37. Exception.
Property which has been constructed in accordance with a valid building
permit and has been inspected by the Borough Building Inspector and the
Plumbing Division of the Allegheny County Health Department may be sold
or conveyed without evidence of compliance as required by the article;
provided, however, that if such property is sold after five years from the
A. As part of the document of certification application process, outlined in
§§ 134-32, 134-33, 134-34 and 134-35 of this article, in addition to the
dye test performed by a plumber registered and licensed by the
Allegheny County Health Department, the Borough of Baldwin does
hereby require a video camera inspection of the private sewer lateral
performed by a plumber registered and licensed by the ACHD.
B. When, as a result of a video camera inspection, it is determined that
there is a defect in the private lateral whereby stormwater, surface
water, or groundwater is being allowed to flow into the private lateral,
no document of certification will be executed until the private lateral
line is repaired and certification of such repair is certified by a plumber
registered and licensed by the ACHD.
C. The Borough is hereby empowered to make reasonable rules and
regulations for the operation and enforcement of the video camera
inspection requirement. All rules and regulations issued pursuant to
this section shall be in writing.
D. This section shall not preclude the Borough from requiring video
camera inspections or other inspections of the private systems for the
purpose of locating defective piping which would allow surface water or
groundwater to enter the system.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for the operation and enforcement of this article as the
same may become necessary, which shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Establishing acceptable forms of security or guaranties.
(2) Establishing the form of applications, purchaser acknowledgments
and plumber certifications.
(3) Limiting the times of year in which a temporary sanitary sewer
certificate is available for reasons of weather.
B. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted at a regular meeting of the
Borough Council and shall be posted in the offices of the Zoning Officer
and the Borough Secretary.
§ 134-35.1 BALDWIN CODE § 134-37
1:266
date of its original occupancy, compliance is mandatory. A sanitary sewer
certificate granted under this article shall be valid for a period of five years,
and any sale taking place after said five-year period shall be subject to
the provisions of this article, and a new sanitary sewer certificate shall be
required.
§ 134-38. Effect on other laws.
Nothing in this article shall limit in any manner whatsoever the Borough's
right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as or
offered as a defense to any citation issued by any municipal corporation or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to any other law or ordinance.
§ 134-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this article and, in particular, the provisions of §§ 134-32,
134-33 and 134-34 hereof, or of any regulation or requirement pursuant
hereto and authorized hereby shall, upon conviction before any District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of $1,000 and, in default of payment
thereof, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 134-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-39
1:267

ARTICLE IX
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 733]
§ 134-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of existing and new holding tanks designed to receive and
retain sewage whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby
declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of this municipality.
§ 134-41. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of the terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Council of the Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether permanent or
temporary, which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water-carrying
system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough of Baldwin
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Borough of Baldwin.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply for recreation.
§ 134-42. Rights and privileges granted.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Borough the control and methods of holding tank use, sewage disposal and
sewage collection and transportation thereof.
§ 134-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-43
1:269
§ 134-43. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 134-44. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Borough
and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 134-45. Rates and charges.
The Borough shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rules, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rules as authorized by applicable law.
§ 134-46. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges; reports;
inspections.
§ 134-47. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of all improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Authority will receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Authority will receive a copy of all reports forwarded to the
Department of Environmental Resources.
D. The Authority will complete an annual inspection of each permitted
holding tank at a cost of no more than $150 to be charged to the owner.
The Authority will retain a copy of all annual inspection reports.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of the Borough of Baldwin, the provisions of any applicable
law and the rules and regulations of the Authority and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
C. Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose
of the contents therein.
§ 134-43 BALDWIN CODE § 134-48
1:270
§ 134-48. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 134-47 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $300 and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the county prison for a period not in
excess of 30 days.
§ 134-49. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 134-47 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
Borough or Authority by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 134-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-49
1:271

ARTICLE X
Pleasant Hills Authority Pretreatment Standards
[Adopted 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 787; amended in its entirety
1-22-2008 by Ord. No. 811]
§ 134-50. Industrial users standards. [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord.
No. 834; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 867]
Pollutant
Local Limit
(mg/l)
Mercury 0.0062
Free Cyanide 3.21
Copper 0.32
Cadmium 0.061
§ 134-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-50
1:273

ARTICLE XI
Collection of Sewer Tap-In Fees
[Adopted 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 788]
§ 134-51. Collection by Borough.
The Borough of Baldwin is authorized and requested to collect tapping fees
on behalf of the Pleasant Hills Authority at the same time that it issues a
building permit on the subject property or at such time it collects its own
tapping fee, whichever is first.
§ 134-52. Remission to Authority.
The Borough of Baldwin is authorized to remit the tapping fees collected
on behalf of the Pleasant Hills Authority to the Pleasant Hills Authority,
retaining 5% of the total, not to exceed $1,000.
§ 134-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-52
1:275

ARTICLE XII
MS4 Prohibited Discharges
[Adopted 12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 858]
§ 134-53. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Baldwin
MS4 Prohibited Discharge Ordinance."
§ 134-54. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 134-55. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 134-54 of this article, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion
and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water
resources.
B. Reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal
separate stormsewer systems is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth,
their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated
small municipal separate stormsewer systems (MS4s).
A. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
B. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
§ 134-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-55
1:277
§ 134-56. Statutory authority.
The municipality also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
§ 134-57. Applicability.
All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved
stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to
regulation by this article.
§ 134-58. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 134-59. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this article invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 134-60. Compatibility with other requirements.
Actions taken under this article do not affect any responsibility, permit or
approval for any activity regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or
ordinance.
§ 134-61. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
D. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
E. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
F. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all facilities and all SWM
BMPs that are implemented within the municipality.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
§ 134-55 BALDWIN CODE § 134-61
1:278
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this article. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of
two broad categories or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this
article, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or
behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact of
pollutants with stormwater runoff whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P.S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials. Earth
disturbance activity is subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25
Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any activities that may affect stormwater
runoff and any activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges
to a regulated small MS4.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
§ 134-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-61
1:279
§ 134-62. Stormwater management requirements.
§ 134-63. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 134-64. Operation and maintenance agreements.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
A. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
article and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual),72 No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
B. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this article.
C. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be implemented, operated,
and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this article
and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code,
the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.
D. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.73
A. Facilities, areas, or structures used as Stormwater Management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
B. O and M plans for stormwater management approved pursuant to 25
Pa. Code § 102 after the date of this article shall be recorded as a
restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.
C. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
72.Editor's Note: See § 134-73B.
73.Editor's Note: See § 134-73A.
§ 134-61 BALDWIN CODE § 134-64
1:280
§ 134-65. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Prior to completing construction of a SWM site plan, the property
owner shall sign and record an operation and maintenance (O and M)
agreement (see Appendix A) covering all stormwater control facilities
which are to be privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall operate and maintain all
facilities in accordance with the approved schedule(s) in the O and
M plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for operation and maintenance activities. In the event
of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to
the Municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O and M) of
the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O and M agreement,
the municipality may perform the services required and charge the
owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against
the property.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
C below and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution a regulated small MS4 or to the
waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
§ 134-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-65
1:281
§ 134-66. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs.
§ 134-67. Right-of-Entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this article.
§ 134-68. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(16) Rising groundwaters.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
A. Annually for the first five years following construction.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
§ 134-65 BALDWIN CODE § 134-69
1:282
§ 134-69. Enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any
approved SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or structures without the written
approval of DEP or a delegated County Conservation District, and the
municipality.
§ 134-70. Suspension and revocation.
§ 134-71. Penalties.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of an
approved SWM site plan or O and M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to a regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act which
constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers
the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this article.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this article.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
§ 134-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-71
1:283
§ 134-72. Appeals.
§ 134-73. References.
enforcement of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this article, may appeal to the municipality
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this article, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
§ 134-71 BALDWIN CODE § 134-73
1:284
ARTICLE XIII
Fees for Delinquent Accounts and Delinquent Claims
[Adopted 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 869]
§ 134-74. Fees established.
It is hereby enacted and ordained the authority of the same that in addition
to the principal sewage rental charge, penalty and interest due on any
sewage claim or sewage account as set forth in ordinances and any
amendments thereto, the Borough of Baldwin hereby establishes the
following additional fee schedules and additional charges as authorized by
law to be imposed on delinquent accounts and delinquent claims of the
Borough of Baldwin which charges are in addition to any other ordinance
and/or resolution enacted or adopted by the Borough assessing cost,
penalties, interest and fees, attorneys' fees for the collection of delinquent
accounts:
A. An additional collection and accounting fee of $6 shall be added each
month to each delinquent account of the Baldwin Borough that remains
delinquent for 60 days from the date first billed. The additional
delinquent fee of $6 will be added for each additional month that the
delinquent account remains delinquent until the entire account
becomes current. Each account that becomes delinquent in payment for
any portion of the bill or for any amount due for a period of 60 days or
longer will be assessed the delinquent accounting and collection fee
until the entire account balance is made current.
B. Each delinquent account of the Borough of Baldwin that is scheduled
for shut off of services due to a delinquency in the account shall be
assessed and charged a property posting fee of $15 for the posting of
the notice of termination of services. Each individual posting of the
realty of a notice to terminate services will result in a charge of $15
being assessed and charged to the said posted delinquent account for
each posting.
C. Each property to which water service has been terminated due to
delinquency in the sewage user's fee account owes to the Borough of
Baldwin shall be assessed $35 for the termination of water services plus
an additional accounting and management fee of $10; provided,
however, if the water company increases or decreases its current fee to
terminate the water services from $35 than the amount charged to the
Borough by the water company for said termination shall be the amount
assessed and charged to the service account, plus an additional
accounting and management fee of $10.
D. Each property that has had its water service terminated due to the
aforesaid delinquency will be assessed and charged a service charge of
$35 to reinstate water services plus an additional accounting and
management fee of $10; provided, however, if the Water Company
increases or decreases its current fee to reinstate water service from
$35; than the amount charged to the Borough by the Water Company
§ 134-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-74
1:285
shall be the amount assessed and charged to the reinstated service
account plus an additional accounting and management fee of $10.
E. If payment is made by any negotiable instrument that is dishonored for
any reason (i.e., NSF, closed account stop payments, etc.), then the rate
payer or user of the sewerage collection and treatment system of the
Borough of Baldwin shall be assessed and charged $38 for each
dishonored negotiable instrument. In the event that the Bank's fee
charged for dishonored Checks increase, then the aforesaid amount of
$38 will be increased an equal amount and shall be charged to the
drawer of the check, to the maker of the negotiable instrument
delinquent account, or to the account.
F. Cost of postage and/or certified mail shall be assessed and charged at
the actual postage cost to the delinquent account.
G. Notary public fees shall be assessed and charged at the actual cost
incurred to the delinquent account.
H. Fees for online payments shall be charged and assessed to the rate
payer. The current fee is $1.50 for each ACH transaction and $1.50 for
each online credit card or debit card charge; provided, however, if the
online clearing company fees increase, then the fee charged by said
clearing company shall be the fee imposed.
I. Fees for title certifications shall be $30 per certification and paid by the
title company or the buyer of the real estate.
J. This section relates to costs and legal fees incurred in collection of
delinquent sewage accounts of the Borough of Baldwin. Any sewage
account that is not fully paid on or before the due date of the first
delinquency notice, (i.e., 60 days from the initial bill), is hereby
declared to be a delinquent account subject to these charges set forth in
this section; provided however, dishonored negotiable instruments are
assessed and charged the aforesaid fee of $38 with the returned of any
check unpaid for any reason even if the account is not delinquent. The
costs and fees that are to be assessed to the delinquent accounts are to
be paid directly to the designated Borough's collector of sewage user's
fees, and shall be kept by the aforesaid collector and/or the collector's
attorneys who prosecute the claims as payment for the collection,
managing, and accounting fees. Any cost prepaid by the Borough to the
Borough's collector for the collection of said delinquent accounts that is
recovered from the delinquent accounts shall be reimbursed to the
Borough to the extent of the moneys that were recovered from and
were paid by the delinquent property owner or delinquent account
holder. The Borough shall advance posting payments of $15 per posting
to the designated Borough's collector prior to the postings, or such cost
shall be offset in the monthly amounts due the Borough. The Borough
shall pay the shutoff cost either directly to the water company or to the
Borough's collector to pay to the water company upon billing by the
water company. In the event that any of the delinquent accounts are
§ 134-74 BALDWIN CODE § 134-74
1:286
rental property, then the owner of the realty is responsible for these
additional costs and fees in addition to any unpaid usage charges,
penalties and interest. Landlords are required to register all rental
realty and properties with the designated collector of the sewage
accounts, and landlords who have registered with the designated
collector that the realty is a rental property with a tenant(s) shall
receive a notice of a delinquency in the tenant's account within 30 days
after the account becomes delinquent. Landlords who fail to register
with the designated collector that the realty is rental realty or if the
account is in the landlord's name, then there is a nonrebuttable
presumption that the landlord is responsible for the payment of the
sewage account, even if the landlord did not receive the thirty-day
notice of the tenant's delinquency.
K. That in addition to all costs incurred, the schedule of legal and
administrative fees that the designated collector of sewage usage fees
or his designated attorney or agent are authorized to charge in the
collection of delinquent sewerage accounts are as follows:
Schedule of Legal Fees
Legal Services Fee for Services
Preparing and sending demand
letter regarding payment of
delinquency
$75 assessed to the delinquent
account
Filing of lien $150 assessed to the delinquent
account
Title search $250 assessed to the delinquent
account
Preparation and service of writ of
scire facias
$600 assessed to the delinquent
account
Required additional notice and
presentation of related motions
regarding federal tax liens,
judgments and mortgages
$150 assessed to the delinquent
account
Alternative service of legal
pleadings
$250 assessed to the delinquent
account
Entry of judgment $150 assessed to the delinquent
account
Preparation of writ of execution
and attend initial sheriff sale
$750 assessed to the delinquent
account
Preparation of documents and
attendance at second sheriff sale
$600 assessed to the delinquent
account
Review schedule of distribution
and resolve distribution issues
$250 assessed to the delinquent
account
Installment payment agreement at
taxpayer's request
$100 assessed to the delinquent
account
§ 134-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-74
1:287
Schedule of Legal Fees
Legal Services Fee for Services
Services not covered above $150 per hour — attorney
$75 per hour — paralegals
$50 per hour — law clerks
§ 134-74 BALDWIN CODE § 134-74
1:288
Chapter 136
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 81.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 100.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 105.
Recycling — See Ch. 132.
§ 136-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 136-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of
1980 (P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).74
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
provided that such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes
the residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and
marketing of all agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural
crops or commodities grown on what are usually recognized and
accepted as farms, forest or other agricultural lands.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited
to appliances, furniture, trees, branches or stumps which may require
special handling due to their size, shape or weight.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual
waste building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin.
74.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 134-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:289
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.75
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a
manner such that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste
enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the
waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisances as
odors, gases or vectors.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation which has been licensed by the Borough or
its designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse
for a fee as herein prescribed.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes,
as defined in the Act, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population;
or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
75.Editor's Note: This department was split into two and reorganized by Act 1995-18. Now
the Department of Environmental Protection, 71 P.S. § 510-1, or Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources, 71 P.S. § 1340.301 et seq. For purposes of this
chapter, reference is to the DEP.
§ 136-2 BALDWIN CODE § 136-2
1:290
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. The term does not include sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency or any
other legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In any provisions of this chapter prescribing a fine,
imprisonment or penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term
"person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or
other legal entity having officers and directors.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing
the volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology
used to convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse.
"Processing" facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities,
composting facilities and resource-recovery facilities.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations;
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste"
shall not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal
Control Act.76 "Residual waste" shall not include treatment sludges
from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit issued
pursuant to the Clean Streams Law.77
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes but is not limited to
ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and yard
cleanings.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of
materials placed for collection or from solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Baldwin.
SEWAGE TREATMENT RESIDUES — Any coarse screenings, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludges from sewage treatment plants and
pumpings from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid
waste and require proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
76.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 136-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:291
§ 136-3. Prohibitions.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall
be presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year
constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used
as an adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the Borough any
garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other municipal or residual solid
waste, including agricultural waste, domestic waste and hazardous
waste, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and rules
and regulations of the Department of Health of the State of
Pennsylvania and the County of Allegheny.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste or other
wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof within the Borough except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and rules and regulations of
the Department of Health of the State of Pennsylvania and the County
of Allegheny.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste or other
wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof in the Borough except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, any Department rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the rules and
regulations of the Department of Health of the State of Pennsylvania
and the County of Allegheny.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove
any solid waste or other wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof from
public or private property within the Borough without first securing a
license to do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste or other wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof that are
stored or deposited for collection within the Borough.
§ 136-2 BALDWIN CODE § 136-3
1:292
§ 136-4. Storage.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes or other wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof within the
Borough except at an approved and permitted resource-recovery
facility under Act 97.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste or other
wastes enumerated in § 136-3A hereof in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, body of water, public or private property within the Borough
except as provided in this chapter.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regulatory scheduled collections and shall
place and store all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following preparations standards:
(1) All municipal waste shall be drained free of liquids before being
placed in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers in accordance with Ordinance No. 619, adopted
contemporaneously herewith.78
(4) Subject to Ordinance No. 619, garden clippings and tree trimmings
shall be placed in approved containers or shall be cut and tied
securely into bundles. Bundles shall be not more than three feet in
length, not more than two feet in diameter and not more than 40
pounds in weight. No single piece shall be more than three inches
in diameter.
(5) Subject to Ordinance No. 619, newspapers and magazines shall be
placed in approved containers or shall be tied securely into bundles
of not more than 40 pounds in weight.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 132, Recycling.
§ 136-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-4
1:293
(6) When specified by the Borough or its designated representative,
special preparation and storage procedures may be required to
facilitate the collection and resource recovery of certain waste
materials.
(7) Carpet and/or carpet padding shall be placed in an approved closed
container or must be cut in lengths not exceeding eight feet and
securely tied. No single piece shall be more than 40 pounds in
weight.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the
Borough or its designated representative. Individual containers and
bulk containers utilized for storage of municipal waste shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 30 gallons and a loaded
weight of not more than 40 pounds and shall be limited to three
such containers per residence.
(4) Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers,
provided that the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top for
collection and shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and
a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
(5) All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply with
the minimum standards established by the National Sanitation
Foundation.
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times. Solid
waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned,
rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary, to prevent
the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides
of the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent public
nuisances.
§ 136-4 BALDWIN CODE § 136-4
1:294
§ 136-5. Collection.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this chapter or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notice from the Borough or its designated
representative.
(5) Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a collection
point specified by the Borough or its designated representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
for collection, the containers shall be properly stored on the
owner's or customer's premises at all times.
(7) Bulk waste items such as furniture, appliances and tires shall be
stored in a manner that will prevent the accumulation or collection
of water, the harborage of rodents, safety hazards and fire hazards.
Doors must be removed from appliances.
F. The storage of all municipal waste from multifamily residential units,
commercial establishments, institutions and industrial lunchroom or
office waste sources is subject to the regulations and standards set
forth in this chapter. The type, size and placement requirements for
bulk containers shall be determined by the waste generator and the
waste hauler and are subject to approval by the Borough.
A. The Borough shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish and
bulky wastes from individual residences. Multifamily residential owners
shall contract with a private collector or collectors to provide this
essential residential collection service.
B. All single-family residences shall utilize the residential collection
service provided by the Borough.
C. All commercial, institutional and industrial establishments shall
negotiate and individually contract collection service with the
Borough's collector or any other properly licensed waste hauler of their
choice.
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week.
E. All commercial, institutional, public and industrial lunchroom and office
waste containing garbage shall be collected at least once a week.
Rubbish collection from these sources shall be made as often as
necessary to control health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly
conditions. The Borough reserves the right to require more frequent
collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published, as deemed
necessary, by the Borough or its contracted hauler.
§ 136-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-5
1:295
§ 136-6. Charges.
G. Placement of container(s) at curbside may be no earlier than 5:00 p.m.
on the day prior to the designated collection day and must be removed
from curbside to the storage place no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of
collection.
H. All waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through
Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or on Saturdays
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless prior approval or
any exception has been granted by the Borough. No collection, hauling
or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday.
I. All licensed haulers and haulers under contract with the Borough shall
comply with the following standards and regulations:
(1) All municipal waste collected within the Borough shall ultimately
be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny County Solid
Waste Plan 1990, or in subsequent revisions thereto.
(2) Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97 and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, the attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(5) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The Council of the Borough shall be authorized to make funds available,
in accordance with the laws and procedures of the Borough, for the
establishment, maintenance and operation of a municipal solid waste
collection and disposal system or for the contracting of such service to a
private collector.
B. Annual costs shall be made available by the Borough on any
competitively bid residential collection service contract that may be
awarded by the Borough.
C. The Borough shall be responsible for the payment of any fees for solid
waste collection and disposal for residential customers receiving
standard contracted service.
D. The Borough's contracted hauler and other licensed haulers shall be
responsible for the collection of any fees for private arrangement or
§ 136-5 BALDWIN CODE § 136-6
1:296
§ 136-7. Enforcement.
The Borough may petition the appropriate court for an injunction, either
mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 136-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-17-1993 by Ord. No.
657]
Chapter 138
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
private contract solid waste collection and disposal services provided
to any individual, residential, commercial, institutional or industrial
source within the Borough.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine of
not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 or, in default of payment of
such fine, then by imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days,
or both. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
B. In the alternative, any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be cited before the District Magistrate for a summary offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined for a sum of not less than $100
nor more than $500 and, in default of the payment of such fine, shall be
imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days. Each day of violation
shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 136-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-8
1:297

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 138-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Baldwin
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 138-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Municipality finds that:
§ 138-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 138-2 of this chapter through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including regulation of development and activities causing accelerated
runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the
protection of people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the
environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low-impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by
using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1)
infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire, and/or 3) harvest and use
precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices
and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of
predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
§ 138-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:299
§ 138-4. Statutory authority.
The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, and/or the Act
of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as
amended, The Stormwater Management Act.
§ 138-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 138-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 138-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes
and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
Municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
§ 138-3 BALDWIN CODE § 138-8
1:300
§ 138-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 138-9. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 138-10. Waivers.
A. If the Municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the Municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to § 138-10B. The proposed area of
disturbance shall be less than one acre. The request for a modification
or waiver shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, and
shall accompany the stormwater management site plan submitted to
the Municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the
request is based, the provisions of the chapter involved, and the
proposed modification. The designated plan reviewer shall review the
request to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter,
including Subsection B below. If acceptable to the Municipality, the
Municipality may grant the waiver or modification.
B. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the Municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the
land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or
detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended
outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Hardship
must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions
of the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden
shall not be considered a hardship. Modifications shall not substantially
or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany
the stormwater management site plan submission, as directed in
§ 138-10A above.
C. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the Municipality.
§ 138-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-10
1:301
§ 138-11. Version of regulations and standards.
Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard shall be interpreted to
refer to the latest or most current version of that document.
§ 138-12. Disclaimer of liability.
D. This section shall not apply to requests for waiver or modification to the
provisions of Article V, Design Criteria. All requests for waivers or
modifications from Article V shall be reviewed by the Municipality for
applications of any size earth disturbance.
A. For regulatory purposes, the degree of stormwater management sought
by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable. This chapter
shall not impose upon the Municipality any legal duty in addition to
those duties otherwise imposed under the Stormwater Management
Act upon the Municipality, any appointed or elected official, employee
or representative of the Municipality. It is not the intention of the
Municipality to guarantee the elimination of harm resulting from
stream flow, floods, rain, snow, or stormwater runoff; or erosion
resulting therefrom. It is the intention of the Municipality to create
reasonable stormwater management regulations which balance several
competing interests in an appropriate fashion with the emphasis on
public safety.
B. This chapter does not imply that areas within or outside any identified
flood-prone area will be free from flooding or flood damages.
C. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or with any condition
imposed by the Municipality or a Municipality official hereunder, shall
relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or
property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor
impose any liability upon the Municipality for damages to person or
property.
D. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty
of any kind by the Municipality, or by an official, employee, or
consultant thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use,
or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of
action against the Municipality, or an official, employee, or consultant
thereof, for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
§ 138-10 BALDWIN CODE § 138-12
1:302
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 138-13. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
B. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for this chapter only.
ACT 167 — The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and
quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the Municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the Municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of
two broad categories or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this
chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
§ 138-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-13
1:303
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands, to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P. S. § 851(c)) that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see return
period.
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER — A qualified professional as defined
herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County Conservation
District, that has been designated by the Municipality to be the
reviewer of SWM site plans for the Municipality, and shall be
understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Municipality
within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the
next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See project site.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 138-13 BALDWIN CODE § 138-13
1:304
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS79).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration. Any
surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious surfaces. In addition, any surface designed
79.Editor's Note: See § 138-43A and B.
§ 138-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-13
1:305
to be constructed of permeable, pervious or porous concrete, asphalt,
or pavers shall be considered an impervious surface.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species
that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and
displace native vegetation. (see http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/
public/documents/document/dcnr 010314.pdf for a list of invasive
species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings: the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving a) a
group of two or more buildings or b) the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features; any subdivision of
land; development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.80
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on-site.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 138-13 BALDWIN CODE § 138-13
1:306
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa.
Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.81
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak
rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — A watershed or portion of a watershed
for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan.82
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs
located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.83
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 138-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-13
1:307
accordance with this chapter. "Stormwater management site plan" will
be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this chapter.
STREAM — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code,84 Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — See stream.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 138-13 BALDWIN CODE § 138-13
1:308
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 138-14. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 138-15:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the Municipality, in accordance with
§ 138-24, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in
regulated activities.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.85 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual86), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated. Comment on the adequacy of the Erosion and Sedimentation
Controls may be provided by the Municipality per the requirements of
Allegheny County Conservation District. The provisions of the Borough
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance (Chapter 87) are
incorporated herein by reference.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 138-16 and the peak
rate controls of § 138-17 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
85.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See § 138-43D.
§ 138-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-14
1:309
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be
created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a
minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan, however, if in the judgement of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties are being affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the Municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual87). If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable
to the designated plan reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID
and green infrastructure is not practicable.
H. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at
strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter.
I. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
87.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
§ 138-14 BALDWIN CODE § 138-14
1:310
§ 138-15. Exemptions.
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm. Infiltration tests performed at the facility locations and proposed
basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must
support time-to-empty calculations if infiltration is a factor.
J. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak
rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual,
Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1488 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
K. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,89 and the Storm
Water Management Act.90
L. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.91
M. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.92
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than 0.25 acre and propose an increase in impervious area of less than
5,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in § 138-19 of this
chapter except as provided in Subsection B below.
B. Earth disturbances between 0.05 acre (2,178 square feet) and 0.25 acre
(10,890 square feet) of earth disturbance must submit a SWM site plan
to the Municipality which shall consist of the following items and
related supportive material needed to determine compliance with
§§ 138-16 through 138-18. The applicant can use the protocols in the
Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan (Appendix C).
88.Editor's Note: See § 138-43E.
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
90.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 138-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-15
1:311
§ 138-16. Volume controls.
The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices provided
in the BMP Manual93 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever
(1) General description of proposed stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District where
appropriate.
(3) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that is proposed; proposed structures, roads,
paved areas, and buildings; and a statement, signed by the
applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved
drainage plan must be approved by the Municipality, and that a
revised erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted to the
Municipality or Conservation District for approval.
(4) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail; and all calculations, assumptions, and
criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities
must be shown.
C. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
D. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
E. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase
impervious area, and underground infrastructure projects are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter, provided the activities meet the
requirements of all other Municipal, state and federal requirements.
Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 138-14D through J.
F. The Municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
G. Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that
are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing development
and are not part of new development or redevelopment are exempt
from the stormwater management provisions of this chapter. This does
not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal
regulation.
§ 138-15 BALDWIN CODE § 138-16
1:312
possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the design
storm method in Subsection A or the simplified method in Subsection B
below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the design storm
method in Subsection A or the simplified method in Subsection B below, or
alternative design criteria as allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.
A. The design storm method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual94) is applicable as a
method to any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be incorporated
into the CG-1 method:
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a forty-eight- to seventy-two-hour dewatering
time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not
contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in
a facility designed for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an
area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to
local stormwater systems or the environment. Justification, as
prepared and sealed by a qualified professional, for assertion that
permanent removal is not feasible must be provided, at a minimum,
in the form of field-measured infiltration rate testing and
geotechnical evaluation of the existing site soils with regard to the
impact of proposed infiltration. Applications omitting this
justification, including infiltration rate testing will be considered
incomplete. BMPs proposing use of extended detention in lieu of
permanent reduction through the listed methods shall include a
valve to adjust or regulate dewatering time to achieve the
performance standards noted herein. The valve system shall
include an inspection/monitoring port for review of dewatering.
(3) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
93.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
94.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
§ 138-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-16
1:313
§ 138-17. Rate controls.
B. The simplified method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual95) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the design storm
method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff
flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides
justification that the listed removal options are not feasible, and the
designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a
facility designed for a twenty-four-hour dewatering time in an area
with a dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a
combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed
for a seventy-two-hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a
combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater
systems or the environment.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 138-17, Rate
Controls, if the project qualifies for exemption by the provisions of
§ 138-15A.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: Post-development discharge rates shall
not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year twenty-four-hour storm events. This is
the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those
rates shown in the maps contained in Appendix A (Release Rate
Management Districts). This predevelopment to post-development
control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the conditional direct
discharge areas on the release rate maps. For comparison of peak flow
rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a of a cubic foot per second
(cfs). If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
post-development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and 100-year twenty-four-hour storms, then the
requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant
95.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
§ 138-16 BALDWIN CODE § 138-17
1:314
§ 138-18. Riparian buffers.
shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate
of discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the
methods included in the chapter titled "Stormwater Calculations and
Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
Except, however, where documented downstream flooding problems
exist, the Municipality may impose a 50% reduced release rate criteria.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and 100-year twenty-four-hour storm events, the postdevelopment
peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved
release rate maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (Release
Rate Management Districts) of this chapter. For comparison of peak
flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot per second
(cfs). For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the specified design events. Peak flows should be
computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP
Stormwater Management BMP Manual.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer. The intent of this
chapter in establishing a riparian buffer is to protect and improve
stream water quality. The riparian buffer is intended to slow overland
flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and
shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition
of sediment, nutrients, pesticides, and other pollutants in the buffer
rather than in the stream; and reducing erosion by providing stream
bank stabilization. The trees provide shade for streams, keeping waters
cooler and reducing evaporation.
B. Except as required by PA Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the riparian buffer
easement shall be required for all, streams (as defined in Article II) with
a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The riparian
buffer easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the
top of the streambank (on each side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian buffers.
(1) No use or construction within the riparian buffer shall be permitted
that is inconsistent with the intent of the riparian buffer as
described in § 138-18A.
(2) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
(3) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
§ 138-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-18
1:315
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the Municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds
Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning
Ordinance.96
E. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement, but they shall cross the easement in the shortest practical
distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities are not
permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
G. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted by the Municipality within riparian
buffers:
(1) It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted
provided they have adequate drainage.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
H. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
I. Underground utilities shall be permitted within the riparian buffer
easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance
area and removal of trees. Restoration within the riparian buffer
easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses, and other
plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the
restoration shall be designed by a registered professional with the
requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to
cross the easement perpendicular to the easement or in the shortest
practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as
required.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
§ 138-18 BALDWIN CODE § 138-18
1:316
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 138-19. Plan requirements.
A. Appropriate sections from the Municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,97 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
B. The Municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the Municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
Municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
(1) Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection C(3)(k) below.
(2) The following signature block for the Municipality:
(Municipal official or Designated Plan Reviewer (§ 138-21A)), on
this date (Signature date), has reviewed and hereby certifies that
the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Municipal Ordinance No. __________, except where waivers have
been granted as noted on the Plan. The review is based on a survey
and plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is
correct and valid as submitted.)
(3) The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual.98 A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(c) A key map showing the development site's location within the
Municipality's stormwater management districts, watersheds
and subareas. On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
district(s), watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are located on
the development site and identify their district and watershed
names and applicable subarea numbers.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Subdivision and Land Development.
98.Editor's Note: See § 138-43C.
§ 138-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-19
1:317
(d) Location of the 100-year floodplain on the development site
based on the current municipal flood insurance rate maps.
(e) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 138-14.
(f) Expected project time schedule.
(g) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(h) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(i) Plan and profile drawings and details of all SWM BMPs,
including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and
swales.
(j) SWM site plan shall show the property lines, dimensions of the
site and the locations of existing and proposed on-lot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells, property
boundaries, existing and proposed topography, point(s) of
interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts.
(k) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing
and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This
plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for
O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance
activities, personnel and equipment requirements, estimated
annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing
O&M.
(l) A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other than
green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed
to achieve the volume, rate and water quality controls under
this chapter.
(m) Certification and seal of the qualified professional responsible
for the preparation of the plans and report.
(n) Watershed maps delineating predevelopment and postdevelopment
watershed boundaries and land cover conditions,
as well as the flow path and segments used to determine time
of concentrations for each watershed.
§ 138-19 BALDWIN CODE § 138-19
1:318
§ 138-20. Plan submission.
Up to five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
§ 138-21. Plan review.
(o) Storm sewer calculations and watershed maps delineating all
sub-areas used to size and compute flow for storm sewer
system.
(p) Existing contours at intervals of two feet except in areas with
slopes greater than 15%, in which case five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(q) Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two feet,
except in areas with slopes greater than 15%, in which case,
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
A. Two copies to the Municipality.
B. One copy to the municipal engineer (when applicable).
C. One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when
requested by the District).
D. One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with
combined sewer systems).
A. The Municipality has designated the Municipal Engineer as the
designated plan reviewer of SWM site plans for the Municipality, and
shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the
Municipality within this chapter.
B. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the Municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM site plan involves a subdivision
and land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time
period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Municipality.
D. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the Municipality will not approve
the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and
LID practices are not practicable.
E. If the Municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the Municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Municipality also
§ 138-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-21
1:319
§ 138-22. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated plan reviewer, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this article.
§ 138-23. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipality's concerns, to the Municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 138-24. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The Municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 138-25 within the term of validity, then the
Municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the Municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 138-23 of this
chapter.
§ 138-25. Record drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
F. The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VII, must accompany a
resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan, including, but not
limited to, BMP grading, outlet structure configuration and emergency
spillway configuration. The record drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the
Municipality.
B. The record drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at
§ 138-21 BALDWIN CODE § 138-25
1:320
the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate. The certification shall
include documentation confirming field reviewed dewatering times for
rate and volume control BMPs. Record drawings shall be provided in
both hard copy and electronic (AutoCAD, latest edition) format.
C. The Municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it
deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the Municipality reveal
deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM site plan, the
Municipality may request corrective actions. Any corrective action shall
be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
D. After receipt of the completion certification by the Municipality, the
Municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 138-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-25
1:321

ARTICLE V
Design Criteria
§ 138-26. Calculation methodology.
A. All computations used in conjunction with the analysis and design of
stormwater management facilities shall be based on one or more of the
following methods, or as otherwise approved in advance by the
Municipality:
(1) TR-55-Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Release No. 55.
(2) TR-20-Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Technical Release No. 20.
(3) Modified rational method.
(4) Penn State Runoff Model.
(5) Virginia Tech/Penn State Runoff Model.
B. These methods for determining peak discharge shall be used to:
(1) Determine predevelopment runoff conditions;
(2) Analyze the impact of development; and
(3) Perform calculations in the design of any detention/retention
facilities used in controlling runoff.
C. The SCS, Type II Rainfall Distribution shall be used for all analyses. The
design storm frequencies for the watershed are:
Design storm 24-hour rainfall depth
1-Year 1.97
2-Year 2.35
5-Year 2.88
10-Year 3.61
25-Year 4.31
50-Year 4.40
100-Year 5.71
D. Predevelopment conditions: The cover type for all sites will be
considered to be the dominant land cover during the five year period
immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity:
(1) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition). Forested land areas
shall be considered in good condition.
§ 138-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-26
1:323
§ 138-27. Standards for collection and conveyance facilities.
(2) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing disturbed impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow (good condition).
E. Post-development conditions: The hydrologic parameters used to
develop peak flow rates shall be reflective of anticipated soil runoff
characteristics following grading and development of the site.
F. Time of concentration: The minimum time of concentration for any
watershed shall be six minutes. A minimum six-minute time of
concentration may be assumed for any post-development watershed.
Calculations must be provided for all predevelopment times of
concentrations. A minimum time of concentration cannot be assumed
for predevelopment conditions.
G. The use of the basic rational method in estimating runoff may be
employed in the design of the storm sewer conveyance system within
the development. The storm sewer system shall be interpreted as the
conduits, culverts, inlets and appurtenant features for the conveying of
stormwater to, through or from a development site to the point of final
discharge or control facility. The rational method shall not be used in
the analysis of stormwater runoff from the development in its entirety
or in conjunction with the design of any retention/detention facilities or
other runoff control measures.
H. Points of interest for analysis of pre- and post-development runoff must
be selected to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
§§ 138-16 and 138-17 is achieved at all points where runoff exits the
perimeter of the property.
I. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another unless the watersheds are subareas of a larger watershed that
are tributary to a common point of interest within or near the perimeter
of the property. Transfer of runoff from one watershed to another under
any other circumstances shall only be approved at the discretion of the
Municipality. Documentation shall be provided that peak flow rates are
not increased following development and there will be no detrimental
impact in downstream areas.
J. The stormwater management plan shall consider all of the stormwater
runoff flowing over the project site. Runoff calculations shall be made to
ensure that runoff from the upstream watershed area can be
accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements and watercourses,
etc., on the site.
A. All stormwater collection and conveyance facilities (pipes, swales, and
structures) shall be designed for a 100-year design storm event, unless
the runoff would naturally drain overland to a stormwater detention
facility, in which case a twenty-five-year design storm event may be
§ 138-26 BALDWIN CODE § 138-27
1:324
§ 138-28. Standards for stormwater detention facilities.
used. The hydraulic gradeline must be a minimum of two feet below
the surface elevation within the pipe. Swales and channels shall provide
at least one foot of freeboard above the energy gradeline. Backwater
effects of pipes discharging under surcharge conditions shall be
included.
B. Runoff calculations shall include complete hydrology and hydraulic
analysis of all downstream swales and pipe facilities to permanent
stream discharge point, to the municipal boundary or connection to a
state- or county-owned conveyance system.
C. Manholes shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart for pipe sizes up
to 24 inches in diameter and not more than 450 feet apart for larger
pipe sizes.
D. No public stormwater pipe shall be less than 15 inches in diameter that
conveys surface runoff. The minimum pipe slope shall be 1.0% grade or
maintain velocity of two ft./s. For public storm sewer systems, only
pipes related to construction of stormwater BMPs may be less than 15
inches in diameter. Pipe under the cartway of a municipal roadway shall
be reinforced concrete pipe.
E. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Municipality's
construction standards. In addition, all workmanship and materials
shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be
supplied by manufacturers or suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin 15.
F. Manhole and inlet castings shall conform to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 and PennDOT Standards for
Roadway Construction. Inlet grates shall be bicycle safe. Frames and
grates shall be cast iron or structural steel. Concrete frames shall not
be permitted.
G. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for cleanout. No blind connections shall be permitted.
H. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined drainage
course, which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater runoff cannot
be discharged to a defined drainage course, documentation of written
permission from each downstream property owner shall be provided for
all properties between the source of discharge and the defined drainage
course. The use of level spreaders or similar BMPs that promote sheet
flow may be permitted if the applicant provides documentation that the
peak post-development 100-year discharge is no greater than
predevelopment two-year discharge and a letter from the geotechnical
engineer of record regarding slope stability of the downstream area is
provided. Use of a level spreader requires a waiver to be granted by the
Municipality.
§ 138-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-28
1:325
A. All retention/detention facilities shall be equipped with multistage
outlet structures to provide discharge control for each designated
storm frequency. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the postdevelopment
100-year storm runoff in the event of an outlet structure
failure without damaging or impairing the continued function of the
facilities (i.e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities. The
facility(ies) must have an emergency outlet which is able to discharge
the post-development 100-year peak flow. Should any stormwater
management facilities qualify as a dam under PaDEP Chapter 105
criteria, the facility shall be designed in accordance with those
regulations and meet the regulations concerning dam safety.
B. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff shall
provide an emergency spillway designed to convey the unattenuated
100-year post-development peak rate flow with a blocked primary
outlet structure and an inundation stormwater to the invert elevation of
the spillway, with a minimum one-foot freeboard to the crest of the
embankment.
C. Woody vegetation shall not be permitted on the embankments or within
25 feet of the emergency spillway.
D. The water depth of a storage facility which is not fenced shall be limited
to two feet unless approved by the Municipality. Otherwise, appropriate
fencing at least four feet in height shall be required.
E. Side slopes of storage facilities shall not exceed a ratio of 3:1 horizontal
to vertical dimension. The crest of the embankment shall have a
minimum width of not less than 10 feet.
F. The facility shall be equipped with an access road at least 10 feet wide
and with a maximum grade of 15%. Access roads greater than 12%
grade must be paved. Access roads 12% or less shall have a minimum
six-inch depth noneroding aggregate surface. A gate with a minimum
opening of 10 feet shall be provided for maintenance access. An access
easement with a minimum width of 20 feet to all stormwater detention
facilities shall be provided. The access easement shall include a
statement on the recorded plan from the owner/operator of the facility
granting access to the Municipality.
G. All stormwater facility outlet structures shall have suitable gaskets to
prevent leakage and piping of water through the facility embankment.
All storm pipe installed through the facility embankment must be
constructed of reinforced concrete pipe. Use of high-performance
polypropylene pipe may be permitted with documentation of pipe
manufacturer's backfill requirements.
H. A geotechnical investigation report for the construction of the
stormwater detention/retention and infiltration facilities must be
provided including design recommendation for embankment
construction, interior and exterior slopes, drainage swales and
infiltration areas.
§ 138-28 BALDWIN CODE § 138-28
1:326
I. Basin outlet structures shall have nonclogging trash racks over all
design openings. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall be
included in the operation and maintenance plan.
J. Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the greatest
extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through the basin.
K. BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses (e.g.,
drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the level of
water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to
protect and maintain water quality in special protection) streams, as
required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa.Code, Chapter 93
(collectively referred to herein as "State Water Quality Requirements").
§ 138-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-28
1:327

ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance
§ 138-29. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 138-30. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The Municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as
part of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Municipality will accept the
facilities. The Municipality reserves the right to reject or accept the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The Municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the Municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
Municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
§ 138-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-31
1:329
§ 138-31. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.99
§ 138-32. Special Stormwater Facility Maintenance Fund.
A. Persons installing post-construction stormwater management BMP
facilities will be required to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Facility Maintenance Fund to help defray the costs of
periodic inspections and annual maintenance expenses. The amount of
the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by
the Municipality for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the
Municipality. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed by the Municipality and billed directly to the owner.
(2) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years, as estimated by the
Municipality.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the maintenance fund covering annual
inspection and maintenance costs shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Municipality Manager shall
determine the present-worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the final approval of the Council.
B. If the storage facility is proposed, which also serves as a recreation
facility, such as a lake or ballfield, the Municipality may reduce or waive
the amount of the maintenance fund based on the value of the land for
public recreation purposes.
C. If at some future time any storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or another
storage facility (i.e, a distributed storage facility), the unused portion of
the maintenance fund will be applied to the cost of abandoning the
facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any
amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are
paid will be returned to the depositor.
99.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 138-31 BALDWIN CODE § 138-32
1:330
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 138-33. General.
The Municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged
to an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for
the following:
A. Administrative/clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Review of a SWM site plan resubmission.
D. Attendance at meetings.
E. Inspections.
§ 138-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-33
1:331

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 138-34. Prohibited discharges and connections.
§ 138-35. Roof drains and sump pumps.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
C below and discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped ground water and water from
foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
(9) Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are
followed.
D. In the event that the Municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
Municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 138-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-35
1:333
§ 138-36. Alteration of SWM BMP.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, drainage easements, or structures that were installed as
a requirement of this chapter without the written approval of the
Municipality.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the Municipality, no stormwater from
roofs or driveway drains shall be discharged to the street surface or
curb.
§ 138-35 BALDWIN CODE § 138-36
1:334
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 138-37. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Municipality or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 138-38. Inspection.
§ 138-39. Enforcement.
§ 138-40. Suspension and revocation.
A. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Municipality for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
B. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
Municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 138-15.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 138-36 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 138-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-40
1:335
§ 138-41. Penalties.
§ 138-42. Appeals.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when:
(1) The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the Municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the Municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $50 and not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable
with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate
offense and penalties shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the Municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or
any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
Municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the Municipality's decision.
§ 138-40 BALDWIN CODE § 138-42
1:336
ARTICLE X
References
§ 138-43. References.
A. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
B. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
C. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
D. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 138-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-43
1:337
Chapter 139
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and housing
standards — See Ch. 74.
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99.
Manholes — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Sewers and connections — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Vehicles with studded tires — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 138-43 BALDWIN CODE § 138-43
1:338
ARTICLE I
Street Openings and Excavations
§ 139-1. Compliance with regulations required.
From and after the adoption of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, persons, corporation or association of persons to open or excavate
in any street, alley, road or highway of said Borough or cause the same to
be done for the purpose of laying, relaying or repairing any gas, water or
sewer line or conduit or for any other purpose whatsoever, including the
making of house or service connections therewith, except in pursuance of
the regulations in the following section prescribed.
§ 139-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any of the streets in the Borough of Baldwin without first securing a
permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 139-3. Application for permit.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any
of the streets in the Borough of Baldwin shall make application to the
Borough Secretary, in writing, for the purpose. Such application shall be
made upon application forms to be furnished by the Borough and shall
set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed
opening or excavation and the approximate size or depth thereof and shall
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be
done in full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough of Baldwin
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in relation thereto and
that the applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the
Borough of Baldwin from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits,
demands, payments, costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed
opening or excavation and all damages to persons or property resulting
in any manner therefrom or occurring in the prosecution of the work
connected therewith or from any other matter, cause or thing relating
thereto.
§ 139-4. Fees; deposits; bonds.
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough of Baldwin, the applicant shall pay to the Borough a permit fee
in the minimum amount of $50 to cover the cost of inspection and other
incidental services in connection therewith. When application shall be made
to open or excavate any longitudinal opening or excavation in excess of 10
feet, before any permit shall be issued so to open or excavate, the applicant
shall pay, in addition to the minimum permit fee, an additional fee at the
rate of $50 for every 100 feet or any fraction thereof to be opened; any
footage in excess of 100 feet shall be charged an additional $20. In addition
to the permit fee herein charged, the applicant for the permit shall deposit
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-4
1:339
with the Borough Secretary the additional sum of $100 for each 25 linear
feet of opening or fraction thereof in any street, alley, road or highway in
the Borough, but in no event shall such deposit be less than $400; provided,
however, that when such opening or excavation shall exceed 100 linear
feet in length, the applicant shall submit to the Borough Secretary a bond
with approved surety and double the amount of the total deposit required,
which bond, if approved by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin, shall be
conditioned on the faithful observance for all of the terms and conditions
of this article. When any person or persons, corporations or associations of
persons shall have occasion to make frequent openings or excavations in
the streets, alleys, roads or highways of the Borough of Baldwin, in lieu of
the deposit required herein, such persons shall file a bond with the Borough
Secretary on or before the 15th day of January of each and every year,
which bond shall be in the amount of $5,000 or such other amount as the
Borough Council, by resolution, may from time to time designate, which
bond, if approved by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin, shall likewise
be conditioned on the faithful observance of all the terms and conditions of
this article. The deposit required hereto shall be retained by the Borough to
ensure the completion of the refilling and resurfacing of any excavation or
opening of any Borough street, and upon said completion, the sum shall be
returned to the depositor.
§ 139-5. Restoration.
A. All driveways, walkways, sidewalks, steps or other surfaces which
utility companies require opening for the installation or repair of utility
lines or any other persons requiring the opening of a public street in the
Borough of Baldwin shall be replaced in kind with the following
minimums:
(1) Bituminous driveways: Six inches of compacted stone or gravel
subbase, four inches of bituminous concrete base course with 1 1/2
inches of HMA fine-graded wearing course.
(2) Concrete driveways: Six inches of compacted AASHTO No. 57
gravel subbase, six inches of PennDOT Class 'AA' concrete
reinforced with WWF 6 x 6, W2.9 x W2.9 with stiff broom finish or
to match existing if approved by Borough. Also to include trowel
edges and PennDOT 408 approved section.
(3) Sidewalks: Five inches of compacted AASHTO No. 57 gravel
subbase and five inches of PennDOT Class 'AA' concrete reinforced
with WWF 6 x 6, W2.9 x W2.9 with stiff broom finish, troweled
edges and to have a PennDOT approved sealer.
(4) Berm areas disturbed shall be replaced with compacted stone or
gravel backfill, minimum three-foot width and 6% maximum cross
slope from the road edge (wider if directed by the Borough or to
match existing). Areas beyond the berm are to be backfilled with
compacted soil and top with four inches of topsoil and seeded and
§ 139-4 BALDWIN CODE § 139-5
1:340
§ 139-6. Other work.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by the
applicant at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions
of this article and to the review and approval of the Borough.
§ 139-7. Exhibition of permit.
The contractor or person doing the work of opening or excavating as
aforesaid shall at all times maintain in possession and shall exhibit to any
official of said Borough upon demand the permit to do said work, which
permit only shall be evidence of authority for the doing of said work.
§ 139-8. Barricades.
Each and every opening or excavation made in pursuance of the permit
herein provided, so long as the same shall remain open, shall be protected
by a suitable barricade during daytime and by a barricade and flashing
yellow lights at night, and the same shall be allowed to remain open only so
long as shall be reasonably necessary, not exceeding five days, to complete
in each 25 linear feet thereof the work and purpose for which the opening
or excavation shall have been made.
§ 139-9. Traffic control.
Provide traffic control in accordance with PennDOT Publication 213 and the
Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). All proposed detour
routes are subject to review and approval by the Baldwin Chief of Police.
§ 139-10. Erosion and sedimentation control.
Provide erosion and sedimentation control in accordance with Department
of Environmental Protection Chapter 102 requirements.
mulched per PennDOT Form 408. The top six inches of material
shall be replaced in kind.
(5) All joints on bituminous driveways shall be sealed with PG 64-22.
(6) Public street restoration shall comply with the requirements of
§ 139-16 herein.
B. All other materials used shall conform to Pennsylvania Department of
transportation Publication 408 specifications, and the replacement of
all streets shall be in accordance with the Borough Standard Detail
B-101-B. All subbase material noted above shall be natural stone or
gravel. No slag shall be used.
§ 139-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-11
1:341
§ 139-11. Return or forfeit of deposit or bond.
At the expiration of six months from the excavation of any street, alley,
road or highway in the Borough, should said street, alley, road or highway
be found in proper condition, the sum or sums deposited at the time of
the taking out of the permit shall be refunded upon return of the permit
and upon a review of the Borough, but should the street, alley, road or
highway at any time within the six months be found in bad condition by
reason of the opening or excavation, it shall be repaired by the Borough
of Baldwin and the deposit made or bond given shall be liable for the cost
and expense thereof, provided that if the opening or excavation, in the case
only of openings or excavations for house or service connections, is, in the
opinion of the Borough, in proper condition sooner than the expiration of
said six months, the sum or sums so deposited may be refunded.
§ 139-12. Effect on other provisions.
This article shall not be deemed to repeal the provisions of Ordinance No.
124, adopted the 21st day of March, 1957, by the Borough of Baldwin,
relating to excavations by the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania or
the successor or assigns.
§ 139-13. Violations and penalties.100
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting
in the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before the District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $300, plus
costs of prosecution, or be imprisoned for up to 30 days.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Telephone Franchise.
§ 139-11 BALDWIN CODE § 139-13
1:342
ARTICLE II
Curb Cuts
§ 139-14. Permit required; application.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to cut or otherwise alter any
existing curb owned or maintained by the Borough of Baldwin shall, prior
to such action, if the property concerned is a property used for residential
purposes, make application to the Building Inspector of the Borough or,
if the property concerned is a property used for commercial purposes, to
the Borough Council for a permit to perform the work which may affect
the curb in any manner whatsoever. Said written application shall indicate
thereon the name of the street, highway or road and the place at which
the cutting or other alteration will take place and the type of work to be
performed which will affect said curb and shall also contain a statement to
the following effect. It is agreed by the applicant that the within request is
for a license only, revocable by the Borough of Baldwin at any time upon a
decision by the Council of the Borough of Baldwin, and that the applicant
will, at the sole expense of said applicant, replace or restore any Borough
installation to its prior condition before cutting or other alteration.
§ 139-15. Permit fee; issuance of permit.
Upon payment of the fee of $2 by the applicant for said permit, the Borough
Building Inspector or the Borough Council, as the case may be, may issue
said permit to the applicant, which permit shall indicate thereon the name
of the street, highway or road and the place at which the cutting or other
alteration will take place.
§ 139-16. Specifications; restoration.
A. Any person, firm or corporation requesting a permit for the cutting or
other alteration of a curb in the Borough shall perform such work in
accordance with the Borough of Baldwin's standard details. Such
person, firm or corporation shall restore the surface of any publicly
dedicated easement to a condition substantially the same as it was
before with the exception of the cutting or alteration approved by the
Borough.
B. This section is hereby amended by adding thereto the bituminous street
opening repair public improvement requirements as shown on the
attached drawing designated as "B-101-B," which is attached hereto
and made a part hereof.101 All of the drawings and specifications set out
therein shall hereby be designated as the required public improvement
requirements of the Borough of Baldwin. The specifications attached
hereto for repairing street openings apply to all streets.
101. Editor's Note: The drawing appears at the end of this chapter.
§ 139-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-17
1:343
§ 139-17. Deposit or bond required.
Any person, firm or corporation, prior to the issuance of any permit
provided for in this article, shall deposit with the Borough Secretary a sum
of money equal to $5 per foot of each linear foot of curb cut or altered.
In lieu of said deposit, a bond in an equivalent amount may be deposited
with said Borough Secretary, conditioned for the faithful compliance with
the terms of this article, which bond shall be returned to the applicant by
the Borough Secretary upon review of the Borough that the work has been
accomplished in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 139-18. Failure to comply; work by Borough.
Should any person, firm or corporation, after having cut or altered any
curb in the Borough, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of
this article or the instructions or directions of the Building Inspector or
the Council of the Borough of Baldwin pertaining to said work, the proper
Borough officials shall proceed to have the street, road or easement placed
in proper condition at the cost of the person, firm or corporation to whom
the permit was issued, said cost to be deducted from the cash deposited
aforesaid or, in the event that a bond is deposited, the solicitor shall be
authorized or directed to proceed on the bond for the collection of any
amount due. If the cost of repairs exceeds the amount deposited or bond
deposited the Borough may proceed with collection in Civil Court.
§ 139-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before the District
Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 plus costs of
prosecution, or to imprisonment for up to 30 days.
§ 139-17 BALDWIN CODE § 139-19
1:344
Chapter 142
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 24.
Planning Commissions — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 83.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 87.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Sewers — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 139-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-19
1:345

Part 1
Borough Of Ba[lAddwoinp tSeudb1d0i-v1is6i-o1n9 6A7ndB LyaOnrdd .D Nevoe. l3o5p5m]ent Ordinance
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Applicability; Exceptions
§ 142-1. Title. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Baldwin
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 142-2. Purpose.
This Part 1 is adopted for the following purposes:
§ 142-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land in the Borough to make a
subdivision thereof or to lay out, construct, open or dedicate for public
use or travel or for the common use of the occupants or buildings thereon
any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewers, water main or other facilities
in connection therewith unless and until a plan thereof shall have been
prepared by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and submitted
to and approved by the proper Borough official or body, as hereinafter
provided.102
A. To assure harmonious and orderly development and thereby promote
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Borough of
Baldwin.
B. To ensure integration of subdivision plans with the various elements of
the Baldwin Master Plan.
C. To secure equitable treatment of all subdivision plans by providing for
uniform procedures and standards for the observance of all
subdividers, the Planning Commission and the Borough.
102. Editor's Note: Original Section 4 of Article I of Ord. No. 355, Exceptions, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454.
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:347

ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 142-4. Word usage.
§ 142-5. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A minor public way, having a right-of-way width between property
lines of less than 30 feet for vehicular service access to the back or side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
BLOCK — An area bounded by existing or proposed streets.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The registered professional engineer appointed
by the Borough Council to perform those duties set forth in this Part 1.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The person so appointed by Council to act as
Borough Manager. The Borough Secretary or Assistant Secretary is
authorized to perform the duties of the Borough Manager as prescribed for
in this Part 1 when a Borough Manager has not been so appointed or in his
absence.
BUILDING — Any structure intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure
of persons, animals or any other property.
BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE — A line of that face of the building
which is nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors,
covers and porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include
walks, steps or terraces.[Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
COMPLETION GUARANTY — A deposit of cash, bond or certified check
and an agreement to the effect that the subdivider will install required
improvements.[Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
A. The present tense includes the future tense.
B. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, company or corporation as well as an individual.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "piece" and "parcel."
E. The word "building" includes all structures, or part thereof, affixed to
the land.
§ 142-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:349
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street designed to be so permanently, with a
suitable vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
DEVELOPMENT — The act, process or state of erecting all structures
except farm dwellings and subsidiary structures.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
storm sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
for one or more families.[Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more one-family or multiplefamily
dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having a yard in
common.[Added 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
two or more dwelling units.
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of land for the use by others, including
the public.
FILING, PLAT — A plat shall be deemed to be filed with the Planning
Commission or the Borough Council, as the case may be, when it has been
received and properly receipted by the Manager. The Manager may refuse
to receive a plat if the procedures under Article III have not been fully
observed. The Manager shall transmit plats to the official bodies concerned.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Any or all of the following: grading, paving,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, waterlines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and
structures, drainage channels and structures, curb returns, sidewalk and
driveway entrances within rights-of-way, guardrails, traffic signals and
devices, streetlights, retaining walls, sodding and planting.
LOCAL STREET — A street which is used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the
area of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a street, alley or crosswalk may
be included.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between straight lines connecting front and
rear lot lines at each side of the lot measured across the rear of the required
front yard; provided, however, that the width between side lot lines at
their foremost points (where they intersect with street lines) shall not be
less than 80% of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the
turning circle of culs-de-sac or curved streets, where the eighty-percent
requirement shall not apply.
MAJOR STREET — A street which is used primarily for fast or heavy traffic
of an intercommunity nature and including state highways and turnpikes.
MANAGER — See "Borough Manager."
§ 142-5 BALDWIN CODE § 142-5
1:350
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street which is adjacent to a major
street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
MASTER PLAN — A plan which may consist of several maps, data and other
descriptive matter as may be adopted, altered or revised from time to time
by the Planning Commission for guiding the orderly physical development
of the Borough or any portion thereof, including the general locations for
streets, parks or other public open spaces, public utilities, schools and other
facilities.
OWNER — Any person or legal entity having a proprietary interest in the
land to be subdivided but not including a mortgagee, lien or lessee or
contract purchaser.
PLAT — A plan or map which shows the proposed layout of the subdivision.
PLAT FILING — See "filing, plat."
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map indicating the proposed
subdivision, which is submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for
advice and direction.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — See "improvements, public."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, crosswalk or for
other public purpose.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum distance of unobstructed vision, in a
horizontal or vertical plane, along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street, which shall take into account the visibility over
a crest vertical curve and the extent of headlight illumination across a sag
vertical curve.
STREET — A public way, having a right-of-way of no less than 50 feet
between property lines, for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
turnpike, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, way or however otherwise
designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which carries traffic from local streets to
the major streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
STREET, LOCAL — See "local street."
STREET, MAJOR — See "major street."
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — See "marginal access street."
STREET, PARTIAL OR HALF — A street, generally parallel and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way than normally required for
satisfactory improvement and use of the street.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street accepted for public improvement and
maintenance, whether by Borough, county or state governments.
§ 142-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-5
1:351
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as
defined herein. A "subdivider" shall be an owner or authorized agent of the
owner of the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, including all changes in street or lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land,
but shall not include division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels
exceeding 10 acres and not involving any new street or easement of access.
"Subdivision" also includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or property so
divided. "Subdivision" also includes the process of creating units in a singlefamily
cluster lot development.[Amended 3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 558]
WALKWAY — A public right-of-way having a width of 10 feet or more within
a block, intended for pedestrian use, and from which motor vehicles are
excluded.
WATERCOURSE — A channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring or stream.
§ 142-5 BALDWIN CODE § 142-5
1:352
ARTICLE III
Submission of Plats
§ 142-6. Responsibilities of subdivider and Planning Commission.
§ 142-7. Preapplication procedure.
§ 142-8. Procedure for approval of preliminary plat.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to become familiar with
the subdivision regulations contained herein; to consult with the
Planning Commission, other Borough officials and public utility people
on the availability of services and facilities in the area to be subdivided;
and to discuss the subdivision proposals with potentially interested
parties, such as lending and mortgage insurance institutions, in order
to determine what part of the market demand should be served and the
subdivision plan which would be the most advantageous to the
development of the Borough as well as to the subdivider.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Commission to discourage
premature development in unsuitable areas that are inaccessible or
hazardous or lack services. The Planning Commission shall also
encourage replatting of dead subdivisions and coordinating the platting
of small adjacent land.
A. Previous to filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plat,
the subdivider may submit to the Planning Commission sketch plans
and data as specified in § 142-28.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plans and data at its
next regular meeting, provided that the above information is submitted
to the Planning Commission at least 10 days before the meeting date.
C. Within 14 days after the above-mentioned meeting, the Planning
Commission shall inform the subdivider whether or not the sketch plans
and data as submitted meet the objectives of these regulations. The
Planning Commission shall make suitable recommendations for
modification and improvements of such plans and data and shall return
such plans and data to the subdivider.
A. The subdivider shall have a preliminary plat prepared, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material, as specified in
§ 142-29.
B. Five copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified herein shall be submitted to the Planning Commission,
together with a written application for approval, at least 10 days prior
to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
C. Following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted
for conformity to the regulations contained herein and negotiations
with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the land and
§ 142-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-8
1:353
§ 142-9. Procedure for approval of final plat.
extent of improvements to be made by him, the Planning Commission
shall, within 30 days, act thereon as submitted or modified, and if
approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval as
approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if
disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
D. The action of the Planning Commission shall be noted on four copies of
the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy
shall be retained by the Planning Commission, the third copy shall be
submitted to the Borough Engineer, and the fourth copy submitted to
the office of the Manager.
E. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final
plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
proposed layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat, which shall be submitted for approval of
the Planning Commission.
F. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be deemed to have lapsed
unless an application for final approval of at least part of the
preliminary plat is made within six months of the date of tentative
approval. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
A. The subdivider shall have prepared a final plat which shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, together with
improvement plans and other material as specified in Article VI,
§ 142-30. The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop
at this time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all the
requirements contained herein.
B. The final plat and other material required for approval, together with a
written application for approval, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be
considered. The application for approval shall be an application
separate and apart from the application for approval of a preliminary
plat and shall be in form prepared by the Borough of Baldwin. No
application may be submitted to the Borough Secretary during the 10
days immediately prior to the next meeting of the Planning
Commission. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
C. If the final plat is disapproved by the Planning Commission, the reasons
therefor shall be stated in writing to the subdivider. The decision of the
Planning Commission shall be made within 10 days subsequent to the
meeting at which the final plat is considered. Notice of the disapproval
shall be sent by the Planning Commission to the subdivider or the
applicant within five days after the decision is rendered. Whether or not
the Planning Commission approves or disapproves the final plat, such
§ 142-8 BALDWIN CODE § 142-9
1:354
§ 142-10. Fees.
plat shall, immediately following the approval or disapproval of the
same, be sent to the Borough Council for its consideration. [Amended
3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
D. The subdivider shall file a completion guaranty before recording of the
final plat, the filing of which shall be a condition of the approval of every
application. The guaranty shall consist of: [Amended 3-17-1975 by
Ord. No. 454]
(1) A cash deposit in escrow with the Borough or an accredited lending
institution, such as a savings and loan or a national bank.
(2) A performance bond in the amount of 100% of the cost of the
improvements.
E. The Borough Council shall approve with or without modifications or
disapprove the final plat within 90 days from the date of the submission
of the application for approval of the final plat to the Borough Secretary.
If the final plat is disapproved by the Borough Council, the reasons
therefor shall be stated in writing to the subdivider. Notice of the
decision of the Borough Council shall be given within five days of the
decision to the subdivider or the applicant. [Amended 3-17-1975 by
Ord. No. 454]
F. The final plat, after the approval of the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council, shall be submitted to the Allegheny County Planning
Commission for its approval and in accordance with its regulations.
G. The final plat, in the form approved by the Borough Council, shall be
recorded by the subdivider in the office of the County Recorder of
Deeds within 60 days of the date of approval by the County Planning
Commission; such approval shall be null and void if the plat is not
recorded within said time limit.
H. Upon recording of the final plat, a reproducible copy of the recorded
plat shall be filed in the office of the Borough Manager. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall result in the suspension of all
development activities within such plan of subdivision.
A. Application fee. To cover the costs of reviewing plats, processing
applications and other expenses incidental to the approval of a
subdivision, the subdivider shall pay a fee of $50 at the time of
application for approval of a preliminary plat, said $50 to be payable to
the Borough of Baldwin. When the application for approval of a
preliminary plat is forwarded to the Planning Commission, it shall be
accompanied by a memorandum that this fee has been paid.
B. Subdivision fee. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
§ 142-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-10
1:355
§ 142-11. Issuance of permits. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No.
454]
(1) To cover the costs of holding any required public hearings and the
checking of maps, plans, specifications and any other engineering
data incidental to the final approval of the final plat, a fee
established by the Borough Engineer in accordance with the
following table shall be paid to the Borough of Baldwin:
Fee Schedule A
Number of Lots in
Plan Fee
2 to 10 $100 (minimum)
11 to 25 $10 per lot
26 to 40 $250 plus $8 per lot for each lot over 25
41 to 75 $375 plus $6 per lot for each lot over 40
76 or more $610 plus $5 per lot for each lot over 75
(2) If the subdivider fails to apply for final approval of the subdivision
within 12 months, the fee for any portion thereof shall not be
refunded.
C. Escrow account fees. To cover the costs to the Borough for the
engineering and inspection supervision of construction and other
miscellaneous expenses incidental to the construction and final
approval of a subdivision or other construction project, the subdivider
or developer shall deposit to an escrow fund established for this
purpose a sum of money in the amount of 2% of the estimated or
contract cost of those portions of the project included under site
development and improvement, except that the minimum payment
permissible for this purpose shall be $500. Should expenses incurred by
the Borough exceed the amount of the escrow deposit at any time
during construction, a further deposit shall be required before final
approval and acceptance of the project. Any funds left in the deposit
upon final approval and acceptance shall be returned to the developer.
A. No permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a
subdivision may be issued unless and until a plan of such subdivision
shall have been approved and properly recorded.
B. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure until such time
as the condition of those public improvements located on the property
in question shall have been determined to be in a condition acceptable
to the Borough by the Borough Engineer.
§ 142-10 BALDWIN CODE § 142-12
1:356
§ 142-12. Release from improvement bonds. [Added 3-17-1975 by
Ord. No. 454]
The procedure for obtaining releases from improvement bonds shall be the
same hereunder as is set forth in § 142-25 of this Part 1.
§ 142-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-12
1:357

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 142-13. General standards.
§ 142-14. Street layout.
A. The layout of any subdivision in the Borough of Baldwin shall be in
accordance with the Borough Master Plan and the Zoning Ordinance.
The type of development shall be appropriate for the location, and the
street pattern shall tie in with the overall street and highway plan of the
Borough.
B. Where a proposed park, playground or other public use shown on the
Master Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Planning
Commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area
within the subdivision in those cases in which the Planning Commission
deems such requirements to be reasonable.
C. Land which the Planning Commission has found to be unsuitable for
subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage and other features likely to be
harmful to the safety, welfare and general health of the future
residents, and which the Planning Commission considers inappropriate
for subdivision, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods to
eliminate these hazards are formulated by the developer and approved
by the Borough Engineer and the Planning Commission.
A. Street layouts shall conform to the following:
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the Borough Master Plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets. Where not shown on the Master Plan or on
the Official Map of the Borough, the arrangement and other design
standards of streets shall conform to the provisions found herein.
(2) In general, all streets shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing streets and shall compose a convenient system to ensure
circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, with the exception
that local streets may be so laid out, including the use of loop
streets and culs-de-sac, where made necessary by topographic
conditions, that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(3) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
major street, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets in order to protect residential areas from heavy
traffic and also to provide separation between local and through
traffic.
§ 142-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-14
1:359
(4) New half or partial streets will not be permitted; wherever a tract
to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street, the other
part of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(5) Whenever possible, culs-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length
as measured from the center line of the intersecting street to the
center of its circular turnaround. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord.
No. 454]
(6) The terminus of a cul-de-sac shall be a circular turnaround having a
right-of-way minimum radius of 50 feet. The outside radius of the
curbing shall be 40 feet. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
(7) Every subdivision shall have access to a paved public street.
(8) Where a railroad abuts or extends through any portion of a
subdivision, provision shall be made for overpasses or underpasses
acceptable to the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission; streets
paralleling any railroad shall be separated therefrom by a buffer
strip of at least 50 feet in depth, and if such buffer strip is
composed of residential lots, such lots shall be at least 150 feet in
depth.
(9) Local streets are intended to serve primarily the abutting
properties and shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic, for which purpose loop streets and culs-de-sac may be used
if deemed necessary.
(10) Collector streets are intended to carry traffic from residential areas
to major streets, county, state and federal highways.
(11) Major streets are intended for use by heavy through traffic and as
connections to and between county, state and federal highways and
major urbanized areas.
(12) Marginal access streets are intended to provide access by local
traffic to properties adjoining major streets without interfering
with through traffic.
(13) Alleys are intended to provide secondary access to business and
industrial properties for deliveries. Alleys are not normally
permitted in residential areas, and in no case shall an alley provide
the only means of access to a lot.
(14)Walkways are intended to provide pedestrian circulation through
large blocks or in developments where it is desired to separate
pedestrian from vehicular traffic.
(15) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles; no street shall intersect another at less than 60°.
(16) Intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this
proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with care
§ 142-14 BALDWIN CODE § 142-14
1:360
§ 142-15. Street design.
for safety. Suitable curbs, dividers, signs and other devices may be
required.
(17) Clear sight triangles whose adjacent and opposite sides shall each
be measured 100 feet along the street center line from their point
of junction at all intersections; no buildings or obstructions to
vision shall be permitted within such sight triangles.
(18) Streets shall have a grade not to exceed 4% for a distance within 25
feet of the street right-of-way line at any intersection transverse.
(19) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or else shall have a minimum
offset of 150 feet between their center lines.
(20) Street intersections with major streets shall be located not less
than 800 feet apart between their center lines.
(21) Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5°, connection
shall be by horizontal curves.
(22) Alleys shall not be constructed in any new subdivision but may only
be constructed when they are a natural continuation of an alley
already partially open and in use, in which case they shall be ended
within a continuing distance of 300 feet.
(23) The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names
shall not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically the
names of any other subdivision or street in the Borough of Baldwin.
Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission.
A. Street design specifications are as follows:
(1) Width, grade alignment, construction and improvement for each
street in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the standards
established in the following table.103 [Amended 3-17-1975 by
Ord. No. 454]
(2) The entire right-of-way of each street in a proposed subdivision
shall be graded, and there shall be installed paving, drainage
structures, curbs and gutters and sidewalks in accordance with the
appropriate standards for the class of street, with the exception
that the standards of the high-density residential area may be used
in a low-density residential area.
(3) Minimum curb or pavement-edge radii at street intersections shall
be 25 feet for intersections of a local street with another local
103. Editor's Note: The Table of Minimum Improvement Standards for Public Ways is included
at the end of this chapter.
§ 142-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:361
§ 142-16. Storm drainage.
street or a local street with a collector street or a local street with
an alley, 30 feet for other intersections, or such greater radius as is
suitable to the specific intersection.
(4) Where the grade of the street is above or below the grade of the
adjacent land, walls or slopes shall be constructed in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer and shall be sufficient to
support the street or the adjacent land, as the case may be.
(5) Where the grade of the street is three feet or more above the grade
of the adjacent land, guardrails shall be built which shall be
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer.
(6) Street shoulders shall be constructed with suitable materials from
roadway or structure excavation supplemented by additional
suitable material, if directed, from borrow excavation; the entire
shoulder area shall be uniformly and thoroughly compacted by
rolling, as directed by the Borough Engineer.
(7) The outside edge of sidewalks shall be placed one foot from the
street right-of-way lines, except for business streets where the
sidewalk shall occupy the full width between the curb and the
street right-of-way lines.
(8) Embankments at the sides of streets and cross sections of drainage
ditches shall not exceed a maximum slope of one foot horizontally
to one foot vertically in a cut section and 1 1/2 feet horizontally to
one foot vertically in a fill section; in special cases the Borough
Engineer may require more rigid standards.
(9) Means of ingress and egress for vehicle driveways to and from each
lot or parcel shall be shown on the plans for installation in
accordance with existing Borough regulations for depressed curbs
and driveways across sidewalks.
(10) Bituminous or macadam streets shall crown at the center line to a
slope of 1/4 inch to one foot; concrete streets shall crown at the
center line to a slope of 1/8 inch per foot; alleys shall be dished to
the center line at a slope of 1/4 inch per foot for bituminous or
macadam paving and 1/8 inch per foot for concrete paving.
(11) All streets shall be constructed on a prepared subgrade conforming
to Section 3.7 of the publication of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Highways, Form 408 Specifications
(1960).
A. Suitable drainage structures, culverts, storm sewers, ditches and
related installations shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage of
all low points along the line of streets and to intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
§ 142-15 BALDWIN CODE § 142-16
1:362
§ 142-17. Suitability of land; lots and blocks.
B. In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to the avoidance of problems which may arise from the
concentration of stormwater over adjacent properties.
C. Where a natural watercourse is retained as a drainage channel, an
appropriate right-of-way not less than 20 feet shall be provided.
D. Provision for storm drainage and the design and installation of drainage
structures shall be acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
E. Drainage ditches or channels shall have a minimum gradient of 1%.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided,
whether for residential, business or industrial use.
B. Land unsuited for development which would entail hazards to life,
health or property or would be uneconomic to provide with public
services shall not be subdivided; steep areas having slopes of 25% or
more and land subject to flooding shall not be considered suitable for
subdivision unless such deficiencies can be eliminated.
C. Residential blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a
minimum length of 500 feet; where a block exceeds 800 feet, a walkway
shall be provided.
D. Business or industrial blocks shall be of such size and shape as may be
suitable for their prospective use and shall provide sufficient space for
off-street parking and loading.
E. The width of any block shall be sufficient to permit at least two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth, except where reverse frontage lots bordering
a major street are used.
F. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
G. Every lot shall abut on a proposed public street, with the possible
exception of suitably designed residential courts having acceptable
means of access.
H. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
right-of-way lines.
I. If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be suitably
incorporated into existing or proposed lots or dedicated to public use if
acceptable for such public use. All parcels of subdivisions shall comply
in all respects with the Zoning Ordinance regarding setbacks, area,
height, etc.104 [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
§ 142-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-17
1:363
§ 142-18. Community facilities.
§ 142-19. Utilities. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
J. Double frontage lots are prohibited except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to a major street.
K. Easements for public utilities having a minimum width of 15 feet shall
be provided and shall be satisfactory to the agency providing such
utility service. Whenever possible, utility easements shall extend along
rear property lines.
L. Every lot shall have a grade not to exceed 20% within an area 60 feet
wide and 60 feet deep measured from the street right-of-way line.
M. The building setback line in all districts shall be in accordance with the
yard requirements as stated in the Zoning Ordinance.105 The setback
shall be measured from the required right-of-way line of any existing or
proposed street to the front line of the permitted buildable area.
A. In reviewing subdivision plats, the Planning Commission shall consider
the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the
additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
B. Subdividers shall give earnest consideration to the providing of areas
for community facilities normally considered desirable for serving
residential areas, such as parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, schools,
churches, libraries, shopping centers and local business centers.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for building sites, play areas, landscaping and offstreet
parking as may be necessary for the use proposed.
D. Subdividers shall confer with the Planning Commission prior to the
preparation of final plats in order to develop suitable plans for
providing community facilities.
E. Areas for community facilities may be provided through dedication or
sale to a public agency or gift or sale to a private agency, including a
property owners' association. In all cases, suitable arrangements shall
be made fixing responsibility for sponsorship and continued
maintenance of community facilities.
F. Subdivisions shall conform to the Borough's plan of parks, recreation
areas and other community facilities.
A. Where connection with the sanitary sewer system of the Borough is
practicable, the owner, by special arrangement with the Council, shall
install sanitary sewers and sewer laterals in conformity with Borough
specifications for sanitary sewer construction before streets and roads
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 168, Zoning.
§ 142-17 BALDWIN CODE § 142-19
1:364
§ 142-20. Monuments.
§ 142-21. Street name signs. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
A street name sign for each intersection shall be installed. The subdivider
shall provide a cash escrow with the Borough of Baldwin to guarantee the
shown on the plans are constructed. All gas, water, electric and other
mains, pipes and conduits, together with all service connections or
laterals, shall be laid, when the need for the same can be reasonably
anticipated, before the streets and roads shown on the plans are
constructed.
B. Where connection to public sanitary sewers is not possible, the
subdivider may install a sewage disposal plant and sanitary sewers
connecting thereto in a manner satisfactory to the State Health
Department; such facilities shall be dedicated to the Borough or shall
be operated in conformance with the regulations of the Pennsylvania
Public Utilities Commission and the State Health Department.
C. Every lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being served by electric,
gas, water, telephone and other utilities as deemed necessary. The linen
plats shall provide easements where required for the installation of said
underground improvements.
D. Where bridges, dams and/or other structures are placed on streams
with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or larger or where a permit is
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Regulations, application should be made to the Department of
Environmental Resources, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, by the person in
interest, and a copy of such permit shall be filed with the Borough
Engineer.
A. Concrete monuments of a type and construction approved by the
Borough Engineer and with a minimum size of four inches by four
inches by 30 inches shall be installed in subdivisions in street rights-ofway,
five feet from street lines, and at intersections of subdivision
boundary lines with street lines as may be required by the Borough
Engineer. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
B. Monuments consisting of a concrete monument at least 30 inches in
length and approved by the Borough Engineer shall be installed in the
plan in the positions as indicated on the linen plat. An escrow for the
installation of the monuments shall be provided to the Borough in an
amount to be determined by the Borough Council. [Amended
3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
C. Monuments shall be scored on the top to coincide exactly with the
intersection of the lines to be marked and shall be set so that the top of
the monument is level with the surface of the surrounding ground as
finally graded.
§ 142-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-21
1:365
placement of these signs. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by
the Borough Council by resolutions adopted from time to time.
§ 142-21 BALDWIN CODE § 142-21
1:366
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements
§ 142-22. Required improvements; compliance required. [Amended
3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
Before final acceptance of any subdivision, the Borough Council shall
require that the necessary grading, paving and other street improvements,
including, where specified by the Borough, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm sewers,
shall have been installed in strict conformity with the standards and
specifications of the Borough. In certain cases the Borough may require that
escrow amounts be placed for the future installation of said items.
§ 142-23. Construction permits.
§ 142-24. Inspections.
§ 142-25. Completion of improvements; approval or rejection.
[Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
A. Before construction shall be begun on any required improvements in a
subdivision, applications for construction permits shall be filed with the
Borough Engineer on the form supplied by the Borough and shall be
accompanied by four sets of plans prepared by a registered professional
engineer setting forth the location and nature of work, together with all
engineering data necessary for completion of work, and shall be
verified by an affidavit made by or on behalf of the owners or owner.
B. Upon the approval of the construction application, plans and
specifications, the Borough shall issue a construction permit to the
owner of the property. The said owner shall pay the cost of any material
tests made and shall reimburse the Borough for the necessary
inspection at the rate of $50 for each day that a Borough inspector is on
the work.
A. The Borough Engineer shall be notified by the owner or contractor at
least 24 hours in advance of the commencement of any construction
operation, such as grading, sewer installation or paving, in order that
provision may be made for the proper inspection of such construction
operation. Samples of materials and every reasonable facility for
ascertaining whether the work is in conformity with the provisions of
this Part 1 shall be furnished to the proper officials and employees of
the Borough in the same manner as is required of contractors under the
terms of the construction specifications of the Borough.
B. Inspection fees are included in the provisions of § 142-10C.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
§ 142-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-25
1:367
§ 142-26. Default of completion guaranty.
If improvements and facilities are not installed and completed within two
years of the date of recording of the plat or do not comply with the
standards and specifications of this Part 1 or if the inspection fee has
not been paid, the Borough may proceed to complete the improvements
and facilities and may use whatever proceeds from bonds, cash deposits,
checks or securities as are required to meet the expense of completing
improvements and facilities or to pay the inspection fee.
§ 142-27. Maintenance bond. [Amended 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454;
6-21-1993 by Ord. No. 660]
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all
of the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing with the Borough Council and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by
the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified
or registered mail, of the action of said Borough Council with relation
thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
A. Prior to acceptance of the required improvements and facilities, the
subdivider shall provide to the Borough for a period of two years from
the date of acceptance of said improvements and facilities a
maintenance bond in the form of a bond, cash or certified check in an
amount equal to 50% of the total cost of said improvements and
facilities to guarantee the maintenance and repair of such
improvements and facilities as may be defective in material or
installation. In the event of default, the Borough shall make necessary
maintenance and repairs from the proceeds of the bond or other surety.
§ 142-25 BALDWIN CODE § 142-27
1:368
B. Following the expiration of the maintenance bond required hereunder,
the obligation for the maintenance, repair, construction and/or
replacement of any sanitary or storm sewer lateral or line extending to
the main line to which such property owner's storm or sanitary sewer
lateral or line is connected shall remain the obligation of the property
owner, and any repairs, maintenance, construction or replacement cost
shall be the obligation of the property owner; provided, however, that in
the event a sanitary or storm sewer lateral or line shall extend beneath
the public street or public way (the paved or traveled portion of the
same) and the property owner notifies the Borough that the portion of
the lateral or line extending beneath the public street or way is
defective, clogged or in some other manner impaired and the owner
certifies the same in writing, then the Borough shall investigate and
determine the cause of the blockage or obstruction or the cause of such
disrepair of the line, and if the cause is determined to be in that portion
of the line under the public street or way (the paved or traveled
portion), then the Borough shall assume the obligation and cost of
repairing, maintaining or replacing such sewer line. In the event that it
is determined that the cause of the obstruction or other disrepair to the
sanitary or storm sewer lateral or line is not under the public street or
public way, then the property owner shall be responsible for the repair,
maintenance or replacement of the lateral or line and shall likewise be
responsible for all costs incurred by the Borough in the investigation
conducted by it following the property owner's certification. All costs,
together with attorney's commission of 10% of the cost, shall be
lienable and shall be filed as a municipal claim pursuant to the
procedure provided by the acts and statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 142-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-27
1:369

ARTICLE VI
Specifications for Plats and Data
§ 142-28. Sketch plan.
§ 142-29. Application for approval of preliminary plat.
An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by
the following documents:
A. The sketch plan, inasmuch as it is not a formal requirement of this Part
1, need not conform to any rigid standards; nevertheless, sufficient data
should be included so as to enable the Planning Commission to
interpret and give advice concerning the sketch plan.
B. It is recommended that the sketch plan be a simple pencil sketch on a
topographic or other suitable base map or print thereof, showing the
proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to
conditions in and around the subdivision.
C. It is further recommended that the following data also be submitted
with the sketch plan: a location map showing the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to traffic arteries, public transportation, shopping
centers, schools and churches; existing and proposed covenants;
utilities available; number and size of residential lots; building types,
size and price range; proposed park, playground and school areas;
proposed commercial facilities, if any; and a time schedule if only part
of the subdivision is to be developed at one time.
A. A preliminary plat on five clear black-line prints on white paper at a
scale of 100 feet to one inch, or larger, which shall include all
contiguous land owned by the subdivider and any other contiguous land
which the subdivider proposes to acquire and develop in the
foreseeable future. The plat shall show all existing conditions and
proposals, including the following:
(1) Streets: names; right-of-way, roadway and paving widths;
approximate grades and gradients; and similar data for alleys, if
any.
(2) Other rights-of-way or easements: location, width and purpose.
(3) The location of utilities and drainage facilities.
(4) Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
(5) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or
other public uses.
(6) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
§ 142-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-29
1:371
§ 142-30. Application for final approval.
An application for final approval need include only that portion of a property
proposed for immediate subdivision.
(7) Minimum building setback lines.
(8) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and
acres in parks and other community facilities.
(9) The title, scale, North arrow and date.
(10) Existing topography based on the latest data available from the
United States Geologic Survey having a contour interval of not less
than five feet.
(11) Proposed topography.
(12) Names of abutting subdivisions and owners of contiguous property.
B. Profiles, at a horizontal scale of 50 feet to one inch or larger and a
vertical scale not more than five times the horizontal scale, showing
existing and proposed center-line grades of existing and proposed
streets.
C. Typical cross sections and construction details of proposed street,
drainage structures and other proposed improvements.
D. A draft of proposed protective covenants whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect
the proposed development.
E. All documents required in the stormwater management sections of this
chapter, as more specifically provided in Part 2 hereof. [Added
4-17-1989 by Ord. No. 605]
A. The following copies of the final plat and other maps shall be submitted:
(1) One original drawing in black waterproof ink on new linen tracing
cloth, which will be returned to the subdivider after being properly
signed and executed upon final approval and which shall be used
for recording purposes.
(2) One reproduced black-line tracing on cloth or approved
transparency, which will be signed and executed upon final
approval and shall be returned to the Borough after recording in
the County Recorder's Office.
(3) Eight clear and legible black-line prints on white paper which may
be distributed by the Borough as follows: one signed and executed
copy to the Planning Commission; one copy each to the School
Board and Borough Road Superintendent; and six copies to the
Manager for distribution.
§ 142-29 BALDWIN CODE § 142-30
1:372
B. The final plat and any other maps shall conform to one of the following
sheet sizes: 18 inches by 24 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 36 inches
by 48 inches. Where necessary to avoid sheets larger than the
maximum, the final plat shall be shown on two or more sheets of
uniform size and shall include a key diagram showing the relative
location of the sections.
C. The final plat shall be at a scale of 50 feet to one inch, or larger, and
shall contain the following data:
(1) The subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Tract boundary lines, rights-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way lines, property and lot lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings, deflection angles and radii, lengths or arcs
and central angles of all curves satisfactory to the Borough
Engineer and sufficient to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(4) Primary control points, approved by the Borough Engineer, or
descriptions and ties to such points, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred, and
the location of all existing and proposed monuments.
(5) The boundary lines of a subdivision shall be determined by actual
ground survey only, said survey to be traversed, balanced and
closed; the total error of closure shall not exceed the linear ratio of
one to 5,000, and the allowable angular error of closure shall not
exceed 30 seconds times the square root of the number of angles.
(6) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land and record
name, date, index number, street and lot lines of adjacent
subdivisions to a minimum distance of 100 feet beyond the
proposed subdivision boundary.
(7) The proposed building setback line for each street or the proposed
placement of each building and sight triangle lines.
(8) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision and
numbers of all lots.
(9) An affidavit and certification inscribed on the plat in black
waterproof ink in the form approved by the Planning Commission.
D. The final plat shall be accompanied by a topographic map at a scale of
50 feet to one inch, or larger, which shall contain the following data:
(1) Boundary lines: bearings and distances.
(2) Easements: location, width and purpose.
(3) Streets on and adjacent to the tract: name and right-of-way width
and location; type, width and elevation of surfacing; and legally
§ 142-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-30
1:373
established center-line elevations, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts,
etc.
(4) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract: location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size of water
mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants; if water mains and
sewers are not in or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and
distance to and size of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of
sewers.
(5) Ground elevations on the tract, based on Sandy Hook data; for land
that slopes less than approximately 2%, show spot elevations at all
breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales and at
selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for
land that slopes more than approximately 2%, either show contours
with an interval of not more than five feet if ground slope is regular,
and such information as sufficient for planning purposes, or show
contours with an interval of not more than two feet if necessary
because of irregular land or the need for more detailed data for
preparing plans and construction drawings.
(6) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions; depth to
groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet.
(7) Other conditions on the tract: watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more
in diameter, houses, barns, shacks and other significant features.
(8) Other conditions on adjacent land extending 100 feet beyond tract
boundaries: approximate direction and gradient of ground slope,
including any embankments or retaining walls, character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of
adjacent unplatted land; for adjacent platted land, refer to
subdivision plat by name, recording date and number, and show the
approximate percentage of build-up, typical lot size and dwelling
type.
(9) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(10) Proposed public improvements: highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction
on or near the tract.
(11)Key plan showing the location of the tract at some legible scale.
(12) Title and certificates: present tract designation according to official
records in the office of the appropriate recorder; title under which
proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with names and addresses
of owners, a notation stating acreage, scale, North arrow, datum,
§ 142-30 BALDWIN CODE § 142-30
1:374
bench marks, certification of a registered civil engineer or
surveyor, date of survey and the address of the engineer or
surveyor.
E. The final plat shall include thereon or be accompanied by the following:
(1) A grading plan, which may be shown on the topographic map,
existing and proposed elevations and contours in accordance with
the standards for the topographic map; existing contours shall be
shown as dotted lines and proposed contours shall be shown as
solid lines, and the grading plans shall be in accordance with the
Borough of Baldwin Grading Ordinance No. 318.106 [Amended
3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454]
(2) Location, size and invert elevation of all sewers and drainage
structures, which may be shown on the grading plan.
(3) Profiles and typical cross sections for all streets, profiles shall show
the existing and proposed grades along the center line and ditch
inverts or tops of curbs of proposed streets; sewer lines and
drainage structures.
(4) A copy of all restrictions and covenants, if any, the subdivider
intends to place in the deeds to the lots in the subdivision.
(5) Written application for final approval on an approved form.
(6) Although not required at the time of application for final approval,
the subdivider shall file a completion guaranty before the plat will
be approved by the Borough Council.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Grading, Excavations and Fill.
§ 142-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-30
1:375

ARTICLE VII
Dedication of Public Improvements
§ 142-31. Acceptance.
When any street, park or other public improvements outlined in the
construction permit shall have been completed in accordance with the
terms of this Part 1 and in strict accordance with the Borough specifications
now in effect or hereafter adopted, as the case may be, said street, park
or improvement shall be deemed private until such time as the same shall
have been offered for dedication to the Borough of Baldwin and accepted,
by separate ordinance or resolution, or until it shall have been condemned
for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
§ 142-32. Submission of as-built plans.
Upon completion of construction and installation of all improvements in
the plan and prior to acceptance by the Borough, the developer shall
have prepared an as-built plan showing all improvements as installed.
This drawing shall be reproducible and shall be submitted to the Borough
Engineering and Inspection Department at least seven days prior to the
proposed date of acceptance of the plan.
§ 142-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-32
1:377

ARTICLE VIII
Violations and Penalties; Amendments107
§ 142-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-17-1989 by Ord. No.
605]
Any person, copartnership or corporation who or which shall subdivide any
lot, tract or parcel of land, lay out, construct, open or dedicate any street,
sanitary sewer, stormwater or water main for public use or travel or for
the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, sell any lot
or erect any building in a subdivision without first having complied with
all the provisions herein, including the provisions of Article X hereof, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, such person or
the members of such copartnership or the officers of such corporation
responsible for such violation shall be sentenced to suffer imprisonment not
exceeding two years or to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 142-34. Amendments. [Amended 4-17-1989 by Ord. No. 605]
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time on its own motion or on
petition or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend,
supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this Part 1.
Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the
Borough Council or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review and a report thereon before the Borough
Council votes on the proposed amendment.
B. No amendment to the subdivision regulations in this Part 1 shall apply
to or offset any application for approval of the preliminary plat or final
approval or a construction permit for any preliminary or final
subdivision plat which has been previously approved by the Borough
Council, provided that said subdivision complies with the provisions of
this Part 1 at the time of said approval.
107. Editor's Note: Original Arts. VIII and IX of Ord. No. 355, pertaining to variances and
appeals, were repealed 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 454.
§ 142-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-34
1:379

ARTICLE IX
Interpretation; When Effective
§ 142-35. Interpretation.
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Part 1 shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health,
safety, morals and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Part
1 are at variance with the requirements, deed restrictions, covenants or
ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
§ 142-36. When effective.
This Part 1 shall become effective on the date of its approval by the Borough
Council; provided, however, that all subdivisions which have been recorded
prior to this date may be completed in accordance with the recorded plat,
and provided further that all subdivisions recorded within 60 days prior
to the approval of this Part 1 are hereby declared void if, at the time of
the adoption of this Part 1, no substantial construction of improvements or
buildings shall have been made or no contracts have been let.
§ 142-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-36
1:381

Part 2
[Adopted 4-17-198S9toBrymOwradt.e Nr oM. a6n0a5g; eAmmeenntded In Its Entirety
12-16-2014 By Ord. No. 859]
ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 142-37. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Baldwin
Stormwater Management Ordinance" or just the "stormwater regulations."
§ 142-38. Grant of power; prior ordinances superseded.
This Part 2 is adopted in accordance with the authority granted to
municipalities to regulate subdivision and land development by the
Stormwater Management Act of October 9, 1978 (P.L. 864, No. 167, 32 P.S.
§§ 680.1 through 680.17), as amended, and the Stormwater Management
Guidelines adopted by the General Assembly. This Part 2 shall supersede all
previous ordinances.
§ 142-39. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted and implemented to achieve the following
general purposes and objectives:
A. To manage stormwater runoff resulting from land alterations and
disturbance activities in accordance with watershed stormwater
management plans adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as amended).108
B. To utilize and protect the desirable existing natural drainage systems
and to preserve the flood protection capacity of streams.
C. To encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve groundwater
supplies and stream flows.
D. To provide for adequate maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management facilities in the Borough.
E. To update and revise the existing Ordinance No. 605 (Note: Said
ordinance comprised the former stormwater regulations, amended in
their entirety by Ord. No. 691.) due to changes in the engineering
concepts concerning stormwater management.
F. To update and revise the existing Ordinance No. 605 (as amended by
Ord. No. 659) due to changes in the engineering and legal concepts
concerning stormwater management.
108. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 142-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-39
1:383
§ 142-40. Applicability.
The provisions of this Part 2 shall apply to all subdivision and land
developments unless specifically exempted or otherwise modified herein.
All activities related to proper operation and maintenance of approved
stormwater management BMPs and all activities that may contribute
nonstormwater discharges to a regulated small MS4 are subject to
regulation by this Part.
G. Inadequate maintenance of stormwater facilities contributes to erosion
and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control
stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control
efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
threatens public health and safety, and increases pollution of water
resources.
H. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
I. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to obtain a
permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Permittees are required to enact, implement, and enforce a
prohibition of nonstormwater discharges to the permittee's regulated
small municipal separate stormsewer systems (MS4s).
J. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
K. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
L. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
M. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the Municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
A. Repealer. Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the
Municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Part 2 is
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
B. Severability. In the event that any section or provision of this Part 2 is
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this
Part 2.
§ 142-39 BALDWIN CODE § 142-40
1:384
§ 142-41. Fees.
§ 142-42. Definitions and word usage.
C. Compatibility with other requirements. Actions taken under this part do
not affect any responsibility, permit or approval for any activity
regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
A. The applicant will be responsible for all fees associated with the
approval and installation of the stormwater management plan; such
fees include, but will not be limited to, inspection, engineering, legal
and administrative. Said fees are posted with the municipality. Such
fees will be established from time to time by the Borough by resolution;
engineer costs and expenses shall be billed to the Borough that shall be
payable by the applicant.
B. Administrative/clerical costs. The review of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the Municipal Engineer. The site inspections
including, but not limited to preconstruction meetings, inspections
during construction of stormwater BMPs, and final inspection upon
completion of the stormwater BMPs.
A. Interpretation. The word "person" includes a corporation, association,
partnership or individual. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory;
the word "may" is permissive. The word "building" includes structure or
any part thereof. Words used in the present tense include the future
tense. Words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
B. Definitions. As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT — The Stormwater Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864 No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1 through 680.17, as amended by Act of
May 24, 1984, No. 63).
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer (including his/her heirs,
successors and assigns), as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as
further amended by Act 209 of 1990 and Act 131 of 1992, who has filed
an application for development within the Borough of Baldwin.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania specializing in civil engineering and
appointed by the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 142-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-42
1:385
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial waterway which periodically or
continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link
between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which
confine the water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT (ACCD) — The Allegheny county
conservation district.
COUNTY — Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage
under a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
DEPARTMENT — The Allegheny County Planning Department.
DESIGN CRITERIA —
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of recurrence (e.g., twenty-five-year storm)
and duration (e.g., 24 hours), and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening, or attenuating of runoff
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area such as detention basins,
reservoirs, on roof tops, in streets, parking lots, or within the drainage
system itself, and releasing the water at a desired rate of discharge.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
A "detention basin" can be designed to drain completely after a storm
event, or it can be designed to contain a permanent pool of water, in
which case it is called a "retention basin."
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land
use or similar action that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — A lot, parcel or tract of land on which
development is taking place or is proposed.
DISCHARGE — Rate of flow, specifically fluid flow; a volume of fluid
flowing from a conduit or channel, or being released from detention
storage, per unit of time; commonly expressed as cubic feet per second
(cfs), million gallons per day (mgd), gallons per minute (gpm). See also
"rate of runoff".
DRAINAGE — Interception and removal of excess surface water or
groundwater from land by artificial or natural means.
DRAINAGE AREA — The contributing land area to a single drainage
basin, expressed in acres, square miles, or other units of area; also
Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and
materials.
(1)
Objectives results or limits which must be met by a facility,
structure, or process in performance of its intended functions.
(2)
§ 142-42 BALDWIN CODE § 142-42
1:386
called a "catchment area", "watershed", or "river basin"; the land area
served by a drainage system or by a watercourse receiving storm and
surface water, also called "subarea".
DRAINAGE BASIN — The land area from which water is carried off by a
natural drainage system; also called a "watershed" or "catchment area".
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands or diminishes, the course, current or cross section of
any watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION — Wearing away of the lands by running, water, glaciers,
winds and waves.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion
of land surfaces.
FLOODPLAIN — A normally dry land area adjacent to stream channels
that is susceptible to inundation by overbank stream flows. For
regulatory purposes, the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act
(Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166)109 and regulations pursuant
to the Act define the floodplain as the area inundated by a one-hundredyear
flood and delineated on a map by FEMA (Federal Emergency
Management Agency) or by the applicant in accordance with Borough
ordinance requirements.
FOREST MANAGEMENT or TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground surface.
GROUND WATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone,
from which wells and springs are fed.
GROUND WATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of ground water
naturally by precipitation or runoff or artificially by spreading or
injection.
HYDRAULICS — The branch of science concerned with the mechanics
of fluids, especially liquids. As applied in stormwater management, the
study of the characteristics of water flow in, and conveyance capacity
of, a watercourse, considering such factors as depth, velocity and
turbulence.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph showing the quantity of runoff at a specific
point in time during a rainfall event.
109. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. 3679-101 et seq.
§ 142-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-42
1:387
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake
rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according
to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after
prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides
a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS).
HYDROLOGY — The science dealing with the waters of the earth and
their distribution and circulation through the hydrosphere (above, on
or within the earth). Engineering hydrology deals with the application
of hydrologic concepts to the design of projects for use and control of
water, as well as the calculation of the rates of stormwater runoff.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL or SURFACE — Material which resists the
entrance or passing through of water or other liquids. Some examples:
pavement or roofs.
INFILTRATION —
INTERMITTENT FLOW — Flow that starts and stops again at different
intervals.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging
or filling or stripping of vegetation; or any other activity which causes
land to be exposed to the danger of erosion or changed water flow
characteristics.
The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores of
a soil or other porous medium.
(1)
(2) The absorption of liquid by the soil.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels or land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants, or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means or, for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or
other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 142-42 BALDWIN CODE § 142-42
1:388
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of
stormwater structures and facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania.
NATURAL STORM WATER RUNOFF REGIME — A watershed where
natural surface configurations, runoff characteristics and defined
drainage conveyances have attained the conditions of equilibrium.
OUTFALL — The points at which stormwater runoff leaves streams,
storm sewers, swales, or other well defined natural or artificial
drainage features, as well as areas of dispersed overland flows within
the site and/or leaving the site.
OUTLET STRUCTURE — A structure designed to control the volume
of stormwater runoff from a detention or retention facility during a
specific length of time.
OWNER — The person or association which is responsible for the care
of the structure(s) described.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PEAK RATE OF RUNOFF (or DISCHARGE) — The maximum rate of
flow of water at a given point and time resulting from a predetermined
storm.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end
result or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe
specific means for achieving it. A specification standard, in contrast,
is one which prescribes the exact characteristics to be used, leaving
little choice to the applicant. The allowable release rate is an example
of a performance standard; the design standards for storm sewers are
specifications standards.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, government unit, public
utility or any legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
PERVIOUS MATERIAL — Material which permits the passage or
entrance of water or other liquid. (i.e., grass, earth, stone, and trees).
POINT OF INTEREST — A point of hydrologic and/or hydraulic concern
such as a bridge, culvert, or channel section, for which the rate of
runoff is computed or measured.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE — A meeting with the Borough prior
to a formal application submittal.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
§ 142-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-42
1:389
QUALIFIED PERSON or QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise
qualified by law to perform the work required by this Part 2.
RATE OF RUNOFF — Instantaneous measurement of water flow
expressed as a unit of volume per unit of time, also referred to as
discharge. Usually stated in cubic feet per second (cfs) or gallons per
minute (gpm).
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more or earth disturbance.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The watershed factor determined
by comparing the maximum rate of runoff from a subbasin to the
contributing rate of runoff to the watershed peak rate at specific points
of interest.
RETENTION BASIN — A type of detention basin designed to contain a
permanent pool of water.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur.
ROUTING — Using an inflow hydrograph to simulate the water flow
through a storage facility creating storage data and an outflow
hydrograph.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any
watershed which affect the rate, amount, and direction of stormwater
runoff. These may include, but are not limited to, vegetation, soils,
slopes, and manmade landscape alterations.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.110
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been removed from its site or
origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's
surface.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind or gravity.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the United States Soil Conservation Service and
specifically found in its publication, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, SCS (or most current edition).
110. Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the USDA.
§ 142-42 BALDWIN CODE § 142-42
1:390
There are several runoff models which implement this methodology and
it is not limited to the TR-55.
STORAGE FACILITY — See "detention basin."
STORM FREQUENCY — See "design storm."
STORM SEWER — A pipe, culvert or underground open channel that
carries intercepted surface runoff, street water, and other wash waters,
or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — Natural or
engineered structures which collect and transport stormwater through
or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet, including but not
limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features,
canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets and pumping
stations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff from a specific development site.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff
will be managed at the development site in accordance with this Part 2.
Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM site plan
throughout this Part.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Waters resulting from snow melt or
precipitation within a drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the
ground, collected in channels and conduits, and carried by receiving
streams.
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — A portion of the watershed that has similar hydrological
characteristics and drains to a common point. Also called a drainage
area.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of subdivision by lease of
land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling shall be exempted.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
UPLAND — The higher parts of a region or tract of land.
VOLUME OF STORMWATER RUNOFF — Quantity of water normally
measured cubic feet or acre-feet, measured or determined analytically
from runoff coefficients; rainfall/runoff ratios; and areas underneath
hydrographs.
§ 142-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-42
1:391
WATERCOURSE (WATERWAY) — Any channel of conveyance of surface
water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial,
with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth. (Source:
The Clean Streams Law111).
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other
body of water whether natural or artificial. A "designated watershed"
is an area delineated by PaDEP and approved by the Environmental
Quality Board as one for which the county is required to prepare
a watershed stormwater management plan in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act.112 Also called a drainage
basin.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The term includes,
but is not limited to, wetland area listed in the State Water Plan, the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service Wetlands Inventory Maps, and
the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and any wetland area
designated by a river basin commission.
111. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
112. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.101 et seq.
§ 142-42 BALDWIN CODE § 142-42
1:392
ARTICLE XI
Stormwater Plan Requirements
§ 142-43. General requirements.
The following general requirements shall be followed for all plan
submissions:
A. No final subdivision or land development plan shall be approved, no
permit authorizing construction issued, or any earthmoving or land
disturbance activity initiated until the final stormwater management
plan for the development site is approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 2.
B. A development of a single lot for a single family home or estate must
submit a simplified stormwater management plan. This plan must
include a site location map, a soils map, the runoff calculations and the
routing computations through the stormwater detention system. A site
plan must be submitted with contours at two foot intervals and all
natural features including any natural watercourse.
C. The Borough Engineer shall review the proposed provisions for
stormwater management for a single lot for a single family home or
estate. Where the applicant is proposing to connect to an existing storm
sewer, the applicant shall demonstrate that sufficient capacity exists in
the storm sewer from the point of connection to the point of outlet in
the natural drainage system. The Borough Engineer shall determine if
the proposed development site is part of a larger parcel or tract for
which a stormwater management plan was approved previously and,
therefore, subject to any specific stormwater management control
contained in the prior plan.
D. At the time of the submission of an application by a developer for
stormwater management review, the developer shall also submit a fee,
which will be established from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Baldwin. Such fees shall be in payment of the
costs incurred by the Borough for the review by the Borough Engineer
of the development plan, for any legal fees incurred in preparation of
development plan agreements, and other services, which shall be
established by resolution of the Borough Council from time to time, and
the cost of issuing permits related to the plan.
E. Techniques described in Appendix E (Low Impact Development) of this
chapter are encouraged, because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this Part 2 and the state water quality
requirements.
F. In conjunction with meeting the requirements of this Part 2, the
applicant shall refer to and meet all conditions and requirements set
forth in the Borough of Baldwin Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) Prohibited Discharge Ordinance.
§ 142-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-43
1:393
§ 142-44. Criteria for small developments.
G. In conjunction with meeting the requirements of this Part 2, the
Applicant shall refer to and meet all conditions and requirements set
forth in the Borough of Baldwin Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) Plan
as adopted and revised.
A. At the time of application, the Borough Engineer shall determine if the
subdivision of land development qualifies as a "small development" and
therefore is eligible for a simplified stormwater management plan
submission. For the purposes of this article, a small development is as
follows: any subdivision or land development which results (or will
result when fully constructed) in the creation of 5,000 or less square
feet of impervious surface area shall be classified as a small
development and is exempt from a stormwater management plan
submission. Small developments must provide safe management of
stormwater runoff in accordance with the performance standard of this
article and as approved by the Borough. Any stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of the development shall be designed to
control the peak pre-development stormwater runoff for the one-, two-,
ten-, twenty-five-, and one-hundred-year storm. The detention facility
must be able to safely pass the post development one-hundred-year
storm peak discharge. The facility must provide an emergency outlet
which can discharge the peak runoff for the undetained post
development one-hundred-year storm.
B. Applications for small developments shall include a plan which
describes, narratively and graphically, the type and location of
proposed on site stormwater management techniques or the proposed
connection to an existing storm sewer system. The plan should show
accurately site boundaries, contours at five-foot intervals for areas of
greater than fifteen-percent slope gradient and at two-foot intervals for
areas with less than fifteen-percent slope, location of watershed and/or
subarea boundaries on the site (if applicable); and any watercourses,
flood plains or exiting drainage facilities or structures located on the
site.
C. The predevelopment and post-development calculations which show the
amount of increase impervious area for the land development must be
submitted prior to receiving an exception from submission of a
stormwater management plan.
D. If applicable, a copy of the PaDEP stream encroachment permit and all
supporting calculations must be submitted prior to an exemption.
E. If the land development discharges its runoff into a floodway or a
natural or manmade swale or ditch, and is located upstream of a known
area of continuous flooding, the calculations showing no increase in the
peak water surface elevation at the point of flooding shall be submitted
for review.
§ 142-43 BALDWIN CODE § 142-44
1:394
§ 142-45. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Ordinance.
In conjunction with meeting the requirements of this Part 2, the applicant
shall refer to and meet all conditions and requirements set forth in the
Borough of Baldwin's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
Prohibited Discharge Ordinance.
F. The Borough Engineer shall review and approve the proposed
provisions for stormwater management for a small development. Where
the applicant is proposing to connect to an existing storm sewer, the
applicant shall demonstrate that sufficient capacity exists in the storm
sewer from the point of connection to the point of outlet in the natural
drainage system. The Borough Engineer shall determine if the proposed
development site is part of a larger parcel or tract for which a
stormwater management plan was approved previously, and therefore
subject to any specific stormwater management control contained in
the prior plan.
G. For a parcel or tract of land held under single ownership, only one
application for a small development, as defined above, shall be
permitted before requiring a stormwater management plan for the
entire parcel. A project cannot be phased to circumvent the stormwater
requirements by using the exemption for small developments.
Stormwater for phased projects will be looked at as a whole.
§ 142-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-45
1:395

ARTICLE XII
Stormwater Plan Contents: Preliminary Plan
§ 142-46. General format.
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared using the general
performance and technical standards requirements for plan format
contained in Part 1, the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and
in this article with the following additions:
A. Watershed location map: Provide a key map showing the location of the
development site within the watershed(s) and watershed(s)
subareas(s). On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are located on the development
site and identify watershed name(s) and subarea number(s). Example:
Use a USGS map with the watershed, watershed subareas, and the
subject property all outlined and designated.
B. Subwatershed map: A plan must be submitted showing all the drainage
areas and subwatersheds for the pre- and post-development peak runoff
calculations. Example: Use the site plan and draw the watersheds and
subwatersheds on the plan.
C. Floodplain boundaries: Identify one-hundred-year floodplain on the
development site as shown on the FEMA mapping where applicable. In
the case where no FEMA mapping exists for a watercourse that
boarders the proposed development site, the applicant's determination
of the one-hundred-year floodplain for any watercourse or water body
on the development site shall be used.
D. Natural features: Show all bodies of water (natural and artificial),
watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales, wetlands and other
natural drainage courses on the development site, or which will be
affected by runoff from the development.
E. Soils: Provide a map showing soil types and boundaries within the
development site (consult county, SCS, U.S. Geologic Survey for
information). The soils must be defined on the plan.
F. Contours: Show existing and final contours at intervals of two feet; in
areas with slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
G. Stormwater management controls: Show any existing stormwater
management and/or drainage structures, such as storm sewers, swales,
culverts, etc., which are located on the development site, or which are
located off site but will be affected by runoff from the development.
H. Wetlands: Show any areas on the plan which have soils with hydric
inclusions, are shown on the National Wetlands Inventory Map and/or
support common wetland plants. These areas must be delineated by a
registered professional engineer who specializes in this field.
§ 142-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-46
1:397
§ 142-47. Construction criteria for stormwater control facilities.
Stormwater management facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
the following minimum specifications:
I. Appendix A.113 The preliminary stormwater management plan checklist
must be completed and submitted.
J. A Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan or NPDES Plan
in accordance with Chapter 102 of PaDEP Administrative Code Title 25
as authorized by the Clean Streams Law, Act 222,114 amended, and
current Borough Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance115 must
be submitted.
K. Land cover: Show existing and final land cover classifications as
necessary to support and illustrate the runoff calculations performed.
L. Drainage area delineations: Show the boundaries of the drainage areas
employed in the runoff calculations performed.
M. Stormwater management controls: Show any existing stormwater
management or drainage controls and/or structures, such as sanitary
and storm sewers, swales, culverts, etc., which are located on the
development site, or which are located off site but will be affected by
runoff from the development.
N. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement post-construction with
assurance of long-term operations and maintenance of those BMPs.
A. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the borough
construction standards. In addition, all workmanship and materials
shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be
supplied by manufacturers or suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin 15.
B. All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by
construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide
access for clean-out. No blind connections shall be permitted.
C. All pipe outlets shall discharge onto a stone riprap blanket to prevent
erosion of soil. Riprap shall be sized considering pipe exit velocities
plus a factor of safety of 1.5.
D. The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined drainage
course which has a defined bed and bank. If stormwater runoff cannot
113. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
114. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 69.11 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 142-46 BALDWIN CODE § 142-47
1:398
§ 142-48. Professional certification.
The stormwater management plan (including all calculations) must be
prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer, or land
surveyor with training and expertise in hydrology and hydraulics, or such
other professional persons as are qualified to make certification under the
laws of Pennsylvania. The preparer of the stormwater management plan
must fill out and submit Appendix C116 with said plan.
§ 142-49. Runoff calculations.
§ 142-50. Detention facility routings.
be discharged to a defined drainage course, documentation of written
recorded drainage easement permission from each downstream
property owner shall be provided for all properties between the source
of discharge and the defined drainage course.
A. Runoff calculations are the acceptable methods of calculation for use in
determining the stormwater runoff correspondence with
recommendations of the Monongahela River Watershed Plan, prepared
by the county, in order to maintain a uniform, watershed wide
approach. The following methods for calculating pre- and postdevelopment
runoff rates have been stipulated in the standards and
criteria of the watershed plan:
(1) Methods of runoff calculations, such as:
(a) The Modified Rational Method may be used for drainage areas
less than or equal to three acres.
(b) The SCS TR-55, TR-20, HEC-1 Virginia Tech/Penn State Runoff
Model or the Penn State Runoff Model must be used for all
drainage areas greater than three acres.
B. All pertinent information used to generate the pre- and post-developed
discharge rates must be included with the stormwater management
plan. Also, the calculations for the sizing of the stormwater control
facilities must be submitted with the stormwater management plan.
A. All inflow hydrographs to detention facilities must be routed using
methodology that analyzes detention storage and outflow
simultaneously with respect to time. The modified-puls method or
approved equal, as found in Haested Method's Pond 2 or the Army
Corps of Engineers HEC-1, is recommended.
B. The following provisions shall be considered the overriding
performance standards against which all proposed stormwater control
measures shall be evaluated, and they shall apply to all areas of the
borough.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of of this chapter.
§ 142-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-50
1:399
§ 142-51. Stormwater controls.
All proposed stormwater runoff control measures must be shown on the
plan, including methods for collecting, conveying and storing stormwater
runoff on site which are to be used both during and after construction.
Erosion and sedimentation controls must be shown on a separate plan. The
preliminary plan should provide information on the general type, location,
sizing, etc., of all proposed facilities and their relationship to the existing
watershed drainage system.
C. Stormwater shall not be permitted, as a result of development
undertaken after adoption of this Part 2 to collect upon any property, or
to pass from one property to another in a concentrated flow without
benefit of a legal easement, or to cross a public street on the surface.
D. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property. Such
measures shall include such actions as are required:
(1) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater
after development than prior to development activities; and
(2) To manage the quality, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which will not adversely impact the
health on, or value of, any affected properties.
E. In the case of a development in which the total of the building and
paved surfaces on the site exceed 10,000 square feet, the developer
shall provide as part of the design a stormwater management narrative
signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The stormwater management narrative shall include an
analysis of both pre- and post-developed runoff conditions.
(1) For the analysis of redevelopment projects 20% of the existing
impervious surface shall be considered meadow in good condition.
(2) Post-development runoff rates after development shall not exceed
the pre-developed runoff rates including the reduction in
impervious surface required for redevelopment projects.
A. If the development is to be constructed in stages, the applicant must
demonstrate that stormwater facilities will be installed to manage
stormwater runoff safely during each stage of development.
B. A schedule for the installation of all temporary and permanent
stormwater control measures and devices shall be submitted.
C. If appropriate, a justification should be submitted as to why any
preferred stormwater management techniques, as listed in § 142-66,
are not proposed for use.
§ 142-50 BALDWIN CODE § 142-52
1:400
§ 142-52. Easements, rights-of-way, deed restrictions.
All existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/
or access to stormwater control facilities shall be shown and the proposed
owner identified. Show any areas subject to special deed restrictions
relative to or affecting stormwater management on the development site.
§ 142-53. Other permits and approvals.
§ 142-54. Maintenance program.
The preliminary application shall contain a proposed maintenance plan for
all stormwater control facilities, in accordance with the following:
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the
municipality.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance, or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other BMPs, by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under Section 405.
C. If a conservation easement is provided, the long-term ownership,
access, maintenance, and use restrictions must be identified on the
recording plan.
A. A list of any approvals/permits relative to stormwater management that
will be required from other governmental agencies (e.g., a water
obstruction permit from PaDEP or approval from Allegheny County
Planning), and anticipated dates of submission/receipt should be
included with the preliminary plan submission. Copies of applications
must be submitted to the borough.
B. A list of any permits relative to wetlands along with a wetlands study
must be submitted to the borough if wetlands are found on the
development site. The wetlands study must be prepared, signed and
sealed by a person certified to do such work.
A. Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., municipality, property
owner, a homeowners, association, other management entity).
B. If ownership is to be an entity other than the borough, include a
maintenance program for all facilities, outlining the type of
maintenance activities, probable frequencies, personnel and equipment
requirements, and estimated annual maintenance costs.
C. Identify method of financing continuing operation and maintenance if
facility is to be owned by other than the borough or other governmental
agency.
§ 142-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-54
1:401
§ 142-55. Financial guaranties.
Submit financial guaranties in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI
of this Part 2.
D. Include copies of any legal agreements required to implement the
maintenance program and, if applicable, copies of the maintenance
agreement as required by Article XVI of this Part 2 for all facilities.
§ 142-54 BALDWIN CODE § 142-55
1:402
ARTICLE XIII
Stormwater Plan Contents: Final Plan
§ 142-56. Required documentation.
A. General requirements. The final stormwater management plan shall be
prepared using the general performance and technical standards and
requirements for plan format contained in Part 1, the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance, and in this article with the following
additions:
(1) All information pertaining to stormwater management from the
preliminary plan along with any changes.
(2) Final maps showing the exact nature and location of all temporary
and permanent stormwater management controls along with
design and construction specifications. Details for the construction
of all facilities shall be included as part of the construction
drawings.
(3) A schedule for the installation of all temporary and permanent
stormwater control measures and devices.
(4) An accurate survey showing all current and proposed easements
and rights-of-way and copies of all proposed deed restrictions.
(5) A maintenance program establishing ownership and maintenance
responsibilities for all stormwater control facilities (identify
specific person or entity) and detailing financial requirements and
sources of funding. Submit any legal agreements required to
implement the maintenance program and copies of the
maintenance agreement as specified by this article.
(6) Financial guaranties, to ensure that all stormwater controls are
installed properly and functioning satisfactorily.
(7) Anything else within reason that might be required by the Borough
Engineer and/or Borough of Baldwin to effectuate the purposes of
this Part 2.
(8) Appendix B. The final stormwater management plan checklist must
be competed and submitted.117
(9) Notification of adjacent property owners.
B. Additional information. The information requested in Appendixes A, B
and C must be submitted.118
117. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
118. Editor's Note: Said Appendixes are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 142-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-56
1:403

ARTICLE XIV
Stormwater Plan Review Procedures
§ 142-57. Preapplication phase.
§ 142-58. Preliminary and final stormwater plan reviews.
A. During the preapplication conference, applicants are encouraged to
consult with the Borough Engineer, the Allegheny County Planning
Department, and the county conservation district on the applicable
regulations and techniques for safely managing stormwater runoff from
the development site in a manner consistent with the Borough
ordinances. These agencies may be helpful in providing the data that is
necessary for preparing the stormwater management plan or the
development site.
B. Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a narrative
description of the proposed stormwater management controls for
general guidance and discussion with the Borough and other agencies.
C. The preapplication phase is not mandatory, and any review comments
provided by Borough or other agencies are advisory only and do not
constitute any binding action on the part of the Borough or any other
agency.
A. Preliminary and final plans required. Stormwater management plans, in
accordance with the requirements of this Part 2, will be submitted with
the preliminary and final subdivision or land development plan
application to the Borough Secretary, together with the appropriate
fees.
B. Review by Borough Engineer and Conservation District. Preliminary
and final stormwater management plans will be reviewed by the
Borough Engineer.
C. Notification of affected municipalities. If, during the review of the
proposed stormwater management plan, the Borough determines that
properties in adjacent municipalities may be affected by the stormwater
runoff and proposed management system for the site, the applicant will
notify the affected municipality(ies) and provide an opportunity to
submit comments as part of the preliminary or final plan reviews.
Copies of the plans will be made available to the municipalities upon
request. Comments received will be submitted to the Planning
Commission and Borough Council.
D. Borough Engineer's review. The Borough Engineer shall provide a
recommendation to approve or disapprove the preliminary and final
stormwater management plan based on the requirements of the
Borough's ordinances, the standards and criteria of the watershed plan
and good engineering practice. The Engineer shall submit a written
report, along with supporting documentation, to the Borough Planning
§ 142-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-58
1:405
§ 142-59. Status of stormwater plan after final approval.
Upon recording of the final plat, the applicant may start to install or
implement the approved stormwater management controls, subject to the
Commission for its consideration as part of the overall subdivision or
land development plan review. In the cases where the Borough will
be responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater management
facility, the Borough Engineer shall also prepare a recommended
maintenance program for review and approval by Council.
E. Approval of stormwater plan required for subdivision and land
development approval. No preliminary or final approval shall be
granted for the overall subdivision or land development application
until a stormwater management plan for the site has been approved.
F. Permits required from other governmental agencies. Where the
subdivision or land development application requires a water
obstruction or erosion/sedimentation permit, then final subdivision or
land development plan approval shall be conditional upon receipt of
such permits. However, no building permit shall be issued, or
construction started, until the permits are received and copies filed
with the Borough. Approval from Allegheny county conservation district
or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for Soil
and Erosion is required prior to construction.
G. County planning review.
(1) The Borough shall forward a copy of the stormwater plan, along
with all runoff calculations, shall be forwarded to the Allegheny
County Planning Department. A report of the findings will be
returned to the Borough within 30 days.
(2) If the Allegheny County Planning Department determines that the
plan fails to comply with the watershed standards and criteria or
that a possibility exists for harmful downstream impacts from the
development site, the applicant will be advised so that proposed
stormwater management controls can be modified. The Borough
Engineer shall not recommend approval of the development site's
stormwater management plan until it receives a positive review
from the County Planning Department.
H. Status of the Engineer's determination. The recommendation of
approval/disapproval of the site's stormwater management plan by the
Borough Engineer shall be considered final. The governing body shall
not reverse the engineer's determination by approval or disapproving
the site's stormwater management plan or any specific control measure
in contradiction to the engineer's action. The governing body may
request modifications or alternative approaches to the stormwater
management controls, provided that these are agreed to by the
Borough Engineer and the applicant's engineer.
§ 142-58 BALDWIN CODE § 142-59
1:406
provisions of the above. If site development or building construction does
not begin within two years of the date of final approval of the subdivision or
land development plan, then before doing so, the applicant shall resubmit
the stormwater management plans to verify that no condition has changed
within the watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the
previously approved stormwater management controls. Further, if for any
reason development activities are suspended for two years or more, then
the same requirement for resubmission of the stormwater management
plan shall apply. The terms of these subsequent reviews shall be subject
to the provisions of this Part 2 and any amended additional ordinances
subsequently passed.
§ 142-60. Stormwater plan modifications.
Procedures for approving plan modifications. Requests for modifications in
the final approved stormwater management controls shall be submitted to
the Borough Engineer as follows:
A. If the request is initiated before construction begins, the stormwater
plan must be resubmitted and reviewed according to the original
procedures.
B. If the request is initiated after construction is underway, the Borough
Engineer shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the
modification, based on field inspection, provided that the request
changes in stormwater controls do not result in any modifications to
other approved borough land use/development requirements. The
Borough Engineer shall maintain a record of all changes approved for
the stormwater management controls and shall submit these to
Borough Council with the final as-built plans for the development, prior
to the acceptance of any improvements by the Borough and/or the
release of any bond money for improvements being constructed. If no
bond money was required, this information must be submitted prior to
the Borough's final inspection of the plan is completed and approval is
granted.
§ 142-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-60
1:407

ARTICLE XV
Stormwater Management Performance Standards
§ 142-61. Stormwater zones: Monongahela River Watershed.
§ 142-62. General performance standards.
The following provisions shall be considered the overriding performance
standards against which all proposed stormwater control measures shall be
evaluated:
A. For purposes of stormwater management, the municipality of Baldwin
Borough is divided into stormwater management release rate zones.
These zones are designated in the Monongahela River Watershed Plan,
and a map of these zones may be found in Appendix D119 of this chapter.
(1) The following release rate zones are located within Baldwin
Borough:
Zone 2 Zone 21
Zone 4 Zone 22
Zone 6 Zone 24
Zone 9 Zone 32
Zone 12 Zone 34
Zone 15 Zone 35
Zone 43
(2) One or more of these districts may be further subdivided into
subareas which have similar hydrological characteristics and drain
to a common point.
B. The location and boundaries of the watershed(s) and subareas are
shown on the Municipal Stormwater Management District Zone Map
which is hereby adopted as part of this section. A copy of this District
Map is available through the Borough Office.
A. Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property. Such
measures shall include actions as required and shall be evaluated
according to the following standards:
(1) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is no greater
after development than prior to development activities; or
119. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 142-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-62
1:409
§ 142-63. Technical performance standards.
The stormwater performance standards contained in this article are
intended to implement the standards and criteria contained in the
Monongahela River Stormwater Management plan, adopted and approved
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act.120 If
there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this section and the
standards and criteria of the plan, or if the watershed plan is subsequently
amended, then the standards/criteria of the current watershed plan shall
govern.
§ 142-64. Storm frequencies.
(2) To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
B. The stormwater management plan for the development site must
consider all the stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
C. No discharge of toxic materials into any stormwater management
system shall be permitted. Where required by federal and state
regulation, the landowner or developer shall be responsible for
obtaining a NPDES permit for stormwater discharges.
D. For any development that is to be constructed in stages, the applicant
must demonstrate that stormwater facilities shall be installed to
manage stormwater runoff safely during each stage of development.
E. For the analysis of redevelopment projects 20% of the existing
impervious surface shall be considered meadow in good condition.
F. Where existing storm sewers are reasonably accessible, proposed
developments shall be required to connect with the storm sewer system
unless insufficient capacity or other reasons can be demonstrated to
prevent the connection. The Borough Engineer shall determine what is
reasonably accessible.
A. Stormwater management facilities on all development sites shall
control the peak stormwater discharge for the one-, two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm frequencies. The SCS twentyfour-
hour Type II Rainfall Distribution shall be used for analyzing
stormwater runoff for both pre- and post-development conditions. The
twenty-four-hour total rainfall for these storm frequencies in the
watershed are:
120. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 142-62 BALDWIN CODE § 142-64
1:410
§ 142-65. Calculation methods.
Design Storm Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth in
Inches
1-year 1.97
2-year 2.50
10-year 3.61
25-year 4.31
50-year 4.40
100-year 5.71
B. The Modified Rational Method shall be used for analyzing the
stormwater runoff for small watersheds as specified in this article. The
rainfall intensities for the design storms are as specified. (For additional
information or data on other return periods, consult the Rainfall
Duration Frequency Tables for Pennsylvania, produced by PaDEP, Office
of Resource Management, Division of Stormwater Management,
Harrisburg, February 1983, or in its most recent update.)
A. Development sites. For the purposes of computing peak discharges and
runoff hydrographs from development sites and drainage areas larger
than three acres, calculations shall be performed using the
methodologies presented in SCS Publication, Technical Release 55 (TR
55) or TR 20, HEC 1, Penn State Runoff Method (PSRM), Modified
Rational Method, or an approved method for analyzing these types of
watersheds. For development sites less than three acres, the Rational
Method may be utilized using the design storm criteria shown in
§ 142-63 or an approved method for analyzing these types of
watersheds. The Borough may approve the use of simulation computer
programs for the stormwater analysis and design. The appropriate
calculations and worksheets or acceptable computer printouts as
approved by the Borough must be submitted regardless of the
methodology used for these calculations. An approved simulation of the
modified puls (Haested Method Pond 2, HEC 1) routing methodology
shall be used in analysis for routing the design storm hydrographs
through the detention/retention facility. The proper stage/storage and
stage/discharge and routed outflow hydrographs must be submitted for
approval.
B. Stormwater collection/conveyance facilities. For the purpose of
designing storm sewers, open swales and other stormwater runoff
collection and conveyance facilities, the Rational Method shall be
applied. Rainfall intensities for a twenty-five-year design storm with a
minimum five-minute duration must be used and should be obtained
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's Part II Manual,
Chapter 10, Rainfall Intensity Charts. However, if the existing Tc is
larger than five minutes, it should be used as the rainfall duration.
§ 142-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-65
1:411
§ 142-66. Release rate percentage.
C. Detention/retention basin. The inflow hydrograph shall be routed
through the detention/retention facility by using the Modified Puls
method or other recognized routing method subject to the approval of
the Borough and the County. The routing and outflow hydrographs for
each design storm must be submitted.
D. Pre-development conditions. Pre-development conditions shall be
assumed to be those which exist on any site at the time of adoption of
the Monongahela River Stormwater Management Plan. Hydrologic
conditions for all areas with pervious cover (i.e., fields, woods, lawn
areas, pastures, cropland, etc.) shall be assumed to be in good
condition, and the lowest recommended SCS runoff curve number (CN)
shall be applied for all pervious land uses within the respective range
for each land use and hydrologic soil group.
A. Definition. The release rate percentage defines the percentage of the
pre-development peak rate of runoff that can be discharged from an
outfall on the site after development. It applies uniformly to all land
development or alterations within a subarea.
B. Procedure for use:
(1) Identify the specific subarea in which the development site is
located from the watershed map located in Appendix D of this Part
2121 and obtain the subarea release rate percentage from the
following corresponding zone release rate percentages:
Assigned Release Rate Area Release Rate Percentage
Zone 2 100
Zone 4 60
Zone 6 60
Zone 9 90
Zone 12 50
Zone 15 70
Zone 21 50
Zone 22 60
Zone 24 70
Zone 32 70
Zone 34 50
Zone 35 70
Zone 43 100
121. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 142-65 BALDWIN CODE § 142-66
1:412
§ 142-67. No-harm evaluation.
All other areas not located within an assigned zone by the
Monongahela River Watershed Plan are assigned the release rate
of 100%.
(2) Compute the pre- and post-development runoff hydrographs for
each stormwater outfall on the development site using an
acceptable calculation method for the one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty- and one-hundred-year storms. If the post-development peak
runoff rate and the runoff volume is less than or equal to the predevelopment
peak runoff rate and volume, then additional
stormwater control shall not be required at the outfall. If the postdevelopment
peak runoff rate and volume are greater than the predevelopment
peak runoff rate and volume, then stormwater
detention shall be required. The maximum allowable release rate
form the detention facility shall be calculated by multiplying the
subarea release rate percentage by the pre-development rate of
runoff from the development site for each of the four design storms.
A. An applicant may seek to exceed the otherwise applicable subarea
release rate percentage by performing the "no-harm evaluation." This
evaluation requires an independent engineering analysis to
demonstrate that other reasonable options exist to prevent the
occurrence of increased stormwater runoff discharge rates and/or
velocities, or that measures can be provided to prevent increased
stormwater discharge rates and/or velocities from increasing flood
elevations and accelerating erosion at all downstream points in the
watershed.
B. A no-harm evaluation will be considered only in the following instances:
(1) In the Monongahela River Watershed: only in instances where the
discharge to a stream channel from the development site occurs
directly to the Monongahela River, to an adequately sized storm or
combined sewer which discharges directly into the Monongahela
River, or through a properly sized and designed regional
stormwater detention facility.
C. The analysis for the no-harm evaluation shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer and the Allegheny County Planning Department for
review and approval.
D. The no-harm evaluation shall be prepared by a registered engineer who
is experienced in hydrology and hydraulics. The no-harm evaluation
analysis shall be completed using the following procedure.
E. The analysis shall be completed using an approved calculation
methodology in the following manner:
§ 142-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-67
1:413
§ 142-68. Design criteria for stormwater management controls.
(1) Develop the runoff hydrograph(s) for the design storms of the site
and areas tributary to it using the approved methodology for predevelopment
conditions using the land use characterizations
contained in the Monongahela River Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan.
(2) Develop the post-development discharge hydrograph from the
proposed site using the approved methodology.
(3) Subtract the runoff hydrograph ordinates under pre-development
conditions (Step 1) from the discharge hydrograph ordinates (Step
2), maintaining the time scales of both hydrographs for one-to-one
correspondence.
(4) Obtain the hydraulic model for the existing conditions for the
Monongahela River Watershed from the county.
(5) Locate the subbasin(s) in which the proposed development is
located and into which the discharge hydrograph enters. If more
than one subbasin receives this incremental flow, divide the flow
accordingly.
(6) Add the incremental increase computed in Step 3 to the runoff
hydrograph of the subbasin(s) identified in Step 5.
(7) Route the adjusted runoff hydrograph through the Monongahela
River Watershed Model and note any increase in peak flows which
would occur in downstream subbasins. If no increase is noted, then
the no-harm has been demonstrated. If no increase is observed in
peak flows, the increased potential for erosion and/or
sedimentation in downstream channels resulting from any change
in the flood hydrograph predicted by the model shall be evaluated.
If no increased potential can be demonstrated by appropriated
technical means, then the "No-Harm" exemption may be requested.
(8) If an increase in peak flow is observed in any of the downstream
subbasins or increased potential for erosion and/or sedimentation
is indicated, the no-harm exemption shall not be granted.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or combinations of
techniques, as provided in this Part 2, Stormwater Management
Ordinance, which are most suitable to the level of stormwater
runoff control required, the type of development, and the natural
features of the site. Cost of maintenance shall be one of the
considerations in the designs selected. All controls are subject to
the approval of the Borough Engineer. The Engineer may request
specific information on design and/or operating features of the
§ 142-67 BALDWIN CODE § 142-68
1:414
proposed stormwater controls in order to determine their
suitability and adequacy in terms of the standards of this Part 2.
(2) In selecting and designing stormwater management systems and
controls, applicants may be guided by the following references:
(a) Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No.
55, USDA, Soil Conservation Service, June 1986 (or most
recent edition).
(b) Part II Design Manual, The Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, 1990 Edition (or most recent update).
(c) HEC 1 and HEC 2, U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, most recent
edition.
(d) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, March 1982.
(e) Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control, Maryland Water Resources Administration, 1983.
(f) Urban Stormwater Management, Special Report No. 49,
American Public Works Administration, 1981.
(g) Water Resources Protection Measures in Land Development - A
Handbook, University of Delaware Water Resources Center,
April 1974.
(h) Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9, Water Pollution Control Federation,
1970.
(3) The applicant should consider the effect on the proposed
stormwater management techniques of any special soil conditions
or geological hazards which may exist on the development site. In
the event such conditions are identified on the development site,
the Borough may require in-depth studies by a competent
geotechnical engineer.
(4) In developing a stormwater management plan for a particular site,
stormwater controls shall be selected according to the following
preference:
(a) Infiltration of runoff on site.
(b) Stormwater detention/retention facilities.
(5) Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to
reduce peak runoff and promote groundwater recharge. A
combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the
applicable minimum control requirements. Justification shall be
provided by the applicant for rejecting each of the preferred
practices based on actual site conditions.
§ 142-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-68
1:415
B. Criteria for stormwater detention facilities.
(1) If detention facility(ies) are utilized for the development site, the
facility(ies) shall be designed such that post-development peak
runoff rates from the developed site are controlled to those rates
defined by the subarea release rate percentage for the one-, two-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm frequencies.
(2) All detention facilities shall be equipped with outlet structures to
provide discharge control for the four designated storm
frequencies. Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the postdevelopment
one-hundred-year storm runoff in the event of an
outlet structure failure without damaging or impairing the
continued function of the facilities (i.e., impairing the continued
function of the facilities). The facility(ies) must have an emergency
outlet which is able to discharge the post-development onehundred-
year peak flow. Should any stormwater management
facilities qualify as a dam under PaDEP Chapter 105 criteria, the
facility shall be designed in accordance with those regulations and
meet the regulations concerning dam safety.
(3) Shared-storage facilities which provide detention of runoff for more
than one development site may be considered within a single
subarea. Such facilities shall meet the design criteria contained in
this section. In addition, runoff from the development sites involved
shall be conveyed to the facility in a manner so as to avoid adverse
impacts, such as flooding or erosion, to channels and properties
located between the development site and the shared-storage
facilities.
(4) Where detention facilities will be utilized, multiple-use facilities
such as lakes, ballfields or similar recreational uses, shall be
considered first as storage facilities wherever feasible, subject to
the approval of the Borough and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Chapter 105 Regulations.
(5) Other considerations which should be incorporated into the design
of the detention facilities include the following:
(a) Inflow and outflow structures should be designed and installed
to prevent erosion, and bottoms of impoundment-type
structures must be protected from soil erosion. All outlet
velocities must be calculated and submitted. If riprap is used,
the sizing calculations must be submitted.
(b) Control and removal of debris both in the storage structure and
in all inlet or outlet devices must be a design consideration.
Trash racks on the outlet structures are required to minimize
debris that enters the structure.
§ 142-68 BALDWIN CODE § 142-68
1:416
(c) Inflow and outflow structures, pumping stations and other
structures should be protected and designed to minimize
safety hazards.
(d) The interior slope of a detention/retention basin shall be 3:1
(horizontal to vertical). The water depth at the perimeter of a
storage pond should be limited to that which is safe for
children. This is especially necessary if bank slopes are steep
or if ponds are full and recirculating in dry periods. Restriction
of access (fences, walls, etc.) may be necessary depending on
the location of the facility.
(e) Detention/retention basins shall require a supporting report
from a geotechnical engineer including design
recommendations for embankment construction, interior and
exterior slopes, drainage swales and infiltration areas, and
shall be constructed under the supervision of the geotechnical
engineer.
(f) Landscaping must be provided for the facility which
harmonizes with the surrounding area. Landscaping of the
pond embankment shall not be permitted.
(g) Facility must be accessible for maintenance purposes,
considering the frequency and type of equipment that will be
required. A maintenance schedule must be submitted and
approved by the Borough.
(h) Details of the facility must be shown on the plan.
(i) A riprap channel with underdrain for low flows must be sized
properly and provided within the pond.
(j) If an underground facility (i.e., tank, sump) is proposed, a
cleanout manhole with steps must be provided.
(k) An emergency spillway must be provided for all detention/
retention facilities. For aboveground basins, the spills must be
sized to pass the entire one-hundred-year post-development
storm with one foot of freeboard.
(l) Outlet control structures shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete (cast-in-place, precast or block) and provided with
trash racks approved by the Borough.
(m) All impoundment areas shall be adequately underdrained to
prevent long-term ponding of water.
(n) All detention facilities shall be provided with an access road
(with a legal easement) for maintenance purposes. Such roads
shall be minimum of 10 feet wide, have a maximum grade of
15% and be of a stone or impervious surface.
§ 142-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-68
1:417
(o) All pond outlet structures shall have suitable gaskets to
prevent leakage and piping of water through the pond
embankment. All storm pipe installed through the pond
embankment must be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe.
(p) An as-built drawing shall be required for each stormwater
detention facility constructed. (The drawing shall represent
the volume of the facility and the stage-storage relationship.)
The drawing shall be stamped by a registered professional
engineer and submitted to the Borough within 60 days of the
completion of the facility. No facility will be accepted until this
requirement has been fulfilled.
(q) The exterior slope of a detention/retention pond shall not
exceed three horizontal to one vertical.
(r) Normally dry, open-top, storage BMPs should drain in 24 hours
to 72 hours.
(s) Infiltration BMPs should be spread out and shallow as much as
practicable.
C. Criteria for collection/conveyance facilities. All stormwater runoff
collection or conveyance facilities, whether storm sewers or other open
or closed channels, shall be designed in accordance with the following
basic standards:
(1) All sites shall be graded to provide drainage away from and around
the structure in order to prevent any potential flooding damage.
(2) Lots located on the high side of streets shall extend roof and french
drains to the storm sewer in the street or to the gutter line of the
street if no sewer exists. Low side lots shall extend roof and french
drains to a stormwater collection/conveyance system or natural
watercourse in accordance with the approved stormwater
management plan for the development site.
(3) Collection/conveyance facilities should not be installed parallel and
close to the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid the
possibility of causing the embankment to fail.
(4) All collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey the
twenty-five-year storm peak flow rate from the contributing
drainage area and to carry it to the nearest suitable outlet or
natural watercourse. Off site conveyance shall be provided with
easements to an existing storm sewer system or natural
watercourse.
(5) Where drainage swales or open channels are used, they shall be
suitably lined to prevent erosion and designed to avoid excessive
velocities. Calculations must be presented for the velocities and it
must be shown that the proposed surface for the swale is adequate.
§ 142-68 BALDWIN CODE § 142-68
1:418
(6) Wherever storm sewers are proposed to be utilized, they must
comply with the following criteria:
(a) Designed to traverse under seeded and planted areas. If
constructed within 10 feet of the road paving, walks or other
surfaced areas, the drains shall have a narrow trench, and
maximum compaction of backfill to prevent settlement of the
superimposed surface or development.
(b) Installed after excavating and filling in the area to be traversed
is completed, unless the drain is installed in the original
ground with a minimum of three feet cover and/or adequate
protection during the fill construction.
(c) Designed with cradle when traversing fill areas of
indeterminate stability; designed with anchors when gradient
exceeds 20%, and designed with encasement or special backfill
requirements when traversing under a paved area.
(d) Designed to adequately handle the anticipated stormwater
flow and to be constructed and maintained economically. The
minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
(e) Drain pipe, trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements
shall conform to the requirements of the Borough and/or
applicable requirements of the Borough and/or applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Publication 408, latest edition.
(f) All pipe shall be made of either PVC, corrugated plastic pipe,
corrugated plastic pipe with smooth interior walls, corrugated
metal/steel or reinforced concrete. All corrugated metal pipe
shall be polymer coated, with bonding and paved inverts where
prone to erode. Pipe under a borough cartway shall be
reinforced concrete pipe with a minimum diameter of 15
inches.
(g) Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate,
safe, self-cleaning and unobtrusive and shall be consistent with
the standards of the Borough.
(h) Appropriate grates shall be designed for all catch basins,
stormwater inlets and other entrance appurtenances in
accordance with borough specifications.
(i) Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finished
grade and sloped to conform to slope of finished grade. Top
castings of structures located in roads or parking areas shall
be machined or installed to preclude rattling.
(j) Where a proposed storm sewer connects with an existing
storm sewer system, the applicant shall demonstrate that
§ 142-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-68
1:419
§ 142-69. Erosion and sedimentation controls.
Proposed erosion and sedimentation pollution control measures should be
submitted with the stormwater management plan. These plans shall follow
the guidelines set forth in the Borough's current Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Ordinance under a separate cover. In addition, the plan
shall be prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania Erosion/
Sedimentation Regulations (25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102) and the standards
and guidelines of the county conservation district.
§ 142-70. As-built drawings.
Prior to releasing the final bond moneys, the Borough shall receive an asbuilt
drawing, signed and scaled by a registered surveyor, and these plans
shall include the following:
sufficient capacity exists in the downstream system to handle
the additional stormwater flow.
(k) Storm sewer outfalls shall be equipped with energy dissipation
to prevent erosion and conform with applicable requirements
of the PaDEP for stream encroachments (Chapter 105 of the
Department's Rules and Regulations).
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25
Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,122 a DEP "NPDES
Construction Activities" permit is required for Regulated Earth
Disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or county
conservation district must be provided to the municipality. The issuance
of an NPDES construction permit (or permit coverage under the
statewide General Permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements Subsection
C.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required,
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. The location of any roads or driveways constructed for the land
development or single-family home.
122. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 142-68 BALDWIN CODE § 142-70
1:420
B. The location, tops and flow lines of all storm sewers constructed within
the land development or single-family home.
C. The location, depth and contours of the detention or retention facilities
constructed for the land development or single-family home.
D. A detail of the outlet structure for the detention or retention facility as
constructed.
E. The location and details of all post-construction stormwater
management BMPs including water quality devices.
F. A revised stormwater management report reflecting the final contours
for a detention pond as constructed.
§ 142-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-70
1:421

ARTICLE XVI
Completion of Facilities and Maintenance
§ 142-71. Maintenance responsibilities.
§ 142-72. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
A. The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all proposed stormwater control facilities. The proposed
maintenance plan should be consistent with the general maintenance
policies stated in this Part 2, the Borough Stormwater Management
Ordinance, and also consistent with the following principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater
control facilities should also be dedicated to and maintained by the
Borough.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities should be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The Borough Council shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities as part of the final application
review based on the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The
Council reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility of any or all of the stormwater management
controls.
C. A security deposit in the sum of $5,000 cash or certified check shall be
delivered to the Borough and held by it pending the completion of the
stormwater management facilities to ensure the final completion of the
site plan development. In the event that the Borough Engineer shall
determine that the aforementioned sum of $5,000 may be insufficient
because of the nature and size of the development, the Borough
Engineer shall submit a proposal to the developer of the amount which
the Engineer believes to be necessary for completion. In the event that
the developer disagrees with the amount so proposed by the Borough
Engineer, a third engineer may be retained to mediate the proposal and
establish the amount required to be deposited which will ensure
completion of the facilities. The cost incurred by retaining a mediator
shall be billed to the developer.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan, the
property owner shall prepare and submit to the Borough Secretary a
stormwater management agreement which will be referred to the
§ 142-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-72
1:423
§ 142-73. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
Borough Engineer and to the Borough Solicitor for approval. In the
event that the agreement shall be approved, it shall be submitted to
the Recorder of Deeds for recording and shall be binding upon all
successor owners or developers of the premises. The fees for recording
the agreement shall be at the cost of the developer. The agreement shall
stipulate that:
(1) The owner shall maintain all facilities in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule and shall keep all facilities
maintained in a safe and attractive manner.
(2) The owner shall convey to the Borough easements and/or rights-ofway
to assure access for periodic inspections by the Borough and
maintenance if required.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the Borough the name, address
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
will be submitted to the Borough within 10 days of the change.
(4) The owner shall establish any special maintenance funds or other
financing sources, in accordance with the approved maintenance
plan.
(5) If the owner fails to maintain the stormwater control facilities,
following due notice by the Borough to correct the problems, the
Borough shall perform the necessary maintenance or corrective
work. The owner shall reimburse the Borough for all costs or a lien
shall be placed on the property.
B. The Borough may require other items to be included in the agreement
where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance
of all facilities. The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough Solicitor.
A. Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray the costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by
the Borough for a period of 10 years as estimated by the Borough
Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at
the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Borough, the deposit shall cover 100% of the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Borough Engineer
§ 142-72 BALDWIN CODE § 142-73
1:424
§ 142-74. Financial guaranties and dedication of public
improvements.
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
(3) The amount of deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Borough Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents which shall be subject to
the approval of the Borough Council.
B. If the storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility
(e.g., ballfield, lake), the Borough may reduce or waive the amount of
the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for
public recreation purposes.
C. If in the future, a storage facility (whether publicly or privately owned)
is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other storage
facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will be
applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the
storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
A. Guaranty of completion. A completion guarantee in the form of a bond,
cash deposit, certified check or other negotiable securities acceptable
to the Borough shall be filed. The guarantee shall cover all streets,
sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities, water systems, fire
hydrants, sidewalks and other required improvements, it shall be in the
amount and form prescribed by the Municipal Planning Code (Section
509).123
B. Release of completion guarantee. The procedures for requesting and
obtaining a release of the completion guarantee shall be in a manner
prescribed by the Municipalities Planning Code (Section 510).124
C. Default of completion guaranty. If improvements are not installed in
accordance with the approved final plan, the governing body may
enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the improvements covered by said security, the governing body
may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 142-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-74
1:425
both, shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements
covered by such security and not for any other municipal purpose.
D. Dedication of public improvements.
(1) When streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management facilities,
waterlines or other required improvements in the development
have been completed in accordance with the final approved plan,
such improvements shall be deemed private until such time as they
have been offered for dedication to the municipality and accepted
by separate ordinance or resolution or until they have been
condemned for use as a public facility.
(2) Prior to acceptance of any improvements or facilities, the Borough
Engineer shall inspect it to ensure that it is constructed in
accordance with the approved plan and is functioning properly. In
the case of any stormwater control facility, it must be free of
sediment and debris.
(3) The owner shall submit as-built plans for all facilities proposed for
dedication.
§ 142-74 BALDWIN CODE § 142-74
1:426
ARTICLE XVII
Inspection of Stormwater Management Controls
§ 142-75. Inspection procedures.
A. The Borough Engineer or a designated representative shall inspect the
construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater management
controls for the development site. The permittee shall notify the
Borough Engineer 48 hours in advance of the completion of the
following key development phases:
(1) At the completion of preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stock piling of topsoil and construction of
temporary stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
(2) At the completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(3) During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings.
(5) Completion of any final grading, vegetative control measures or
other site restoration work done in accordance with the approved
plan and permit.
B. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding
one has been inspected and approved. If there are deficiencies in any
phase, the Borough Engineer shall issue a written description of the
required corrections and stipulate the time by which they must be
made.
C. If during construction, the contractor or permittee identifies any site
conditions such as subsurface drainage, which could affect the
feasibility of the approved stormwater facilities, he must notify the
Borough Engineer within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition
and request a field inspection. The Borough Engineer shall determine if
the condition requires a stormwater modification.
D. In cases where stormwater facilities are to be installed in areas of
landslide-prone soils of if other special site conditions exist, the
Borough may require special precautions such as soil tests and core
borings, full-time resident inspectors and/or similar measures. All costs
of any such measures shall be borne by the permittee, developer and/or
landowner.
E. Inspection of all stormwater management BMP's shall be undertaken by
a minimum of two persons at least two times per year, on or before
March 1 and October 1, or after runoff events in excess of one inch of
§ 142-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-75
1:427
rainfall. Additional inspections will be required if it becomes apparent
that facilities are not functioning properly. Corrective actions will then
be taken as required to help ensure continuing operation of postconstruction
stormwater facilities. Any deficiencies noted in items
inspected by the owner shall be documented and corrective actions
taken by the owner. Written records of each maintenance action are to
be retained for a minimum of five years.
§ 142-75 BALDWIN CODE § 142-75
1:428
ARTICLE XVIII
Disclaimer of Liability
§ 142-76. General disclaimer.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under the stormwater
management provisions of this Part 2 nor the compliance with the
provisions of this Part 2 or with any condition imposed by a Borough
official hereunder shall relieve any person from any responsibility for
damage to persons or property resulting there from, or as otherwise
imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Borough for damages
to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of
any kind by the Borough, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 142-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-76
1:429

ARTICLE XIX
Enforcement and Administration
§ 142-77. Enforcement.
This Part 2 shall be enforced by the Code of Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Baldwin who may and shall have authority to issue citations,
complaints and to institute other litigation required for the purposes of
enforcing this Part 2. Such officer may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this Part
2, provided that notice of such action shall be served upon the violator at
least 10 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of
the nature of the violation as such other information as may be required or
appropriate; provided further, however, that if the nature of the violation
is such that serious and substantial injury may occur to the Borough or
any property situate therein, then such notice may be waived and an action
instituted immediately.
A. Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject
property in regard to an aspect regulated by this Part 2.
B. Notification. In the event that the applicant, developer, owner or his/her
agent fails to comply with the requirements of this Part 2 or fails to
conform to the requirements of any permit, a written notice of violation
shall be issued. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the
violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s).
Upon failure to comply within the time specified, unless otherwise
extended by the Borough, the applicant, developer, owner or his/her
agent shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of this Part 2.
C. Preventive remedies.
(1) In additional to other remedies, the municipality may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building or
premises.
(2) In accordance with the Planning Code (Section 515.1),125 the
municipality may refuse to issue any permit or grant approval to
further improve or develop any property which has been developed
in violation of this chapter.
D. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person who has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this Part 2 shall, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough pay a
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.1.
§ 142-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-77
1:431
§ 142-78. Violations and penalties.
Any person, copartnership or corporation, or principal officer of any
corporation who or which shall violate any provision of this Part 2 or
proceed with the erection of any structures, or sell any lot without having
first complied with the provisions of this Part 2, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and upon conviction thereof before a District Magistrate, such
person or the members of such partnership or the officers of such
corporation responsible for such violation shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of no less than $50 or more than $1,000. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation and a separate fine shall
fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500 plus court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the municipality. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
(2) If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to applicable
rules of civil procedure.
(3) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation unless the District Justice further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person violating the ordinance to
have believed that there was no such violation. In such case there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the District Justice's determination of a
violation; thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(4) All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this Part 2 shall be paid over to the Borough.
(5) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and the judgment.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
E. Additional remedies. In addition to the above remedies, the Borough
may also seek remedies and penalties under applicable Pennsylvania
statutes, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, including, but not
limited to, the Storm Water Management Act (32 P.S. §§ 680.1 through
680.17) and the Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations (25
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102). Any activity conducted in violation of
this Part 2 or any Pennsylvania approved watershed stormwater
management plan may be declared a public nuisance by the Borough
and abatable as such.
§ 142-77 BALDWIN CODE § 142-78
1:432
be applicable. In the event that any person shall repeatedly violate the
provision of this Part 2, or fails to adhere to notices and other provisions
of this Part 2, then such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, such persons shall be sentenced to suffer imprisonment,
not to exceed two years, or to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both, in
the discretion of the court.
§ 142-79. Review of stop-work order.
Any person who feels aggrieved at any stop work order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer under this Part 2, or by failure to cancel same after
performance of remedial steps, shall have the right to request a hearing
within seven days after making said request. At said hearing, the Code
Enforcement Officer and the aggrieved person shall present any evidence
bearing on the propriety of said stop work order or continuation of same. At
the conclusion of the hearing, and based upon the evidence presented to it,
the Municipal Board of Supervisors shall:
§ 142-80. Revocation of permit.
The Baldwin Borough Board of Supervisors, upon the request by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the next regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors, after at least three days' notice in writing to the landowner,
may revoke the permit issued pursuant to this Part 2 for any project which
the Board of Supervisors finds, upon evidence presented to it that the
landowner has proceeded with work on the offending portion of any project,
except specified remedial work to bring the project into compliance with the
A. Notification of Noncompliance: A copy of any notice or stop work order
shall be served upon the landowner by either personal delivery or
certified mail.
B. Cancellation notice: Upon completion of remedial steps required by a
notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall forthwith issue of
compliance and cancellation of said notice of noncompliance or stop
work order.
A. Affirm the stop work order and the remedial steps required therein and
direct continuing effect and enforcement of said stop work order with
the offending portion of the project has been brought into compliance;
or
B. Affirm the stop work order, but upon such modified remedial steps as
the Board of Supervisors may find necessary and appropriate, the direct
continuing effect and enforcement of said stop work order until the
offending portion of the project has been brought into compliance; or
C. Reverse, cancel or suspend the stop work order upon a finding that
remedial steps are not necessary or that required remedial steps have
been taken, or upon a finding that a stop work order is not appropriate
or necessary during the performance of required remedial steps.
§ 142-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-80
1:433
approved plan, while under a valid stop work order which has neither been
reversed canceled nor suspended by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 142-80 BALDWIN CODE § 142-80
1:434
Chapter 146
TAXATION
§ 142-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-80
1:435

ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-21-1966 by Ord. No. 337]
§ 146-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.126
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property, not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance," or unemployment compensation
payments made by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse
expenses or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and
salary supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs
126. Editor's Note: This definition has been revised to conform to Section 13 of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, as amended 10-4-1978, P.L. 930, No. 177. See 53 P.S. § 6913.
§ 146-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-1
1:437
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Borough of Baldwin to collect and
administer the tax on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYEE — Any natural person domiciled in the Borough of Baldwin or
employed therein upon whose earned income, as above defined, a tax is
imposed by this article.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the Borough of Baldwin.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 146-2. Imposition of tax; amount.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes of 1% is hereby imposed on:
(1) Earned income received beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, by residents of the Borough of Baldwin.
(2) Earned income received beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, by nonresidents of the Borough of Baldwin for
work done or services performed or rendered in the Borough of
Baldwin.
(3) The net profits earned beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, of businesses, professions or other activities
conducted by residents of the Borough of Baldwin, regardless of
where the same were earned.
(4) The net profits earned beginning January 1, 1967, and ending
December 31, 1967, of businesses, professions or other activities
conducted in the Borough of Baldwin by nonresidents.
§ 146-1 BALDWIN CODE § 146-2
1:438
§ 146-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
B. The tax herein levied and imposed shall continue in force on a calendaryear
basis or a taxpayer-fiscal-year basis following December 31, 1967,
without annual reenactment until such time as the Borough Council of
the Borough of Baldwin shall change the rate of tax or by appropriate
ordinance repeals such tax.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Earned Income Tax Collector
on a form prescribed or approved by the Earned Income Tax
Collector a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current
year, and pay to the Earned Income Tax Collector in four equal
quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first
installment at the time of filing the declaration, and the other
installments on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15
of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year,
respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profits after April 15 of
the current year, shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Earned Income Tax
Collector in equal installments the tax due thereon on or before the
quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the
declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Earned Income Tax Collector on a form
prescribed or approved by the Earned Income Tax Collector a final
return showing the amount of net profits earned during the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of
the current year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the total
amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay to the Earned Income Tax Collector the balance
of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the fourth
quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to make and file
with the Earned Income Tax Collector on or before January 31 of
the succeeding year the final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The Earned Income Tax Collector may provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:439
§ 146-4. Collection at source.
anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his return as hereinabove required and pay the tax
due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Earned Income Tax Collector on a form prescribed or approved by
the Earned Income Tax Collector a final return showing the amount
of earned income received during the period beginning January 1 of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year the
total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon,
the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of tax
due. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in
the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source, shall make and file with the Earned
Income Tax Collector on a form prescribed or approved by the
Earned Income Tax Collector a quarterly return on or before April
30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the
current year and January 31 of the succeeding year, setting forth
the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to withholding
by him during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the
current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of the
current year and December 31 of the current year, respectively, and
subject to the tax, together with such other information as the
Earned Income Tax Collector may require. Every taxpayer making
such returns shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Earned
Income Tax Collector the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Baldwin who employs
one or more persons other than domestic servants for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation who has not previously registered
shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Earned Income Tax Collector his name and address and such other
information as the Earned Income Tax Collector may require.
B. Quarterly returns.
§ 146-3 BALDWIN CODE § 146-4
1:440
(1) Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the Borough of
Baldwin who employs one or more persons other than domestic
servants for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
shall deduct at the time of payment thereof the tax imposed by this
article on the earned income due to his employee or employees and
shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the
current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Earned Income Tax
Collector the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding threemonth
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the
current year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of
the current year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise
agreed upon between the Earned Income Tax Collector and
employer, shall show the name and social security number of each
such employee, the earned income of such employee during such
preceding three-month period, the tax deducted therefrom, the
political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
total earned income of all such employees during the preceding
three-month period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid
with the return.
(2) Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly periods
has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority
may be required by the Earned Income Tax Collector to file his
return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall
be made to the Earned Income Tax Collector on or before the last
day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Earned Income Tax Collector:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax
deducted and the total amount of tax paid to the Earned Income
Tax Collector for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security number, the
amount of earned income paid to the employee during said period,
the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the
tax upon such employee, the amount of tax paid to the Earned
Income Tax Collector. Every employer shall furnish two copies of
the individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
§ 146-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-4
1:441
§ 146-5. Powers and duties of Earned Income Tax Collector.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided in § 146-9 hereof, every employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by
this section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he was
required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been
recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Earned Income Tax Collector to collect and
receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall
also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him
from each person or business paying the tax, and the date of such
receipt.
B. The Earned Income Tax Collector, before entering upon his official
duties, shall give and acknowledge a bond to the Borough of Baldwin. If
the Borough Council shall, by resolution, designate any bond previously
given by the Earned Income Tax Collector as adequate, such bond shall
be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
(1) Such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance
Commissioner of this commonwealth.
(2) Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Earned Income Tax Collector, his clerks, assistants and appointees
of all trusts confided in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful
execution of all duties required of him by virtue of his office, upon
the just and faithful accounting or payment over, according to law,
of all moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by
him by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or
successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official
things held in right of his office.
(3) Such bond shall be taken in the name of the Borough of Baldwin
and shall be for the use of such political subdivision, and for the use
of such other person or persons for whom money shall be collected
or received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise appear, in case
of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of
the principal on the bond. The Borough of Baldwin may sue upon
§ 146-4 BALDWIN CODE § 146-5
1:442
the said bond in its or his own name for its or his own use. Such
bond shall contain the name or names of the surety company or
companies bound thereon. The Borough of Baldwin shall fix the
amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum amount
of taxes which may be in the possession of the Earned Income
Tax Collector at any given time. The Borough of Baldwin may,
at any time, upon cause shown and due notice to the Earned
Income Tax Collector and his surety or sureties, require or allow
the substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable
to the Borough of Baldwin for the purpose of making the bond
sufficient in amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first
approved from any accrued liability or previous action on such
bond. The Borough of Baldwin shall designate the custodian of the
bond required to be given by the Earned Income Tax Collector.
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article is hereby empowered to
prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating
to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and all payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in cases of overpayment for any period
of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article.
D. With the prior approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Baldwin, the Earned Income Tax Collector shall refund, on petition of
and proof by the taxpayer, earned income tax as erroneously paid.
E. The Earned Income Tax Collector and agents designated by him are
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
employer or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the Earned Income
Tax Collector reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in
order to verify the accuracy of any declaration or return, or if no
declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer
and every taxpayer and every person whom the Earned Income Tax
Collector reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby
directed and required to give to the Earned Income Tax Collector, or to
any agent designated by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Earned Income Tax Collector, his agents
or by any other official or agent of the taxing district, as the result of
any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications
required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for
official purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order,
or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 146-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-5
1:443
§ 146-6. Compensation of Earned Income Tax Collector.
The Earned-Income Tax Collector shall receive such compensation for his
services and expenses as shall be determined by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin from time to time.
§ 146-7. Suit for collection of tax.
G. The Earned Income Tax Collector is authorized to establish different
filing, reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do
not coincide with the calendar year.
A. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue in the name of the Borough
of Baldwin for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Time limit.
(1) Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is
later; provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the
institution of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined
to be due in the following cases:
(a) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person
although a declaration or return was required to be filed by
him under the provisions of this article, there shall be no
limitation.
(b) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or
return in the possession of the Earned Income Tax Collector,
reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no
limitation.
(c) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25%
or more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(d) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of
this article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to
the Earned Income Tax Collector, or where any person has
willfully failed or omitted to make the deductions required in
this section, there shall be no limitation.
(2) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the
Act.127
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of an
erroneous refund, provided that such suit is begun two years after
127. Editor's Note: The term "Act" herein refers to the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6901 et
seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.).
§ 146-5 BALDWIN CODE § 146-7
1:444
§ 146-8. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 146-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 146-10. Statutory authority.
This article and the tax imposed hereunder is adopted under and by virtue
of the authority contained in the Act of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania numbered 511, approved the 31st day of
December, 1965, entitled the "Local Tax Enabling Act of 1965," its
supplements and amendments,128 the provisions of which are hereby
making such refund, except that the suit may be brought within five
years if it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Earned Income Tax
Collector or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records
and papers, and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false
or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid
the full disclosure of the amounts of his net profits or earned income in
order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax, imposed
by this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any District Justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and
costs or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days in the
Allegheny County Jail. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each offense and costs
or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days in the Allegheny
County Jail. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 146-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-10
1:445
accepted and adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Baldwin,
and where the interpretation or terms or provisions of this article are not in
accord with or in compliance with the provisions of said Act of Assembly, the
provisions of said Act of Assembly are intended to be ordained and enacted
by this article as fully as though incorporated, set forth and made part of
this article.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 et seq.
§ 146-10 BALDWIN CODE § 146-10
1:446
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 806129]
§ 146-11. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Baldwin adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971130 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this article shall be at the rate of 1/2 of 1%.
§ 146-12. Administration.
The tax imposed under § 146-11 and all applicable interest and penalties
shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of December
31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as "The Local Tax
Enabling Act"), provided that, if the correct amount of the tax is not paid
by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of Baldwin,
pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S.
§ 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 146-13. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 146-11 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153; 53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176; 72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 146-14. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on and be applicable
to any document made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for
recording on or after November 28, 2006.
§ 146-15. through § 146-19. (Reserved)
129. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Realty Transfer Tax, adopted
11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 578.
130. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 146-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-15
1:447

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 809131]
§ 146-20. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the Borough of Baldwin to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as the
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Baldwin.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Baldwin for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Baldwin.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 146-21 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 1-17-2005 by Ord. No. 791.
§ 146-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-21
1:449
§ 146-21. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Baldwin during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for
that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough Council
from time to time: 1) emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; 2) road construction
and/or maintenance; 3) reduction of property taxes; or 4) property tax
relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion
in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead
property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less than 25%
of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in
addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
§ 146-22. Exemptions and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 146-21 BALDWIN CODE § 146-22
1:450
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 146-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-22
1:451
§ 146-23. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Council, in consultation with the Collector and
the DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough Council or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period, shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
§ 146-22 BALDWIN CODE § 146-23
1:452
§ 146-24. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file a return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 146-25. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 146-26. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which
the person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 146-22B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 146-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-27
1:453
§ 146-27. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The following shall apply to individuals engaged in more than one
occupation or employed in more than one political subdivision:
§ 146-28. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 146-29. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of a dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
§ 146-27 BALDWIN CODE § 146-29
1:454
§ 146-30. Suits for collection.
§ 146-31. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to enforce
the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted before the District Judge
and against any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall
have failed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of
1998132 or under specific appeal processes set forth by the political
subdivision.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for
recovery of any such tax clue or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
132. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 146-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-32
1:455
§ 146-32. Interpretation; repeal of prior provisions.
§ 146-33. Effective date.
The tax imposed by this article shall be effective on January 1, 2008, and all
calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by ordinance of the
Borough of Baldwin.
§ 146-34. (Reserved)
A. Interpretation.
(1) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on
any occupation not within the taxing power of the political
subdivision under the Constitution of the United States and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall
be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of
the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of
the court shall not affect or impair the right to impose or collect
said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other persons or
individuals as herein provided.
B. Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar year
2005 and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency and municipal
services tax, plus all applicable penalties and interest, for the calendar
years 2006 and 2007, as the same exist prior to this amendment.
§ 146-32 BALDWIN CODE § 146-34
1:456
ARTICLE IV
Tax Assessment Limitation Program
[Adopted 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 756133]
§ 146-35. Definitions.
ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77, codified
as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S. § 6101-B et seq.
ALLEGHENY REGIONAL ASSET DISTRICT LAW — See the definition of
"Act 77" above.
ASSESSMENT — The fair market value of property as determined by the
Board of Property Assessment, Appeals and Review of Allegheny County.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Baldwin.
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Department of
Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and Registry of Allegheny County.
ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A longtime owner/occupant of a principal residence
in the Borough of Baldwin who is a single person aged 60 or older during
a calendar year in which county real property taxes are due and assessed;
or married persons if either spouse is 60 or older during a calendar year in
which the Borough's real property taxes are due and assessed.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible taxpayer while
residing in his or her principal residence during a calendar year.
INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including but not
limited to salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, income from selfemployment,
alimony, support money, cash public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities including railroad retirement
benefits, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security Act (except
Medicare benefits), all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veteran's disability payments, all interest received from
the federal or any state government or any instrumentality or political
subdivision hereof, realized capital gains, rentals, workers' compensation
and the gross amount of loss-of-time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds (except the first $5,000 of the total of death benefit
payments), and gifts of cash or property (other than transfers by gift
between members of a household) in excess of a total value of $300,
but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind supplied by a
governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate or inflation dividend
and shall not exceed $30,000 (of which only 1/2 of social security benefit
shall be included).
LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned or has occupied the same dwelling place as
133. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Tax Assessment Limitation
Program, adopted 12-29-1994 by Ord. No. 678 and consisting of §§ 146-35 through 146-38.
§ 146-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-35
1:457
a principal residence and domicile, or any person who for at least five
years has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a principal residence
and domicile, if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the
property as part of government or nonprofit housing program.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Baldwin.
PERSON — A natural person.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person, including the
principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in connection therewith
which contribute to its enjoyment, comfort and convenience; or a building
with a maximum of one commercial establishment and a maximum of three
residential units, of which one residential unit must be a principal residence
of the longtime owner/occupant.
SENIOR CITIZENS REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of March
11, 1971, Public Law 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et
seq.134
§ 146-36. Participation in limitation of tax assessment program.
Any person paying property taxes in the Borough of Baldwin may apply
to participate in the assessment limitation program authorized under this
article. In order to be eligible to participate in the program, the person must
meet the following conditions:
§ 146-37. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Property Assessment and the Borough Secretary shall
have the authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to the
administration of the limitation of tax assessment program established
under this article. Such rules and regulations shall include, but not be
limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof of residence, proof
of qualification for or receipt of a property tax rebate under the Senior
Citizens Rebate and Assistance Act and any other reasonable requirements
and conditions as may be necessary to operate the tax assessment limitation
program.135
A. The person must be a single person aged 60 or older; or be married
persons with either spouse being 60 years of age or older.
B. The person must be a longtime owner/occupant.
C. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence and
domicile of the resident.
D. The person's household income must qualify him or her to receive any
amount of property tax rebate under the Senior Citizens Rebate and
Assistance Act.
134. Editor's Note: 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq. was repealed by 2006, June 27, P.L. 1873, No. 1
(Spec. Sess. No. 1), § 5005(3), imd. effective; see now 53 P.S. § 6926.1301 et seq.
§ 146-35 BALDWIN CODE § 146-37
1:458
135. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Gentrification Tax Exemption, adopted 12-19-1994 by Ord.
No. 679 and consisting of §§ 146-39 through 146-44, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 3-18-1996 by Ord. No. 697.
§ 146-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-37
1:459

ARTICLE V
Volunteer Service Credit Program
[Adopted 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 888]
§ 146-38. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for a volunteer fire company listed
under § 146-39C who has complied with, and is certified under, the
Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L.1257, No. 511),
known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The time frame when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed under § 146-39C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company.
§ 146-39. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. The Borough of Baldwin hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies.
B. Program criteria. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution,
the annual criteria that must be met to qualify for credits under the
program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including but not limited to:
(a) Fundraising;
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance;
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
§ 146-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-39
1:461
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company or a nonprofit emergency medical service
agency.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of the Borough who are volunteers of the Baldwin Volunteer
Fire Companies; Baldwin Independent Fire Company #1, Option
Volunteer Fire Department, and South Baldwin Volunteer Fire
Company, that provide service to the Borough of Baldwin.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for
the tax credits established under § 146-40.
(1) For 2018, the eligibility period under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program shall run from January 1, 2018, under December 31, 2018.
(2) Applications for a tax credit in any given year must be submitted to
the Borough Manager no later than September 30 for the year the
credit is sought. [Added 11-19-2019 by Ord. No. 899]
E. Recordkeeping. The chiefs of the volunteer fire companies listed under
§ 146-39C shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities in a
service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by the Borough of
Baldwin, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor General.
The chief shall annually transmit to the Borough a notarized eligibility
list of all volunteers that have met the minimum criteria for the
Volunteer Service Credit Program. The notarized eligibility list shall be
transmitted to the Borough no later than January 31 of each year. The
chief shall post the notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the
volunteer agency's facilities.
F. Municipal review. The Borough Manager shall review the notarized
eligibility list and present to the Borough Council for approval. The
Borough of Baldwin Council shall approve all applicants that are on the
notarized eligibility list. All applicants approved by the Borough of
Baldwin Council shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Borough
Manager.
G. Official Tax Credit Register. The Borough shall keep an official Tax
Credit Register of all active volunteers that were issued tax credit
certificates. The Borough Manager shall issue updates, as needed, of
the official tax credit register to the following:
(1) Borough Council;
(2) Chiefs of each of the three Baldwin volunteer fire companies;
§ 146-39 BALDWIN CODE § 146-39
1:462
§ 146-40. Earned income tax credit.
§ 146-41. Appeals.
§ 146-42. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
article is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of the article, it being
the intent of the Borough of Baldwin that such remainder shall be and shall
remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be severable.
(3) The Allegheny Southwest Tax Collection District and Jordan Tax
Services.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Borough of Baldwin Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible
to receive a tax credit of up to $300 of the earned income tax levied by
the Borough. When an active volunteer's earned income tax liability is
less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax credit shall equal the
individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on his or her Borough earned income tax liability when
filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the tax officer
for the Allegheny Southwest Tax Collection Committee.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the official tax credit register issued by the Borough
Manager.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 146-41.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 146-40 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 146-40 shall follow the provisions
of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights."
§ 146-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-42
1:463
Chapter 148
TIMBERING AND LOGGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 87.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
Trees, shrubs and bushes — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 168.
§ 148-1. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
BUFFER ZONE — Land surrounding the immediate perimeter of a
timbering and logging operation in which no cutting of trees and other
vegetation shall occur except for the isolated cutting of individual trees
which are dead, sick, infected or constitute an immediate danger to
neighboring properties or the public generally.
CLEAR-CUTTING — A timbering and logging method that removes all trees
from a tract of land or portions thereof.
CROWN — The aboveground portion of a tree consisting of branches, stems,
buds, fruits and leaves. This may also be referred to as the canopy.
DBH (diameter at breast height) — The tree trunk measured in inches at
a height of 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks
below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the
split.
ENGINEER — The appointed Engineer of the Borough of Baldwin.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the ground.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FORESTER — A person with a degree in forestry from a college or
university accredited by the Society of American Foresters.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan establishing the best conservation
and management practices for a landowner.
§ 146-42 BALDWIN CODE § 148-1
1:464
GRADE — The elevation of the existing ground surface at the location of any
proposed excavation or fill.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
HAZARD — A danger to life, limb, health or property.
LANDING — A place where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled for
transportation to a processing facility.
MAJOR TIMBERING AND LOGGING OPERATION — Any cutting and
removing of trees for commercial purposes from a tract of land that is
greater than 10 acres in size.
MINOR TIMBERING AND LOGGING OPERATION — Any cutting and
removing of trees for commercial purposes from a tract of land that is less
than 10 acres in size.
PERSON — A natural person but shall also include a partnership or
corporation.
SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land or a series of lots, tracts or parcels
of land which are adjoining where timbering and logging is continuous and
performed at the same time.
SELECTION METHOD — A method of selectively removing trees from a
wooded area either singly or in small groups according to age, size or type,
with provisions being made for natural or artificial vegetation.
SKIDDER — A large machine used in moving logs from a stump site to a
landing.
SKIDDING — The act of moving logs from a stump site to a landing.
SLASH — The woody material or debris left on the ground after the area is
timbered and logged.
TOPS — The upper portion of a felled tree that is unmerchantable because
of small size, taper or defect.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth which
provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated
head with many branches; also, any self-supporting woody plant usually
having a single woody trunk and a potential DBH of two inches or more.
§ 148-2. Minimum standards.
The following shall be minimum standards for issuance of both minor and
major timbering and logging permits:
A. All timbering and logging operations shall be by the selection method.
Clear-cutting is prohibited.
B. Timbering and logging operations shall not be undertaken on any
ground with a slope exceeding 25% nor in landslide- or flood-prone
areas.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-2
1:465
C. Removal of trees which have a DBH of more than 20 inches shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Engineer before inclusion in any timbering
and logging operation.
D. The diversity of the trees species shall be maintained within the permit
area at generally the same ratio both before and after the timbering.
E. Buffer zones of 25 feet along all abutting properties shall be maintained
on the property on which the timber and logging operation is being
conducted.
F. Buffer zones of 25 feet along any streets, streams and around any
springs shall be maintained on the property on which the timber and
logging operation is being conducted.
G. All cutting, removing, skidding and transporting of trees as part of the
timbering and logging operation shall be planned and performed in
such a manner as to minimize the disturbance of or damage to other
trees, vegetation and the land itself.
H. Roads and trails shall be constructed, maintained and abandoned in
such manner as to prevent soil erosion and permanent damage to soils
and waterways.
I. Roads and trails shall only be wide enough to accommodate the type of
equipment used, and grades of such roads and trails shall be kept as
low as possible.
J. Where possible, stream crossing shall be avoided, but where deemed
necessary, crossings shall be made at a right angle across suitable
culverts or bridges.
K. Skidding across live or intermittent streams is prohibited except over
culverts or bridges.
L. All limbs and stubs shall be removed from felled trees prior to skidding.
M. All trees bent or held down by felled trees shall be promptly released.
N. No trees shall be left lodged in the process of felling.
O. Felling or skidding on or across property of others is prohibited without
the express written consent of those property owners. Felling or
skidding on or across any public street is prohibited without the written
permission of the appropriate municipal, county or state government
agency.
P. No tops or slash shall be left within 50 feet of an adjoining property or
public street; within 25 feet of any stream and/or historic or scenic trail;
or within 10 feet of any drainage ditch.
Q. The stumps of all felled trees shall be permitted to remain in the soil for
stabilization purposes.
§ 148-2 BALDWIN CODE § 148-2
1:466
§ 148-3. Permit required for minor logging operation; exceptions.
No person shall commence or perform any minor logging operation without
first having obtained a minor timbering and logging permit from the
Building Inspector. A separate minor timbering and logging permit shall be
required for each site. One permit may cover the timbering and logging
undertaken on the same site. A minor timbering and logging permit will not
be required, however, in any one of the following situations, but in all other
respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply:
§ 148-4. Application for minor timbering and logging permit;
special conditions.
R. Upon completion of the timbering and logging operation, all roads shall
be graded to eliminate any wheel ruts, and access to such roads from
public streets by motor vehicles of any kind shall be effectively blocked.
S. Both minor and major timbering and logging permit applicants shall
allow Borough officials to inspect the sites at times to be determined by
the Borough.
A. No minor timbering and logging permit is required when the removal of
trees is limited to reasonable, regular, normal maintenance and
landscaping improvements by individual homeowners where standards
in § 148-2 of this chapter are not violated.
B. Removal of trees is limited to site preparation for an approved building
permit.
C. Removal of trees is limited to site preparation for an approved site or
subdivision plan.
A. Every applicant for a minor timbering and logging permit shall file a
written application therefor with the Building Inspector in a form and
number to be determined by the Building Inspector. Such application
shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work;
(2) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
timbering and logging work;
(3) State the purpose for which the timbering and logging application
is filed;
(4) Include specifications setting forth the details of work, such as
materials, methods, procedures and a certificate of insurance;
(5) Include a description of the type of tree removal project, identifying
thinning, selective cutting, clear-cutting, and/or aesthetic
improvement cut;
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-4
1:467
§ 148-5. Issuance of minor timbering and logging permit;
expiration; appeal.
(6) Include a description of the area to be timbered, specifying the
area to be timbered, the species mixture, a sampling of tree sizes
and the existence of any unusual, scarce or endangered species;
(7) Include a one-hundred-percent inventory of all trees to be
timbered, stating species, size and quantity. This inventory shall
include those trees which are diseased, damaged or in otherwise
unhealthy condition;
(8) Include a statement demonstrating how trees that are not proposed
for removal are to be protected during the timbering operation;
(9) Include information as to how all trees will be marked for removal
and those trees which are to remain on the site;
(10) Include a specific plan for replanting and reforestation; and
(11) Include a time schedule for the start and completion of all work
within the timbering area.
B. The edge of the designated area will not be disturbed and shall be
maintained at a width of 25 feet. Ingress and egress points shall be
located as determined and approved.
C. All trees shall be cut at a minimum of 18 inches to the ground.
D. The crowns of the felled trees shall be reduced to firewood length and
stacked unless they are removed from the site as they are cut. Branches
less than four inches in diameter shall be processed to wood chips and
remain on the site.
E. All other federal, state and local laws, ordinances and resolutions shall
be in full force and effect as they relate to any minor timbering and
logging operation.
A. A minor timbering and logging permit may be issued by the Building
Inspector upon:
(1) Payment of a fee based on a schedule set by resolution of Council;
(2) Evidence of a certificate of insurance in a form and amount
approved by the Borough Solicitor.
B. The Building Inspector may impose reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as he may
deem necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Borough
and its residents.
C. Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced
§ 148-4 BALDWIN CODE § 148-5
1:468
§ 148-6. Permit required for major logging operation.
No person shall commence or perform any major logging operation without
first having obtained a major timbering and logging operation permit from
the Borough Council. A separate minor timbering and logging permit shall
be required for each site. One permit may cover the timbering and logging
undertaken on the same site.
§ 148-7. Application for major timbering and logging permit;
special conditions.
within three months or is not completed within one year from the date
of issue.
D. Where, in the opinion of the Building Inspector or the Borough
Engineer, the work as proposed by the applicant is likely to endanger
any property or person or any street or alley or create hazardous
conditions, he may deny the minor timbering and logging permit.
E. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Building Inspector within
30 days of the denial of the requested permit. The Council of the
Borough shall consider promptly appeals from the provisions of this
chapter and the Council shall make determinations of alternate
methods, standards or materials when, in its opinion, strict compliance
with the provisions of this chapter is unnecessary. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision or determination of the Council of the
Borough.
A. Every applicant for a major timbering and logging permit shall file a
written application therefor with the Building Inspector in a form and
number to be determined by the Building Inspector. An applicant for a
major timbering and logging permit must pay a fee based on a schedule
set by resolution of Council. Each application for a major timbering and
logging permit shall:
(1) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address or similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work;
(2) State the estimated dates for the starting and completion of the
timbering and logging work;
(3) State the purpose for which the timbering and logging application
is filed;
(4) Include specifications setting forth the details of work, such as
materials, methods, procedures and a certificate of insurance;
(5) Include a description of the type of tree removal project, identifying
thinning, selective cutting, clear-cutting, and/or aesthetic
improvement cut;
§ 148-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-7
1:469
§ 148-8. Notification of neighboring property owners.
The applicant shall provide a list of names and addresses of all property
owners within 1,000 feet of the property where an applicant intends to
engage in a major timbering and logging operation. The Building Inspector
shall notify all affected property owners in writing of the proposed major
timbering and logging operation, including the date of any public hearing.
§ 148-9. Public hearing.
A public hearing pursuant to public notice shall be held by the Borough
Council.
(6) Include a description of the area to be timbered, specifying the
area to be timbered, the species mixture, a sampling of tree sizes
and the existence of any unusual, scarce or endangered species;
(7) Include a one-hundred-percent inventory of all trees to be
timbered, stating species, size and quantity. This inventory shall
include those trees which are diseased, damaged or in otherwise
unhealthy condition;
(8) Include a statement demonstrating how trees that are not proposed
for removal are to be protected during the timbering operation;
(9) Include information as to how all trees will be marked for removal
and those trees which are to remain on the site;
(10) Include a specific plan for replanting and reforestation;
(11) Include a statement of all general soil conditions throughout the
proposed timber area;
(12) Include a list of all equipment to be used in the operation; and
(13) Include a time schedule for the start and completion of all work
within the timbering area.
B. The edge of the designated area will not be disturbed and shall be
maintained at a width of 25 feet. Ingress and egress points shall be
located as determined and approved.
C. All trees shall be cut at a minimum of 18 inches to the ground.
D. The crowns of the felled trees shall be reduced to firewood length and
stacked unless they are removed from the site as they are cut. Branches
less than four inches in diameter shall be processed to wood chips and
remain on the site.
E. All other federal, state and local laws, ordinances and resolutions shall
be in full force and effect as they relate to any minor timbering and
logging operation.
§ 148-7 BALDWIN CODE § 148-10
1:470
§ 148-10. Council action.
A completed application for a major timbering or logging permit shall be
approved or disapproved by Council within 90 days of completion with
all requirements of chapter. Failure to approve or disapprove a completed
application for a major timbering or logging permit shall not be considered
a deemed approval of the completed application. Council may impose
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the Borough and its residents. This includes, but is not limited to, the
imposition of bond and insurance requirements.
§ 148-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 148-12. Other remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the proper officer of the Borough, in addition to
other remedies, may institute in the name of the Borough any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
Chapter 150
TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131. Sewers — See Ch. 134.
A. No person shall undertake any action which would be in violation of any
provision of this chapter.
B. When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter has been served by the Building Inspector on any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $300 plus costs of
prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30 days for each and every
offense. Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Borough
that he is committing such violation, after such notification each day
that he shall continue such violation shall constitute a separate offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be
collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 148-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-1
1:471
§ 150-1. Interference with public sewer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, raise, grow or maintain any tree,
shrub or bush in the vicinity of any of the public sewers of the Borough of
Baldwin if the roots of said tree, shrub or bush may enter, clog, damage or
destroy said public sewer.
§ 150-2. Notice to remove; failure to comply.
If it is determined by the Borough of Baldwin that the roots of any tree,
shrub or bush are entering, damaging or destroying any public sewers in
the Borough of Baldwin, the landowner upon which said tree, shrub or bush
is growing shall be notified, in writing, to remove the same within a period
of 30 days. If the said landowner, after having been notified to remove the
offending tree, shrub or bush, shall fail or refuse to do the same within
said thirty-day period, the Borough of Baldwin is authorized to remove the
same and to file a municipal claim against the said landowner for the costs
involved in said removal.
§ 150-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1985 by Ord. No.
566]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction before the District Justice, be subject to paying a fine not
exceeding $300 plus costs of prosecution or to imprisonment for up to 30
days for each violation of this chapter.
Chapter 154
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of vehicles in parks — See Ch. 123,
Art. I.
Impounding of vehicles — See Ch. 157.
Vehicles with studded tires — See Ch. 160.
§ 150-1 BALDWIN CODE § 150-3
1:472
ARTICLE I
General Traffic Regulations
§ 154-1. Title.
This article shall be known and designated as the "Traffic Control Ordinance
of the Borough of Baldwin."
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Baldwin.
STREET — Any road or thoroughfare situated in the Borough which has
been accepted and opened as a public road or which the Borough has
assumed maintenance and control over.
VEHICLE — The same meaning as ascribed to it in the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.136
§ 154-3. Manner of adoption of regulations.
All traffic control and parking regulations shall hereafter be adopted by
resolution of the Council. The Councilmen, the Mayor and Chief of Police
shall, from time to time, recommend regulations and restrictions to the
Council and request that certain streets are designated by Council to be
posted with appropriate traffic or parking signs. The regulations and
restrictions adopted from time to time by Council regulating traffic and
parking on streets within the Borough shall have the same force and effect
as though incorporated specifically herein.
§ 154-4. Recording and posting of regulations.
Resolutions shall recite that they are being adopted pursuant to this article
and shall be recorded in a book to be provided for such purpose, which
book shall be available in the office of the Department of Police for public
inspection. In addition, signs setting forth the restrictions and regulations
thus established by resolution shall be erected at appropriate places upon
the streets of the Borough.
§ 154-5. Erection of signs.
No resolution shall become effective until after an appropriate sign has
been placed upon the street affected by the restriction or regulation. Where
regulated by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, the signs shall be
erected in conformity therewith, otherwise signs shall be conclusively
presumed to be regular in form and properly placed.
136. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-6
1:473
§ 154-6. Emergency powers of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency, in case of accident, fire,
flood, storm, civil disturbances, time of war or other such emergency:
§ 154-7. Types of regulations. [Amended 12-21-1981 by Ord. No.
519]
The Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate certain streets
and developments in the Borough to be subject to any one or more of the
following types of regulations and restrictions:
§ 154-8. Restrictions against parking certain vehicles on residential
streets. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 874137]
A. To establish temporary parking and traffic regulations.
B. To prohibit parking temporarily in limited areas.
C. To prohibit pedestrians temporarily from entering certain limited areas.
D. To establish temporary detours, one-way traffic or other appropriate
regulations or restrictions.
A. One-way streets.
B. Speed limits.
C. Stop signs.
D. Traffic control lights.
E. No left turns, no right turns or no turns.
F. Parking regulations, including prohibiting parking on either one side or
both sides of a street.
G. Fire lanes.
H. Safety zones, pedestrian and crosswalks.
I. Parking regulations, including prohibiting parking on either side of a
fire lane or of an area designated as through traffic, and establish speed
limits within the same or any other portion of a parking area of a
shopping center, industrial development or residential apartment
development or complex, and the Council may establish fire lanes in any
such areas and prohibit parking or the obstruction of the same in any
manner by vehicles.
J. Any other regulation or restriction not unlawful or beyond the power of
the Council to adopt.
137. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 154-8, Vehicle weight limits on
residential streets, added 1-19-1976 by Ord. No. 464.
§ 154-6 BALDWIN CODE § 154-8
1:474
A. It shall be unlawful to park on residential streets in the Borough of
Baldwin any commercial motor vehicle, trailer, nonmotorized vehicles
or trailers designed to be or actually attached or connected to a motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, including but not limited to boats, boat
trailers, utility trailers, campers, travel trailers or any similar vehicle,
the overall length of which is in excess of 20 feet, and/or exceeds
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. The measurement of detached
trailers, campers and/or other nonmotorized vehicles, as it relates to
the length/weight limit, includes the measurement of a towing vehicle,
whether presently attached or not.
B. Commercial and recreational vehicles, as defined in Subsection A, are
hereby prohibited from being parked on residential streets in the
Borough of Baldwin, except for local deliveries or services to or for
residents, for improvements or repairs needed by residents or intended
for use of a resident, which vehicles are customarily and ordinarily used
in providing such services or repairs, or if engaged in a business
activity, which parking shall be reasonably limited as to time and to the
nature of the business activity, services or repairs. Additionally, the
prohibitions contained herein shall not apply to the stopping, standing
or parking of firefighting equipment or other emergency vehicles, nor
shall this section apply to the parking of vehicles of public utilities or
contractors while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of
streets or utilities within the Borough.
C. Parking of vehicles with commercial signage painted on, or otherwise
affixed to said vehicle, on residential streets, is limited to one vehicle
per residential structure.
D. Parking of commercial and recreational vehicles is permitted in a
garage or private driveway as long as such parking conforms to the
provisions of Article III of this chapter.
(1) Persons living on residential streets who do not have a legal
driveway or parking pad shall be allowed to park on a residential
street and are exempted from the prohibitions set forth above;
provided, however, such residents must apply for a permit issued
by the Borough for permission to park said vehicle(s) on the street.
The Borough shall from time to time, by resolution, maintain
procedures and rules regarding the issuance of such permits.
E. The Baldwin Borough Police Department is hereby authorized to make
determinations of violations of this section and to enforce provisions of
this section.
F. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined $100. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 154-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:475
§ 154-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1973 by Ord. No.
441]
Any person violating any provisions of this article or any regulation or
restriction hereinafter adopted by resolution pursuant hereto shall, upon
conviction thereof in any summary proceeding before any District
Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine according to the schedule of fines set
forth in the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,138 or
as it may be amended, and costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
such fines and costs, shall undergo imprisonment for a period not exceeding
10 days. Each day an offense continues shall be considered a separate
offense. In the event that the amount of the fine is not set forth in the
schedule of fines referred to hereinbefore, then the District Magistrate may
impose a fine of not more than $50 to be collected by summary conviction
as fines and penalties are by law collected.
§ 154-10. Removal and impounding of vehicles.139
A. Police officers of the Borough are hereby authorized to remove and
impound or order the removal and impounding of any vehicle found
violating the provisions of this article or any restriction or regulation
adopted by resolution of the Council pursuant hereto or any abandoned
motor vehicle as defined in Section 102 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.140
B. Vehicles thus impounded shall be impounded and towed only in and by
garages which shall be approved by separate resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Baldwin. No garage shall be approved by
resolution until it shall have provided a bond to the Borough of Baldwin
indemnifying the owner of such impounded vehicle against the loss
thereof, or injury or damage thereto, while in the custody of such
poundkeeper. The Borough shall from time to time by resolution
designate an amount which it considers adequate for such protection.
[Amended 11-19-1973 by Ord. No. 442]
C. The Borough shall from time to time by resolution designate specific
towing and storage charges.
D. Within 12 hours from the time of the removal of any such vehicle, the
Chief of Police of the Borough of Baldwin shall give notice of the fact
that such vehicle has been impounded to the owner of record of such
vehicle, designating the place from which said vehicle was removed,
the reason for its removal and impounding, and the pound in which it
has been impounded.
E. The payment of such charges shall be determined from time to time
pursuant to the provisions of Subsection C (fixing of charges) hereof
138. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
139. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 157, Vehicles, Impounding of.
140. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102.
§ 154-9 BALDWIN CODE § 154-10
1:476
shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right
to recover the money so paid, unless such payment shall be made under
protest. In the event that the charges are paid under protest, the owner
or offending person shall be entitled to a hearing before a District
Justice or court of record having jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions
of the Motor Vehicle Code of 1959, Act of June 11, 1963, P.L. 118,
Section 1.141
141. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 154-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-10
1:477

ARTICLE II
Residential Parking Permits
[Adopted 9-17-2001 by Ord. No. 759]
§ 154-11. Issuance of permits.
The Chief of Police or designee shall provide for the issuance of residential
parking permits as applied for, on such streets designated by this article,
restricting all parking except parking by permit holders only who reside
within that parking zone, the boundaries of which shall be established by
the Chief of Police or designee.
§ 154-12. Permit requirements and fees.
§ 154-13. Parking within spaces required.
Vehicles are to be parked within marked spaces. Wherever a space is
marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every
vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that
space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any persons to park a
vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 154-14. Posted areas.
No persons shall park a vehicle at any time within the posted areas of
the streets described in the following schedule of listed streets without a
permit:
Schedule of Streets
Keeport Drive
Knoedler Road
Macassar Drive
Wolfe Drive
Youngridge Drive
A. To persons who are residents of any particular street or portion thereof
on which parking is restricted, every vehicle owned by those persons
and registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania will require a
parking permit.
B. No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for more than one calendar
year but may be renewed upon expiration or January 1 of each
concurrent year.
C. The permit fee shall be $10 per application, per vehicle, and the fee
shall not be prorated. The permit is not transferable, however, it may be
transferred to another automobile the resident of the apartment owns
or leases. The permit shall be valid for one calendar year, expiring on
December 31 of each year, provided the conditions for issuance exist.
§ 154-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-15
1:479
§ 154-15. Visitor parking.
§ 154-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be liable, on
conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $15 per violation for a
maximum of three violations. After the maximum three violations, the
Baldwin Borough Police Department shall tow the vehicle to the Borough
impound location and notify the resident in writing of the location of the
vehicle.
A. On behalf of persons who are visitors of any resident of any particular
street listed or any portion thereof on which parking is limited to permit
holders only, they may purchase a visitor's placard in the amount of $15
per visitor placard.
B. Visitors' permits shall not be transferable. Residents who allow the
visitor's permit issued to their dwelling unit to be used by a person not a
visitor to their dwelling unit shall, in addition to the penalties set forth
in this article, have said permit revoked for a period of one year
beginning on the date of revocation. In addition, it shall be unlawful for
a person to use a visitor's permit who is not a visitor at the dwelling unit
to which that permit is registered. It shall not be a defense that the
permit was being used with the permission of the registered owner.
Such person shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $300.
C. Should a visitor's permit be lost or stolen, such fact shall be reported to
the Police Department, which shall invalidate same forthwith. Any
person who possesses or uses a visitor's permit which has been
reported lost or stolen shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $300.
D. Lost or stolen visitors' permits may be replaced upon payment of a fee
of $5.
§ 154-15 BALDWIN CODE § 154-16
1:480
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations; Residential Private Property
[Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
§ 154-17. Preamble; purpose; intent.
The indiscriminate parking of motor vehicles on residential lawn areas
and outside of off-street parking areas which were specifically built and
designed for the parking of motor vehicles has many deleterious effects
on the community. These include the destroying of lawn areas, resulting
in creating dirt, mud and other debris on private and public property.
Not only do these deleterious conditions lower the value of individual
properties, thereby causing an overall lowering of all property value in
the neighborhoods, but also mud, dirt and other debris are scattered and
spread onto public streets by motor vehicles so parked when those vehicles
leave the premises. Therefore, in order to stop the scattering of these
materials, which have a deleterious effect on the public streets and the
community as a whole, the Borough hereby declares that the parking of
motor vehicles on residential private property outside of off-street parking
areas is a public nuisance and prohibits the same.
§ 154-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — A person who drives or is in actual physical control of vehicle.
LAWN AREAS — The areas on a residential property not specifically
designed for the parking of motor vehicles. Areas specifically designed
for the parking of motor vehicles are hard surfaced driveways or pads
constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick, gravel with barriers or permanent
curbing, and the like.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled including, but not
limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, scooters, motor bikes and
recreational vehicles, except one which is propelled solely by human power
or any vehicle which is designed for the conveyance of one handicapped
person.
OFF-STREET PARKING — The halting of a motor vehicle in any area beyond
the street right-of-way, whether occupied or not, except momentarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — An area or structure located beyond the
street right-of-way, which is designed to be used for parking motor vehicles.
OWNER — Any person, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of
the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
§ 154-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-18
1:481
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
§ 154-19. Parking prohibited.
Off-street parking of motor vehicles is expressly prohibited on lawn or
landscaped areas located in residential districts.
§ 154-20. Responsibility of owners/drivers.
The owner and/or driver shall be responsible for complying with the
provisions of § 154-19 of this chapter.
§ 154-21. Notice of field violations.
§ 154-22. Penalties.
On neglect or refusal of the owner and/or driver to comply with the
provisions of this article, he, she or they shall, upon conviction of such
default, neglect, failure or refusal, pay a fine of not less than $50 and not
more than $500, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. The
continuation or reoccurrence of the violation of this article after a period
of 24 hours shall constitute a new and separate offense for each successive
additional twenty-four-hour period.
A. Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this Ordinance,
the Borough, through its authorized agents, is authorized to give notice
to the owner and/or driver of a violation either by personal delivery to
such owner and/or driver, by United States mail directed to the last
known address of such owner and/or driver or by leaving the same on
the vehicle which is parked in violation of this article.
B. If such owner and/or driver, within seven days after delivery, mailing or
leaving of such notice, pays to the Borough the sum of $25 for the
violation, the same will constitute full satisfaction for the violation
noted in said notice.
C. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The
failure of such owner and/or driver to make payment, as aforesaid, with
seven days shall render such owner and/or driver subject to the
penalties as provided herein.
D. If such owner shall, in fact, make payment after such seven-day period
but before the filing of a complaint with the District Magistrate on
account of such violation, the sum of $35 shall be in full satisfaction of
such violation.
§ 154-18 BALDWIN CODE § 154-22
1:482
Chapter 157
VEHICLES, IMPOUNDING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 157.
§ 157-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle in such a state of disrepair as to
be incapable of being moved under its own power or with any tire missing
or without a wheel or wheels or with any window broken or missing or
in a dismantled condition or without current license plates or without a
current inspection sticker, which vehicle has not been moved or used for
more than seven consecutive days. In the case of any such vehicle bearing
current license plates, the seven-day period shall commence only when the
Department of Police has sent, by registered mail, notice to the registered
owner stating that the vehicle, if not immediately moved, shall be deemed
to be abandoned.
VEHICLES — All automobiles, tractors, trucks, truck-tractors, truck trailers
and other motor vehicles of any kind.
WHEEL LOCK — A device consisting of metal clamps or jaws and a
padlocking device which, when attached to the wheel of a motor vehicle,
prevents the vehicle from being driven.[Added 7-21-1997 by Ord. No.
712]
§ 157-2. Abandoned vehicles prohibited.
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall abandon vehicles
or place an abandoned vehicle on any public street or way or upon any other
public or private property within the Borough of Baldwin.
§ 157-3. Designation of storage garages.
The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to designate a storage garage
or garages, subject to the approval of the Borough Council, to be operated
by the Police Department as an official vehicle pound or pounds to which
vehicles impounded as hereinafter provided shall be removed.
§ 157-4. Bond required.
Any garage designated, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, as a
pound shall furnish a bond in favor of the Borough of Baldwin in the amount
of $10,000 indemnifying the owner of such impounded vehicle against the
§ 154-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-4
1:483
loss thereof, or injury or damage thereto, while in the custody of such
poundkeeper.
§ 157-5. Notice to owners.
Any vehicle bearing current license plates and a current inspection sticker,
regardless of its condition, shall be deemed an abandoned vehicle, where
it is not used or moved for a period of 30 consecutive days after the
Department of Police has sent registered mail notice to the registered
owner stating that the vehicle, if not immediately moved, shall be deemed
to be abandoned.
§ 157-6. Presumption of ownership.
Where the party abandoning the vehicle cannot be ascertained, then the
Department of Police shall presume that the last owner, whether an
individual person, association, partnership or corporation, registered with
the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or similar
department of any other state or territory or with any department of the
United States or other nation, is the party guilty of the violation and is
subject to the penalties prescribed in this chapter unless proof to the
contrary is presented; however, this provision shall not apply to those
persons, partnerships, associations or corporations who hold title to a
vehicle solely as security under finance purchase agreements or as security
for loans, and in such cases, the Department of Police shall presume that
the party having control and custody of the vehicle under the finance or loan
agreement is the party guilty of the violation and is subject to the penalties
prescribed in this chapter, unless proof to the contrary is presented.
§ 157-7. Removal of vehicles.
When any vehicle shall be found wrecked, abandoned or parked in violation
of laws and ordinances now or hereinafter in force or shall be seized, such
vehicle shall be removed either by Borough-operated towing equipment
or by a contract tower upon the authorization of the Chief of Police to a
designated storage garage operated as a pound pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 157-8. Report and notice of impoundment.
A person removing or directing the removal of any vehicle shall immediately
make a report thereof to the Chief of Police giving the registration number
and location of the pound to which the vehicle has been removed and
the reason for its removal and, within 12 hours from the time of removal,
provided that the vehicle has not already been released from the pound, the
Chief of Police shall notify the owner of record of such vehicle by registered
mail that the same has been impounded, designating the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the pound in which it has been impounded.
§ 157-4 BALDWIN CODE § 157-9
1:484
§ 157-9. Record of impounded vehicles.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and be able
at all times to furnish the owners or agents thereof with information as to
the place of impounding.
§ 157-10. Redemption of impounded vehicles.
Before the owner or his agent shall be permitted to remove an impounded
vehicle from a designated pound he shall:
§ 157-11. Payment of charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve
the owner from liability for any fine or penalty for violation of any law or
ordinance on account of which the vehicle was impounded, and provided,
further, that payments of such charges, unless made under protest, shall be
final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid.
§ 157-12. Hearings.
In the event that towing and impounding charges are paid under protest,
the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District Justice having
jurisdiction, in which case the defendant shall be proceeded against and
receive such notice as is provided by the Vehicle Code in other cases of
summary offenses and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver
of hearing. If the District Justice shall, in accordance with law, acquit the
defendant, the Justice shall forthwith certify to the Borough Treasurer the
facts, and the Borough Treasurer shall, within five days, refund to the
defendant the amount of said towing and storage charges paid by him or in
his behalf.
A. Pay the duly authorized agent of the Borough Treasurer at the location
of the pound a fee of $12 to cover the administrative cost of the
operation of the pound.
B. Pay the towing charges incurred.
C. If the vehicle has been impounded in the garage for a period longer
than five hours, pay $1 per day or fraction thereof. This storage charge
is in addition to the administrative charge referred to in Subsection A.
D. Secure from such duly authorized agent of the Borough Treasurer a
certified release in duplicate, such release indicating whether or not
the payments were made under protest. The agent of the Borough
Treasurer shall retain the original release and, upon proper
identification and ownership by the owner or his agent, said vehicle
shall be released to him.
E. Sign a receipt for such vehicle.
§ 157-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-13
1:485
§ 157-13. Towing notice.
The person removing or directing the removal of any vehicle under the
provisions of this chapter shall affix securely a towing notice form in a
prominent place on such vehicle, such form to bear the license number
of the vehicle, the date, time, place and nature of the violation, and the
name or identifying badge number of the person removing or directing the
removal of the vehicle.
§ 157-14. Towing receipt form.
For the purpose of ascertaining any damage to the vehicle which may have
occurred while in the custody of the poundkeeper, the person removing or
directing the removal of any vehicle to the pound under the provisions of
this chapter shall affix securely thereto and in a prominent place thereon a
towing receipt form; such form to bear a schedule of obvious or apparent
damage to said vehicle and any other additional information that may be
deemed necessary.
§ 157-15. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
Any person, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon judgment of the District Justice having
jurisdiction to determine such violation, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$300 and costs for each offense or imprisonment in the Allegheny County
Jail or Allegheny County Work House for a period not exceeding 30 days. A
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each calendar
day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. In the case
of associations and partnerships, the penalty may be imposed upon the
members or partners thereof and, in the case of corporations, upon the
officers thereof.
A. Any vehicle having five or more unpaid summonses issued against it
within an eighteen-month period, charging that such vehicle was
parked, stopped or standing in violation of the Motor Vehicle Code of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other traffic ordinance or
regulation of the Borough of Baldwin, is deemed to be a public
nuisance, and the Police Department of the Borough of Baldwin or any
police officer of the Borough of Baldwin, or any other agent assigned by
the Borough of Baldwin to traffic duty, is hereby authorized to: [Added
7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 712]
(1) Remove such vehicle or cause it to be removed at the sole cost and
expense of the owner.
(2) Immobilize such vehicle(s) by means of applying a wheel lock. If the
vehicle has remained immobilized for a period of 24 hours and
release has not been obtained, the police or other Borough
authority shall have the authority to remove such vehicle or cause it
to be removed at the sole cost and expense of the owner. In any
§ 157-13 BALDWIN CODE § 157-15
1:486
Chapter 159
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED AND ALL-TERRAIN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 154.
Vehicles, impounding of — See Ch. 157.
Vehicles with studded tires — See Ch. 160.
§ 159-1. Certain vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any type of unlicensed
motor-driven vehicle, including, but not limited to, snowmobiles, two-wheel
vehicles known as "minibikes," trail bikes, motor scooters, four-wheel motor
vehicles known as "go-carts," multiple wheeled, three-wheel motorcycles,
and all-terrain machines or vehicles, under the following conditions:
case involving the immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this
section, a notice shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous
manner, sufficient to warn any individual that such vehicle has been
immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle may result
in damage thereto.
(a) Any tampering with or removal of the device shall be separate
offenses and may be prosecuted as violations of the criminal
mischief and theft sections of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.142
(b) The Borough assumes no liability for loss or damage to such
vehicle while immobilized.
B. The police or other Borough authority shall have the power and is
hereby authorized to remove the vehicle by either private or
governmental equipment in accordance with the provisions of
Ordinance No. 322 of the Borough of Baldwin, adopted the 23rd day of
May, 1966, as amended (this Chapter 157, §§ 57-1 through 57-15 of the
Code of the Borough of Baldwin). [Added 7-21-1997 by Ord. No.
712]
A. On the private property of another without the express written
permission of the owner or occupant of the property. This prohibition
shall prevail whether or not the vehicle or operator is licensed or
unlicensed.
B. On any public street or public grounds located within the Borough of
Baldwin.
142. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. Chs. 33 and 39.
§ 157-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-1
1:487
C. To operate said unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or conveyances so as
to create loud and unnecessary or unusual noises so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace and quiet of the residents of the Borough of
Baldwin.
(1) For the purpose of determining and classifying any noise as
excessive, loud, unnecessary or unusual, as prohibited by this
chapter, the following test measurement and requirements may be
applied; provided, however, that a violation of this chapter may
occur without the following measurements being made:
(a) The noise shall be measured within the Borough at a distance
of at least 25 feet from a noise source located within the public
right-of-way and, if the noise source is located on private
property or public property other than the public right-of-way,
from the property line on which the noise source is located.
(b) The noise shall be measured on a sound level meter, which is
defined as an instrument standardized by the American
Standard Association and used for measurement of the
intensity of sound and calibrated in decibels. Readings shall be
made on a db(A) scale.
(2) A noise measured or registered as provided above from any
unlicensed motor vehicle as set forth herein of more than 80
decibels on the A-weighting scale in intensity shall be and is hereby
declared to be excessive and unusually loud and unlawful. A
"decibel" (db) is defined as a unit of sound-pressure management,
as defined by the American National Standards Institute, with one
decibel, or a db, referring to a sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars.
D. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles upon private
or public property earlier than one hour after daylight and later than
one hour before dark.
E. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles in a careless,
negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger, or be likely to
endanger, the safety of any property or person, including the operator
of said vehicle.
F. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or
conveyances within a distance of 400 feet of a residence or occupied or
inhabited building or structure.
G. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or
conveyances in such a manner as to raise unnecessary dust or dirt. For
the purpose of this provision, unnecessary dust or dirt shall mean
suspended particle matter visible to the unaided or naked eye from a
distance of 50 feet.
§ 159-1 BALDWIN CODE § 159-2
1:488
§ 159-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to police and emergency
vehicles.
§ 159-3. Impoundment of vehicle.143
The Police Department of the Borough of Baldwin or any law enforcement
officer of the Borough of Baldwin shall confiscate and impound the
unlicensed vehicle operated in violation of § 159-1 of this chapter. The
unlicensed vehicle shall be returned to the owner thereof upon payment
of any fine imposed as a result of the violation of this chapter and upon
payment of any storage charges incurred as a result of the impoundment.
§ 159-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or individual violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$300 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Should
the owner of any unlicensed vehicle be subject to a second violation of the
terms of this chapter within a period of six months from the date of the first
violation, the Police Department shall impound the vehicle and shall sell the
same pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code
pertaining to forfeited vehicles.
Chapter 160
VEHICLES WITH STUDDED TIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of vehicles in parks — See Ch. 123,
Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 154.
Impounding of vehicles — See Ch. 157.
§ 160-1. Permit required.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall move any
vehicle while the wheels of which or the traction thereof is equipped with
cleats, blocks, studs, flanges or any other protuberance over, along or
across any highways, streets or alleys in the Borough without first obtaining
a permit from the Borough Secretary.
§ 160-2. Application for permit.
A person, firm, partnership, association or corporation seeking issuance of a
permit hereunder shall file an application for such permit with the Borough
Secretary. The application shall be made in writing upon forms provided by
143. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 157, Vehicles, Impounding of.
§ 159-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:489
the Borough Secretary, and said application shall be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary. The application shall set forth:
§ 160-3. Permit fee; cash deposit.
The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $5
for each vehicle. Said fee shall be deposited by the Borough Secretary to the
general account of the Borough of Baldwin. The application hereunder shall
be accompanied by a cash deposit in a sum to be determined by the Borough
Engineer as an indemnity for any damage which the Borough may sustain
by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire
hydrant or other property of the Borough, which may be caused by or be
incidental to the operation of a vehicle when the wheels of which or the
traction thereof is equipped with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges or any other
protuberance.
§ 160-4. Bond.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation filing an
application hereunder may, in lieu of the cash deposit required above, file
with the Secretary of the Borough a bond approved as to form by the
Borough Solicitor, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in an amount determined
by the Borough Engineer, conditioned upon the issuance that this chapter
and other applicable ordinances and laws shall be complied with. Such
bonds shall run to the Borough for the use and benefit of the Borough and
shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public property from
any act in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the
permit applied for is granted.
A. A description of the vehicle proposed to be operated, giving the make of
the vehicle, the size of the vehicle and the condition of the wheels or
traction thereof, as well as the type of wheels and traction.
B. The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the vehicle
is proposed to be moved.
C. The time when said vehicle is proposed to be operated, showing the
date and hours.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
partnership, association or corporation making the application.
E. A statement as to whether the vehicle will merely traverse the
highways, streets and alleys of the Borough or whether the applicant
proposes to actually operate the vehicle on the said highways, streets
and alleys in the performance of the vehicle's usual function.
F. The number of vehicles proposed to be operated.
G. Any additional information which the Borough Secretary shall find
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
§ 160-2 BALDWIN CODE § 160-5
1:490
§ 160-5. Inspection.
The Borough Engineer shall inspect the highways, streets and alleys
proposed to be used by the applicant and shall fix the cash deposit or the
bond in an amount sufficient to restore the paved surface of the Borough to
its normal condition if the said paved surface should be damaged, injured
or destroyed by reason of the operation of a vehicle, the wheels of which or
the traction thereof is equipped with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges or other
protuberances.
§ 160-6. Restrictions on operation.
The permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The permittee may
use the permit granted for the specific term provided for in the application.
The permit shall be nonassignable, and in the event of an assignment of
the same, the permit shall become immediately void. The permittee may
operate the vehicles only upon the highways, streets and alleys designated
for such use in the written permit. The permittee shall notify the Borough
Secretary in writing of any change in the route proposed or the time
proposed in the application. The permittee shall notify the Borough
Secretary in writing of any and all damage done to property of the Borough
of Baldwin within 24 hours after the injury or damage has occurred.
§ 160-7. Denial of permit; appeals.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation aggrieved by the
provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
permit to the Council of the Borough of Baldwin. The appeal shall be
taken within five days after notice of the denial, and Council shall act
upon the said appeal at or before the next regular meeting of Council
following the filing of the appeal. Any person, firm, partnership, association
or corporation aggrieved by the decision of Council shall have the right to
appeal to the courts of the commonwealth as provided by law.
§ 160-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-19-1958 by Ord. No.
154; 12-19-1985 by Ord. No. 566]
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof before the District
Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not exceeding $300
together with the costs of prosecution or to imprisonment for a period
of up to 30 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 160-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-8
1:491
Chapter 168
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commissions — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 74.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 83.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 87.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Grading, excavations and fill — See Ch. 99.
Junkyards — See Ch. 105.
Massage parlors — See Ch. 116.
Mining — See Ch. 119.
Pornography — See Ch. 130.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 131.
Rental property — See Ch. 133.
Sewers — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
142.
§ 160-8 BALDWIN CODE § 160-8
1:492
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 168-100. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the Borough
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC), Act 247 of 1968,144 as amended.
§ 168-110. Overview and organization.
This chapter is an important part of Baldwin Borough's overall land use
management program that is implemented to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the Borough's residential and business community. The chapter
is divided into subchapters for ease of use and navigation:
§ 168-120. Long title.
This chapter consists of an ordinance authorizing and empowering the
Borough of Baldwin to plan its development and to govern the same by
providing for zoning regulations, providing for appropriations and penalties
for violations of the same; establishing zoning regulations for the use of
land and structures, area of lots, bulk of buildings and other structures,
the density of population, the provision of off-street parking and loading
A. ARTICLE I, General Provisions: This article describes the overall zoning
chapter, its purpose and objectives.
B. ARTICLE II, Terminology: This article describes land uses and other
terms relevant to this chapter.
C. ARTICLE III, Zoning Districts and Zoning Map: This subchapter
describes and establishes zoning districts, within which certain land
uses are permitted.
D. ARTICLE IV, Conditional Uses, Special Exceptions, and Supplemental
Regulations, Including Signs: This article describes land uses related to
structures and land in the Borough. It includes regulations such as
setbacks and height restrictions. Additionally, there are requirements
that are specific to certain uses or certain districts.
E. ARTICLE V, Administration: This article describes the roles for
individuals and groups as they apply to this chapter. These include the
Borough Council, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Planning
Commission and Zoning Hearing Board.
F. ARTICLE VI, Enforcement and Penalties: This article describes
application processes that allow for meaningful review and
consideration of zoning permits, including approvals for conditional
uses and special exceptions.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-120
1:493
spaces and similar accessory regulations for the Borough of Baldwin, and
for such purposes to divide the Borough into zoning districts; and repealing
all ordinances in conflict herewith.
§ 168-130. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Baldwin, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania."
§ 168-140. Intent.
The Borough Council adopted "Baldwin Borough Plans: One Vision, One
Baldwin," an update to the Borough Comprehensive Plan (hereinafter
"Comprehensive Plan") on April 21, 2015. The zoning regulations and
zoning districts set forth in this chapter are made in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Borough of Baldwin for the general welfare
of the Borough residents and are intended to achieve, among others, the
following purposes: to secure safety from fire and other dangers, to provide
adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of the land and avoid
undue concentrations of population, to facilitate adequate provisions for
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements, as well as the conservation of the value of land and buildings.
These land use regulations were made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, of the existing character of the various areas and
neighborhoods within the Borough, their respective suitability for particular
land uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout Baldwin Borough.
Furthermore, the districts established in this regulation are intended to
achieve the following:
A. To provide sufficient space, appropriately located for residential
development to meet the housing needs of the present and expected
future population of the Borough within the range of house types and
densities anticipated.
B. To assure light, air and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
C. To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
D. To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
population and the bulk of buildings, and by providing for sufficient offstreet
parking.
E. To protect residential neighborhoods, as far as possible, from heavy or
through traffic.
F. To make possible provisions of those public and private educational,
recreational, health and similar facilities serving the needs of nearby
residents, which perform most effectively in a residential environment
and do not create objectionable influences.
§ 168-120 BALDWIN CODE § 168-140
1:494
§ 168-150. Relationship to comprehensive plan.
This chapter is adopted to promote an orderly plan of development
according to an established Comprehensive Plan, including data on existing
conditions, statements concerning the proposed plan and evaluations of
implementation techniques. Such material shall be considered as legislative
history and shall be utilized when necessary to establish policy in the
interpretation of this chapter.
§ 168-160. Community development objectives.
§ 168-170. Establishment of controls.
G. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stable
residential development, to protect the character of any district and its
peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the value of land and
buildings and to protect the Borough tax revenues.
A. The community development objectives of the Borough of Baldwin
existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter are contained
specifically in the Comprehensive Plan adopted by Borough Council on
April 21, 2015. The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of Baldwin and was adopted for the purposes
of ascertaining future land use, densities of population, location and
function of streets, community facilities and utilities. The community
development objectives include the following:
(1) Preserve the character of Baldwin Borough's residential
neighborhoods to ensure an adequate choice of attractive living
accommodations promoting compatibility of both a strong singlefamily
housing stock and healthy rental stock.
(a) Promote high-quality design geared toward sustaining
attractive, functional, and enduring systems and places.
(b) Maintain and uphold long-term economic stability.
(c) Support and encourage a pedestrian-oriented environment and
efficient traffic circulation.
A. Minimum and uniform regulations. The regulations set by this chapter
within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
B. For new uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date of
this chapter, any new building or other structure on any tract of land
shall be constructed, developed and used only in accordance with the
regulations specified for each district.
C. For existing uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date
of this chapter, any existing building or other structure or any tract of
§ 168-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-170
1:495
§ 168-180. Interpretation of regulations.
land which is not in conformity with the regulations for the district in
which it is located shall be deemed as nonconforming and subject to the
regulations of this chapter.
A. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of a
restriction upon the use of property, the language shall be interpreted,
where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the language written
and enacted by the governing body, in favor of the property owner and
against any implied extension of the restriction.
B. The interpretation of the regulations of this chapter is intended to be
such that, whenever these requirements are at variance with any other
lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or
covenants, as particularly refer to area and bulk regulations and impose
higher standards, the most restrictive requirement shall govern.
§ 168-170 BALDWIN CODE § 168-180
1:496
ARTICLE II
Terminology
This article describes land uses and other terms relevant to this chapter.
§ 168-200. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall have the meanings
assigned to them, as follows:
§ 168-210. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this
section, as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY USE — A building or use
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use and
located on the same lot with such principal building or use.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. The word "building" includes "structure" and any part thereof.
C. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for" or "occupied for."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association or any other similar entity.
E. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Children's playhouse, garden house or private greenhouse.
(2) Civil defense shelter serving not more than two families.
(3) Carport, utility shed, shed or building for domestic storage.
Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any commercial use unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
(4)
Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities,
on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such
storage is excluded by district regulations.
(5)
Nonpaying guesthouse or rooms for nonpaying guests within an
accessory building, provided that such facilities are used for the
(6)
A.
§ 168-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:497
ADDRESS MARKER — A marker, not more than two square feet in size,
indicating address and/or name of a residential property or indicating the
address of a commercial property.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation of the
Allegheny County Airport is 1,250 feet above mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR
Part 77 and 74 P.S. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this article
and the Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation).145
ALLEY — A service way providing a secondary public means of access to
abutting properties, or a way as shown on a recorded plan.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location to another, or any change in use from that of
one zoning district classification to another.
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The
inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,146 is derived from the approach surface.
Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
AREA — The size of a building or land parcel in square feet or acres.
occasional housing of guests or occupants of the principal building
and not for permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units.
(7) Servants' quarters or servants' house.
Off-street motor vehicle parking area; loading and unloading
facility.
(8)
(9) Home occupation.
(10)Fence.
(11)All accessory uses shall be governed by this chapter.
145. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101 et seq.
146. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101 et seq.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:498
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane from
ground to the sky of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
AREA, FLOOR — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls, or from the center line of common walls separating buildings. For
purposes of determining parking and loading space requirements for the
several zoning districts herein, the floor area of a building or buildings
shall include basement space, penthouses, attic space providing structural
headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more, interior balconies and mezzanine enclosed
porches, accessory uses other than accessory off-street parking, lobbies and
hallways. For determination of parking and loading space requirements, the
following areas shall not be included: basement space, elevator shafts and
stairwells, floor space for mechanical equipment as necessary to service the
needs of the building, uncovered steps, terraces, breezeways, open spaces
unroofed unless specifically required in the parking regulations herein, and
fitting and dressing rooms.
ARTIST AND PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO — An establishment, in conjunction
with or without a dwelling, designed for the preparation, instruction,
display and/or sale of individually crafted work related to artwork, jewelry,
furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, literature
or performance of fine arts such as but not limited to drawing, vocal or
instrumental music.
AUTOMOBILE — A self-propelled, free-moving vehicle, primarily used for
personal conveyance on a public street or way.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than
a street or way, used for the display of new and/or used automobiles or
trailers, and where minor and incidental repair work (other than body and
fender repair) may be done.
AUTOMOBILE FUEL STATION — A building(s), premises or portions
thereof which are used, arranged, designed or intended to be used for the
retail sale of gasoline or other fuel for motor vehicles, boats or aircraft, as
well as for minor automobile repair, including state inspections.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY or CAR WASHING FACILITY — A structure used
for the purposes of cleaning or reconditioning the exterior and interior
surfaces of automotive vehicles, but not including an incidental one-bay
washing facility in a gasoline service station where washing facilities are
purely incidental to the operation of said service station. A self-operated
vehicular laundering facility not requiring attendants or employees,
regardless of capacity, is also considered to be an "automobile laundry"
under this definition.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE AND REPAIR — Engine rebuilding or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision
service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repairs; and
overall painting of vehicles.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:499
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted or incorporated into a roof-like cover often
made of fabric, metal or glass designed and intended for protection from
the weather or as a decorative embellishment which projects from a wall or
roof over a window, walk or door.
BAR OR NIGHTCLUB — A business establishment which provides on-site
alcoholic beverage sales for drinking on the premises, where food is served
only as accessory use, where live entertainment (not including adult
entertainment) may also be provided, and where minors are not admitted
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
BASEMENT — A story partially underground, but having more than 1/2 of
its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A "basement"
shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the
vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining
ground is five feet or more or if the basement is used for business or
dwelling purposes.
BILLBOARD — A sign that conveys information regarding an establishment,
an activity, a person, a product, or a service that is unrelated to or
unavailable on the premises on which the sign is located.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Baldwin.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land which is planted and maintained in shrubs,
bushes, trees, grass or other landscaping material and within which no
structure is permitted except a wall or fence.
BUILDING — A structure or appendage to a structure which is permanently
affixed to the land, has one or more floors or stories and is bounded by
either lot lines or yards. A building may accommodate more than one family
and have more than one dwelling unit and may be used for residential,
commercial, manufacturing, public or semipublic purposes.
BUILDING AND LANDSCAPE MATERIALS SALES OR STORAGE YARD —
A business establishment specializing in the sale and/or short- or long-term
storage of wholesale and/or retail construction supplies and materials for
home improvement.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the lowest
elevation of the finished grade around the building to the highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs, and to the mean
height between eave and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include walks, steps or
terraces.
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other structures
and their relationship to each other, to open area such as yards and to lot
lines and includes the size, height and floor area of a building or other
structure; the relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential
building to the area of the lot (usually called "density"); and all open areas
in yard space relating to buildings and other structures.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:500
CARPORT — A structure with a roof, no walls and four corner supports,
but containing no side sections and which is intended to provide covered
parking for motor vehicles.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of dead
humans and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction
with and within the boundary of such property.
COMMISSION — All references to the "Commission" are to be the Borough
of Baldwin Planning Commission.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Towers, antennas and associated
structures operated by any person, agency or corporation who or which
furnishes wireless, mobile cellular radio telecommunications services,
radio, television and/or other communications services for public or private
use, excluding, however, police, fire and emergency transmissions by
governmental units. This includes communication antennas, towers, and
equipment transmitting and receiving facilities.
CONDITIONAL USES — Those uses of property allowed in certain districts
of the Borough, not as a matter of right, but after approval of the governing
body upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and upon the
meeting of certain conditions that may be imposed thereon.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20
feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
The conical surface zone, as shown in Figure 1,147 is based on the conical
surface. Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
CONVERTED HOUSE TRAILER — A trailer rendered immobile and placed
on either a temporary or permanent foundation for use as sleeping or living
quarters. A converted house trailer is considered a mobile home.
CORNER LOT — A lot bounded on adjacent sides by intersecting streets. On
through lots, the front lot line shall be located on the side having principal
access. The required setback on all sides bounded by a street shall equal
the building setback line of the district in which the corner lot is situated.
With regards to decorative fences, the established front yard will be the
yard facing the street or road bearing the mailing address of the property.
The other yard will be considered the side yard and shall be required to
comply with the front yard requirements regarding fences.
COUNCIL — All references to the "Council" are to the Council of the
Borough of Baldwin.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
CREMATORIUM — A location containing properly installed, certified
apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation.
147. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101 et seq.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:501
DAY-CARE or DAY NURSERY — A facility designed to provide daytime care
or instruction for two or more children or adults, whose numbers shall be
determined by the sponsoring agency or persons establishing the same and
who meet all applicable state and federal requirements, if any, for operation
of the same.
DENSITY, BUILDING OR DWELLING UNIT — Maximum number of
dwelling units permitted per acre or per lot.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
DISTRICT, ZONING — A section of the Borough for which uniform
regulations governing the use, height, area and intensity of use of buildings
and land and open spaces about buildings are established.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An accessory use or structure that provides an access
drive connecting to and from the public right-of-way for motor vehicles so
as to serve patrons while in their motor vehicle(s).
DRY CLEANING (RETAIL) — A business establishment for receiving, pickup
and pressing of garments where no cleaning or drying operations are
conducted.
DRY CLEANING FACILITY — An establishment for the cleaning of clothing
and fabric with chemical solvents rather than water.
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
for one or more families.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling or group of dwellings on one
plot or lot containing separate living units or dwelling units for three or
more families, but which may have joint services or facilities, or both, and
not exceeding three stories in height.
DWELLING, MULTISTORY MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A multiple-family
dwelling of more than three stories, but not exceeding seven stories and 75
feet in height, unless further restricted in district regulations herein.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A building that contains at
least three dwelling units, each of which are separated from the adjoining
unit or units by a continuous, common wall extending from the basement
to the roof, each unit having independent access directly to the outside and
having no other units above or below.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building designed
for or occupied exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other, with separate
dwelling unit entrances.
EASEMENT — A nonpossessory right to use and/or enter into the real
property of another without possessing it. Authorization by a lot owner of
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:502
the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his
lot.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of a tract
of land occupied by an existing use.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — An enterprise operated for profit by other
than a public entity completely within an enclosed structure for the pursuit
of sports, recreation and entertainment activities, including, but not limited
to, such establishment as theaters, multiplex theaters, dance halls, bowling
alleys, fitness centers, indoor racquet clubs and the like. This does not
include a sexually oriented business.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems or collection, communication, supply
or disposal systems.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
FARM — Land devoted to agriculture, stock-raising, dairy, produce or allied
industry that may include a private stable not less than 200 feet distant from
any adjacent property line.
FENCE — An enclosure or barrier not exceeding six feet in height where
the open portion thereof exceeds in area the closed portion.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A business establishment where the principal
business is the receipt, disbursement, or exchange of funds and currencies
such as banks, savings, loans, credit unions or check cashing
establishments. Establishment may or may not offer a drive-through
window.
FOOTCANDLE — Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be
horizontal unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance
meter, aka "light meter."
FULL-CUTOFF — Attribute of a luminaire from which no light is emitted at
or above a horizontal plane drawn through the lowest light-emitting portion
of the luminaire, and no more than 10% of the lamp's intensity is emitted
at or above an angle 10° below that horizontal plane at all lateral angles
around the luminaire. A full-cutoff luminaire, by definition, also is "fully
shielded."
FULLY SHIELDED — Attribute of a luminaire from which no light is emitted
at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the lowest light-emitting
portion of the luminaire.
FUNERAL HOME — A building licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that contains a suitable storage room for the deceased and
may include embalming facilities and rooms for the display of burial
ceremonies of the deceased, but excludes crematories.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:503
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, housing only automobiles, the
property of and for the use of the occupants of the lot on which the private
garage is located.
GARAGE, PRIVATE DETACHED — An accessory building housing only
motor vehicles, the property of and for the use of occupants of the premises
on which the garage is located. Any such detached garage, notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter, shall house no more than three vehicles,
contain no more than 700 square feet of area and will be no higher than 12
feet measured from the grade to the eaves and be no closer than 10 feet
from any side yard and no closer than five feet from any rear yard.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private detached garage or
a private garage, available to the public, and which is used for storage,
parking, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping
of motor-driven vehicles.
GARDEN CENTER — A business enterprise which conducts the retail of
plants grown off-site, as well as accessory items (but not power equipment
such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm implements) directly related
to their care and maintenance. The accessory items normally sold are
clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes and
shovels.
GLARE — Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently
greater than that to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance or
loss in visual performance and visibility so as to jeopardize health, safety or
welfare.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HIGH-RISE — A high-rise dwelling unit is generally considered to be a
multiple-family dwelling exceeding seven habitable stories or 70 feet in
height. The height shall be measured from the lowest point of the ground
surface around the building.
HOME BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT — A business administered or
conducted clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which
involves no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or
pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business must
satisfy the following requirements:
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than members residing
in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:504
HOME OCCUPATION — A business conducted within a dwelling whereas
said business is not classified as a home-based business, no-impact.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various
radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting
the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the
planned approach. The horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,148
is derived from the horizontal surface. Figure 1 is on file in the Borough
Offices.
HOSPITAL — An institution or building for reception, care and medical
treatment of the sick or injured, containing facilities for surgery and twentyfour-
hour-per-day emergency treatment, including ancillary commercial
activities customarily incident thereto.
ILLUMINANCE — Quantity of incident light, measured in footcandles.
IMPROVEMENT — Any type of structure, excavation or paved section or
change thereof.
INSTITUTIONAL HOME — Any dwelling, home, house, multiple-family
dwelling, hotel, motel, building, structure or facility or any part or portion of
any of those previously identified items established, used and/or operated as
the temporary or permanent residence or shelter, for more than one full day,
for more than two persons who are not relatives of the operator. The term
"institutional home" shall include the facilities as defined herein regardless
of whether such facilities are established, owned, used or operated as
private or public facilities, as profit-making facilities or entities or as
charitable facilities or entities, and regardless of what name, title,
description or designation might be applied to such facilities by the owners
and/or operators thereof. The term "institutional home" shall include but
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including but
not limited to parking, signs or lights.
D.
No on-site parking of commercially identified vehicles shall be
permitted.
E.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volumes or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
G.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
H.
I. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
148. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101 et seq.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:505
shall not be limited to such facilities as hospices, detention facilities,
halfway houses, regardless of the nature of the residents thereof, asylums,
orphanages, rehabilitation facilities, sanitariums, vocational training
facilities, nursing homes and the like. The term shall include any facilities
established, owned, used or operated as public or private facilities, as profitmaking
facilities or entities or as charitable facilities or entities, regardless
of what name, title or designation might be applied to such facilities by the
owners thereof.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds' maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
LIBRARY or MUSEUM — A building or room containing collections of books,
periodicals, and sometimes films and recorded music for people to read,
borrow, or refer to; a building in which objects of historical, scientific,
artistic, or cultural interest are stored and exhibited.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a luminaire or installation which
is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the lighting
installation is sited.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth, abutting upon a street
or way or other appropriate means of access, intended for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise
or materials, which space or berth is not less than 10 feet in width and
of sufficient length to ensure that no vehicle using the space shall extend
beyond the property line, and in no case shall the space or berth be less
than 25 feet in length.
LOT — A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a public street.
It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of or a
combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one
parcel.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of an interior lot, the line separating the
lot from the street.
LOT LINE, REAR — The line generally parallel to the front lot line which
defines the rear of the lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the front lot line or the building setback line.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line, measured midway between the side lot lines.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
LUMEN — As used in the context of this section, the light-output rating of a
lamp (light bulb).
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:506
MANUFACTURING — The process of making wares by hand, by machinery
or by other agency, often with the provision of labor and the use of
machinery.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC — A facility for the outpatient diagnosis
and treatment of human ailments not involving twenty-four-hour-per-day
operation and not involving sale of drugs or foodstuffs on the premises.
MIXED-USE OR LIVE-WORK BUILDING — A lot or building on or in which
various land uses are combined as an integrated development. A "single
site" may include contiguous but unconsolidated lots.
MOBILE HOME — Any licensed or unlicensed piece of mobile equipment
designed or constructed to be towed, pulled by a motor vehicle or selfpropelled,
regardless of whether the wheels are attached or unattached or a
permanent or semipermanent foundation is constructed underneath or any
structure of a permanent or semipermanent nature is attached thereto and
intended for human occupancy.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A tract of land containing not less than 10
contiguous acres used or intended to be used for the parking of mobile
homes, together with the necessary improvements and facilities upon the
land.
MOTEL-HOTEL — A building or a group of buildings having units containing
sleeping accommodations which are available for a temporary rental
occupancy by transients and providing sufficient off-street parking facilities
adjacent or convenient thereto. A tourist home containing provisions or
facilities for accommodation of more than two transient occupants not
normally quartered on the premises shall be considered as a "motel-hotel"
facility under the provisions of this chapter.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — A building or lot operated or owned by the
Borough of Baldwin.
NON-PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in non-precision-instrument approach procedure has been
approved or planned.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any lawful building or
other structure which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
area and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located either on the
effective date of this chapter or as a result of a subsequent amendment
thereto.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lawful lot which does not conform to one or
more of the applicable area regulations of the district in which it is located
either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a subsequent
amendment thereto.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any lawful use, whether of a building or other
structure or of a tract of land, which does not conform to the applicable use
regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:507
of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto. However,
no existing use shall be deemed "nonconforming" solely because of the
existence of less than the required off-street parking or loading conditions
or the existence of less than the required supplementary regulations,
excluding signs.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this chapter.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designed or primarily used for office
purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing or a dwelling other
than living quarters for a watchman or custodian.
OPEN SPACES — Common greens, parks, other recreation space or
generally open areas available to the public; or yards or other open areas
provided in connection with residential buildings occupied by more than
two families per lot which are intended for the sole use of the occupants of
such buildings and their guests.
OTHER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
PARKING LOT — Any lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part for
the storage or parking of two or more vehicles where such usage is not
incidental to or in conjunction with a one-family or two-family dwelling.
PARKING SPACE — An open or covered area with a paved all-weather
surface, or space in a private garage or other structure, which space shall
be at least nine feet by 20 feet in size for the storage of one automobile,
accessible from a public way.
PAVED AREA — A percentage which, when multiplied by the lot area,
will determine the permitted ground area which may be covered with an
impervious surface.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/
or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well
as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/
or license.
PERSON — An individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PERSONAL SERVICES — A business enterprise conducted for gain which
primarily offers services to the general public such as shoe repair, valet
service, watch repairing, barbershop, beauty parlors and related activities.
PERSONAL-CARE RESIDENCE — A building where food, shelter and
personal assistance or supervision are provided for at least one full day
for three or more ambulatory adults who are not relatives of the operator
and who may require assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing,
bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self-administration but do not
require hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing or intermediate-care
facility.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:508
PERSONAL-CARE RESIDENCE, LARGE — A personal-care residence
having more than 10 occupants, including clients (any person who is a
resident), operator (any person responsible for the day-to-day operation and
supervision of the home) and family of the operator. An operator may also
be the householder.
PERSONAL-CARE RESIDENCE, SMALL — A personal-care residence that
is limited to no more than 10 persons and no fewer than three persons,
including clients (any person who is a resident), operator (any person
responsible for the day-to-day operation and supervision of the home or
residence) and family of the operator. An operator may also be the
householder. Clients shall be limited to no more than eight persons.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Baldwin.
PORCH — A roofed open structure projecting from the front, side or rear
wall(s) of a building.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point
on the runway center line. The primary surface zone, as shown on Figure
1,149 is derived from the primary surface. Figure 1 is on file in the Borough
offices.
PRIVATE — Any organization or establishment limited to members of an
organization recognized by the commonwealth or other persons specifically
invited or permitted where no inducement or advertisement has been made
to the general public.
PRIVATE OUTDOOR RECREATION — An area maintained in its natural
state as a private property for recreation. This use may include
playgrounds, lawns, trails, pavilions, ballfields, courts, tracks and other
areas designed and intended for outdoor recreation.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A room or rooms used for carrying on a
professional occupation which is recognized by the commonwealth and
requires a license for practice. A professional office includes a medical or
dental clinic.
PROVIDER OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES — A person or
entity offering telecommunications services using duly authorized devices
which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the provision
of direct-to-home satellite services; the term also relates to providers of
149. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101 et seq.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:509
facilities for the provision of personal wireless services and providers of
commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier wireless exchange access services.
PUBLIC RECREATION — Leisure-time activities, including but not limited
to sports and entertainment that are open to anyone without restriction,
except for rules and standards of conduct and use.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A service by a company or agency or individual licensed
or regulated by the Public Utility Commission of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, distributing water, gas or electricity by means of a network
of overhead or underground lines, all of which shall be to provide such
services to residents or occupants of properties within the zoning district
of the same; the term shall not include communications facilities, such
as telephone, cellular telecommunications, radio transmissions, television
transmissions or any other communications services for public or private
use, for transmission to persons, residents or occupants of premises not in
the zoning district in which the services are provided; excluding therefrom,
however, police, fire and emergency transmissions by government units or
facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR FACILITIES —
Public utility service buildings, structures or facilities owned by a public
utility as defined herein and which provide the services for which the
building, structure or facility was designed to residents of the zoning
district in which the building, structure or facility is located. The term
shall not include telephones, central offices, electric substations,
communications facilities, tower sites or other electronic, or radioactive,
electromagnetic transmission towers, antennas or other equipment or
facilities for transmission for use by the general public situate outside the
boundaries of the Borough of Baldwin.
RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any or all of the following:
church, manse, rectory, convent, parish school or similar building incidental
to the particular use; school for religious education; convents and other
buildings for the housing of students and teachers, communicants and
domestic or maintenance employees, but not including business offices,
except those administrative offices housed within the structure or rescue
missions or the occasional use for religious purposes of properties not
regularly so used.
RESTAURANT — A place where the principal and substantial activity is the
sale of food and the incidental sale of beverages.
RETAIL — Any business establishment not otherwise specifically defined
in this chapter that sells or rents commodities and/or services on the
premises directly to the general public, available for immediate purchase
and removal, but not including the manufacturing or processing of any
products.
RETAIL, LARGE — Retail store with a gross floor area equal to or
more than 5,000 square feet. This use may include grocery stores and
wholesaling but shall not include manufacturing or processing.
A.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:510
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A type of easement granted or reserved over the land for
transportation purposes as well as electrical transmission lines, pipelines,
maintenance or other uses.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
SCHOOL — Any building, group of buildings or grounds, or portion thereof,
used for the purposes of educating individuals.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — A business that provides home-type washing,
drying or ironing machines or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by
customers on the premises.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
A sexually oriented business may include, but is not limited to, any of the
following uses, terms or activities:
RETAIL, SMALL — Retail store with a gross floor area less than 5,000
square feet. This use may not include wholesaling, manufacturing or
processing of goods.
B.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images
so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(a)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
(b)
(1)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of
material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as "adult
bookstore" or "adult video store." Such other business purposes
will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being
categorized as an "adult bookstore" or "adult video store" so long
(2)
B.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:511
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale
or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub or bar or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in the state of nudity;
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(2)
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(3)
C.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic
reproductions; or
(1)
Offers sleeping rooms for rent four or more times in one calendar
day during five or more calendar days in any continuous thirty-day
period.
(2)
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions are
regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
E.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities.
F.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
G.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
H.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:512
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in
a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
I.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast. For the
purposes of this chapter, nudity does not include modeling for a class
operated in a viewing room:
By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
(1)
By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(2)
In a structure:
Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;
(a)
Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
(b)
Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
(c)
(3)
J.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
K.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; and
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude.
(2)
L.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of
sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female
genitals.
M.
N. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:513
SHIELDED — A luminaire from which no direct glare is visible at normal
viewing angles by virtue of its being properly aimed, oriented, and located
and properly fitted with such devices as shields, barn doors, baffles, louvers,
skirts or visors.
SIGN — A sign is a name, identification, description, display (including
electronic) or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which
directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, or business. The definition of "sign" does not include the
display of any official court or public office notices nor any official or
municipal traffic control or parking sign or device, nor shall it include the
flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school, or
a religious group. A sign shall not include name, identification, description,
display or illustration that is located completely within an enclosed building.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
(2)
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1) through (3) above.
(4)
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS) — The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by
more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on date of enactment of this
chapter.
O.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL (OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS) — Includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
P.
SIGN, ANIMATED — Any sign or part of a sign or sign face that changes
physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that
gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation of the sign or
sign face.
A.
SIGN AREA — The entire sign face (one side only), or, where the sign
consists of raised letters or symbols, or a sign face of irregular shape,
the sign area shall include the area of the smallest rectangle, circle or
B.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:514
oval that can encompass the letters, symbols, or irregularly-shaped sign
face.
SIGN, BANNER — Any sign intended to be hung, either with or without
frames, of lightweight material such as paper, plastic, or fabric of any
kind. National flags, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any
institution or business shall not be considered banners.
C.
SIGN, BUILDING — A sign attached to any part of a building, including
a sign projecting from a part of a building.
D.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign attached to a roof extension of a building with
or without support, but not walls.
E.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY OR LETTERING — A sign or portion
thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or
rearranged, mechanically or electronically, without altering the face or
the surface of the sign.
F.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign, no greater than five square feet in size,
that provides on-site directional assistance or instruction to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic relative to parking area, entrances and exits. Such
sign shall contain no advertising other than the business name or
logo and shall provide directional information, such as "No Parking,"
"Entrance," "Exit," "One Way," "Loading Only," "Telephone," and other
similar directives. Directional, incidental signs shall be located only in
conjunction with site drive entrances and/or internal traffic drive aisles.
G.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign that is supported from the ground
and not attached to a building. The sign may be attached to a pole,
mast, frame or other structure that is not itself and integral part of, or
attached to, a building.
H.
SIGN, LED — Any sign or portion thereof that displays electronic
images, graphics, or pictures, with or without textual information, using
LEDs (light emitting diodes), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other
illumination devices or combination thereof within the display area and
where a static message change sequence is accomplished immediately
or by means of fade, repixalation, dissolve or other such modes,
devices, processes, products, applications or technologies from a
proximate or remote location. Such signs include computerprogrammable
and microprocessor-controlled electronic displays.
I.
SIGN, MONUMENT — A freestanding sign in which a solid structure,
the width of which is equal to or greater than the width of the sign
face, is used to mount the sign area on, in or as an integral part of such
structure.
J.
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign attached to a permanent structure, other
than a roof, attached to, supported by, and projecting from, a building,
and providing protection from natural elements.
K.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:515
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building designed for and
occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family, having no party
wall in common with an adjacent building and having yard areas on all four
sides.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A special exception deals with special permission,
granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board, to occupy land for specific
purposes when such use is not permitted by right in the Principal Land Use
Chart.150
STORY — That portion of a building, other than the basement (as defined),
included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A right-of-way, or portion thereof, intended for general public
use to provide means of approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word
"street" includes the words "road," "highway," "thoroughfare" and "way."
STREET ACCESS POINT — The distance between any vehicular entrance
and exit along a street.
STREET CENTER LINE — A line which is usually at an equal distance from
both lot lines or right-of-way lines.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but not without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
SWIMMING POOL — A structure used for the purpose of swimming and
having a mean depth of two feet or more.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — A device used to collect or transmit
telecommunications or radio signals, such as panels, microwave dishes,
single poles known as whips and such other devices used for these
purposes, but which shall not exceed 10 feet in height or six feet in width,
or which shall not have a diameter of more than six feet in width.
TOWER — A structure that is intended to support equipment used to
transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including monopoles
and lattice construction steel structures.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign directly associated with any
national, state, or local government election.
L.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or which is designed to be transported.
M.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign painted on or adhered directly to a wall of a
building.
N.
150. Editor's Note: Said chart is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:516
TOWER SITE — Any lot or parcel on which communications facilities, as
defined herein, are located or proposed to be located.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal
surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically. The
transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the
transitional surface. Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
TRUCK — A motor-driven vehicle used for hauling purposes.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight
or less.
VETERINARIAN FACILITY — A business establishment operated by a
veterinary medical doctor(s), certified in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for the medical or surgical treatment of domestic,
agricultural or zoological animals.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
WADING POOL — A structure containing water, but not used for the
purposes of swimming or landscaping. A "wading pool" is not a reflecting
pool or cooling pool for mechanical equipment or a decorative fountain. A
"wading pool" is no more than two feet in depth and is designed for use by
people.
YARD — A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied
and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD OR GARAGE SALE — The sale of items by an individual or family
conducted on premises of said individual or family's dwelling.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the front
lot line and the building line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied by other
than accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the space,
and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and similar structures, the
depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of
such building.
§ 168-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-210
1:517
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the principal building and the side lot line
extending from the front yard or from the front lot line, where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard is
measured horizontally and at 90° with the side lot line, from the nearest
part of the principal building.
ZONING MAP — A map entitled the "Borough of Baldwin, Pennsylvania,
Zoning Map."
§ 168-210 BALDWIN CODE § 168-210
1:518
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
This article describes where land uses are permitted. It establishes zoning
districts, within which certain land uses are permitted, and the Borough
Zoning Map, which defines the locations of those zoning districts.
§ 168-300. Zoning Map; district boundary lines.
§ 168-310. Establishment of districts.
A. Adoption of Zoning Map. The areas within the Borough limits as
assigned to each district and the location of boundaries of the districts
established by this chapter are shown on the Zoning Map, which is
declared to be part of this chapter and shall be kept on file with the
Borough Secretary.
B. District boundary lines.
(1) The district boundary lines shall be as shown on the Zoning Map.
District boundary lines are intended to coincide with lot lines,
center lines of streets, the limits of the Borough or as dimensioned
on the map.
(2) Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed
to follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
(3) The location of a district boundary that divides a lot shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map
unless indicated otherwise by dimensions. In case any further
uncertainty exists, the Zoning Officer shall interpret the intent of
the map as to the location of the district boundary lines.
(4) Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area
shall be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s)
are located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The
land area within each municipality shall be regulated by the use
regulations and other applicable regulations of each municipality.
A. Types of districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the entire Borough of
Baldwin is hereby divided into the following districts:
(1) Residential districts.
(a) R-1: Low density single-family residential district.
(b) R-2: Medium and high density residential district.
(2) Commercial districts.
(a) C-1: Neighborhood commercial district.
§ 168-300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-310
1:519
§ 168-320. Land use chart.
The Land Use Chart to included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-330. R-1: Single-Family Residential District.
(b) C-2: Large retail and professional office district.
(3) Industrial districts.
(a) I-1: Light industrial district.
(b) I-2: Heavy industrial district.
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the statement of intent and community development
objectives as included in this chapter and to further the goals and
objectives of the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Promote home ownership in the Borough to build property values
and create a sense of community.
(3) Create and maintain healthy residential neighborhoods that
include single-family detached residences.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses: refer to the Principal Land Use Chart.151
(2) Permitted accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall
be permitted:
(a) Customary residential accessory uses.
(b) Swimming pools.
(c) A private detached garage limited to three motor-driven
vehicles.
(d) No-impact home-based businesses.
(e) Yard or garage sales.
C. Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations shall be observed:
(2) Lot width at building setback line: 70 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(4) Minimum front building setback: 35 feet.
(1) Lot size: 10,000 square feet minimum.
§ 168-310 BALDWIN CODE § 168-330
1:520
§ 168-340. R-2: Medium and High Density Residential District.
(5) Maximum front building setback: 1/2 the depth of the lot.
(6) Side yards.
(a) Dwellings: five feet minimum one side, 20 feet total both sides.
(b) Nonresidential structures: 25 feet minimum each side.
(7) Rear yards: 35 feet minimum.
(8) Maximum height.
(a) Dwellings: 43 feet or three stories.
(b) Private detached garage: 12 feet at eaves.
D. Off-street parking regulations and standards as required by this
chapter.
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the community development objectives as included in this
chapter and to further the goals and objectives of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Provide a mix and variety of housing types to build strong
residential neighborhoods in the Borough.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses: refer to Principal Land Use Chart.152
(2) Permitted accessory uses. Only the following accessory uses shall
be permitted:
(a) Customary residential accessory uses.
(b) Swimming pools.
(c) A private detached garage limited to three motor-driven
vehicles.
(d) No-impact home-based businesses.
(e) Yard or garage sales.
C. Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations shall be observed:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
§ 168-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-340
1:521
(a) Lot size: 7,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 55 feet minimum.
(c) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(d) Minimum building setback: 35 feet.
(e) Side yards.
[1] Dwelling: five feet one side minimum, 15 feet total both
sides.
[2] Nonresidential: 25 feet each side.
(f) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(g) Maximum height.
[1] Dwellings: 43 feet or three stories.
(a) Lot size: 5,000 square feet per dwelling, minimum.
(2) Two-family dwelling.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 80 feet minimum.
(c) Lot coverage: 25% maximum.
(d) Minimum setback: 35 feet.
(e) Side yards: 25 feet total, 10 feet one side.
[2] Private detached garage: 12 feet at eaves.
(f) Rear yard: 1,500 square feet of yard area per dwelling unit and not less
than 30 feet in depth.
(g) Maximum building height: 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories.
(h) Paved area: 35% maximum.
(3) All other uses:
(a) Lot size: one acre minimum.
(b) Lot width at building setback line: 150 feet.
(c) Open area: 25% minimum.
(d) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(e) Maximum height: 43 feet or three stories.
(f) Paved area: 40% maximum.
(g) Minimum building setback: 35 feet plus the height of the
building over 35 feet.
§ 168-340 BALDWIN CODE § 168-340
1:522
§ 168-350. C-1: Neighborhood Commercial District.
(h) Side yards: 30 feet or the height of the building, whichever is
greater.
(i) Rear yard: 30 feet or the height of the building, whichever is
greater.
(j) Any yard abutting another residence district: 30 feet plus the
height of the building.
(k) High-rise. Any yard abutting another residence district: 150
feet plus the height of the building.
(l) Dwelling unit density.
[1] The following minimum lot areas shall be provided:
[a] When the dwelling units have only one bedroom each,
provide 1,200 square feet for each dwelling unit, plus
paved parking space equal to 1 1/2 spaces per
dwelling unit, plus usable open space of 500 square
feet per dwelling unit. Thus, for each dwelling unit
having one bedroom, the total lot area required shall
be 1,970 square feet.
[b] When the dwelling units have more than one bedroom
each, there shall be provided for each additional
bedroom a lot area of 500 square feet, plus a total
paved area equal to two spaces, plus additional usable
open space of 500 square feet per bedroom.
[c] When computing lot area, no streets serving a
multiple-family dwelling, whether public or private,
shall be included in the lot area. If the streets are to
remain private, their widths shall be considered as 50
feet.
(4) Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the community development objectives as included in this
chapter and to further the goals and objectives of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Provide opportunities for non-residential uses to locate in proximity
to residential neighborhoods such that the sales and services
provided by these non-residential areas are reasonably accessible
to the residential areas.
§ 168-340 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-350
1:523
(3) Allow for the creation of small pockets of commercial uses that are
easily accessible to residential neighborhoods and serve as a
transitional buffer between more intense non-residential uses and
residential areas.
(4) In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and
statement of intent, it is the purpose of this section to provide
commercial and other permitted facilities to serve primarily the
needs of the local residents, including neighborhood-type facilities
and general convenience needs.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses: Refer to the Principal Land Use Chart.153
(2) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above uses.
C. Area and bulk regulations.
(1) Maximum building height: two stories or 25 feet.
(2) Maximum building size: 25,000 square feet.
(3) Lot width: 100 feet at building setback line.
(4) Lot coverage: 50% maximum.
(5) Building setback line: 40 feet minimum.
(6) Side yards:
(a) Ten feet minimum per side.
(b) Corner lots shall provide 30 feet to the side abutting the street.
(c) Abutting R districts: 15 feet.
[1] Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
[2] Height of building: 43 feet maximum, but not to exceed
three stories.
[3] Paved area: 50% maximum.
D. Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
E. Off-street loading regulations: as required by of this chapter.
F. Design standards: as required by § 168-420R, Non-residential design
standards, of this chapter.
153. Editor's Note: Said chart is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-350 BALDWIN CODE § 168-350
1:524
§ 168-360. C-2: Large Retail and Professional Office District.
§ 168-370. I-1: Light Industrial District.
G. Signs: as required by this chapter.
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the community development objectives as included in this
chapter and to further the goals and objectives of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Accommodate local and regional commercial uses.
(3) In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and
statement of intent, it is the purpose of this section to provide for a
cohesive unit of commercial stores arranged and constructed
according to a plan which will serve both the neighborhood and the
community. It is also necessary to provide for the regulations
requiring landscaping as well as provisions covering submission of
plans so that such areas may be made to blend with adjoining uses.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses: Refer to the Principal Land Use Chart.154
(2) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the
above uses.
C. Area and bulk regulations:
(1) Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
(2) Building setback line: 60 feet minimum.
(3) Side yards: 12 feet.
(4) Rear yard: 50 feet minimum.
(5) Paved areas: 60% maximum.
(6) Building size: maximum 100,000 square feet.
(7) Building length: 400 feet maximum.
(8) Building height: eight stories.
(9) Street access points: 300 feet minimum apart.
(10) Design standards: as required § 168-420R, Nonresidential design
standards, of this chapter.
154. Editor's Note: Said chart is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-350 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-370
1:525
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the community development objectives as included in this
chapter and to further the goals and objectives of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Provide suitable regulations for freestanding light industrial uses
which can be accommodated in open areas near urbanized
development.
(3) Accommodate limited residential and commercial development.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Permitted principal uses: Refer to the Principal Land Use Chart.155
(a) No noxious, odorous or undue noises, smoke, fumes, etc., shall
be permitted in any of the foregoing uses. Such uses shall be
completed within buildings and shall not involve processes
generating smoke, fumes, odors, dust, noise or vibrations in an
amount noticeable outside the building or which would
adversely affect surrounding properties or the basic residential
character of the total community.
(2) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Administrative activities and offices.
(b) Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees.
C. The following regulations shall be observed for the development of lots
less than 174,240 square feet (four acres).
(1) Area and bulk regulations:
(a) Lot coverage: 40% maximum.
(b) Building setback line: 35 feet minimum.
(c) Side yards: 20 feet minimum. Corner lots shall provide 35 feet
to the side abutting the street.
(d) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(e) Height of building: 40 feet maximum.
(2) Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
(3) Off-street loading regulations: as required by this chapter.
(4) Design and performance standards: as required by § 168-420R,
Non-residential design standards, of this chapter.
155. Editor's Note: Said chart is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-370 BALDWIN CODE § 168-370
1:526
§ 168-380. I-2: Heavy Industrial District.
(5) Signs: as required by this chapter.
D. The following regulations shall be observed for the development of lots
174,240 square feet (four acres) or larger.
(1) Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations shall be
observed:
(a) Lot coverage: 50% maximum.
(b) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(c) Side yards (site): 15 feet minimum.
(d) Rear yard (site): 50 feet minimum.
(e) Individual building length: 300 feet maximum.
(f) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(g) Paved areas: 35% maximum.
(2) Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
(3) Off-street loading regulations: as required by this chapter.
(4) Design and performance standards: as required by § 168-420R,
Non-residential design standards, of this chapter.
(5) Signs: as required by this chapter.
A. The purpose of this zoning district is to:
(1) Further the community development objectives as included in this
chapter and to further the goals and objectives of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Provide suitable regulations for freestanding heavy industrial uses
which can be accommodated in open areas near urbanized
development.
(3) Provide suitable regulations for industrial parks in which a number
of businesses may locate within a landscaped tract. Because of the
proximity of such uses to residential and commercial uses,
restrictions are imposed to assure both attractive and useful
surroundings. Site locations are an essential aspect of such parks
which need to be interrelated into their surroundings.
(4) Accommodate limited residential and commercial development.
B. Use regulations.
§ 168-370 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-380
1:527
(1) Permitted principal uses: Refer to the Principal Land Use Chart.156
(a) No noxious, odorous or undue noises, smoke, fumes, etc., shall
be permitted in any of the foregoing uses. Such uses shall be
completed within buildings and shall not involve processes
generating smoke, fumes, odors, dust, noise or vibrations in an
amount noticeable outside the building or which would
adversely affect surrounding properties or the basic residential
character of the total community.
(2) Permitted accessory uses:
(a) Administrative activities and offices.
(b) Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees.
C. The following regulations shall be observed for the development of lots
less than 174,240 square feet (four acres).
(1) Area and bulk regulations:
(a) Lot coverage: 40% maximum.
(b) Building setback line: 35 feet minimum.
(c) Side yards: 20 feet minimum. Corner lots shall provide 35 feet
to the side abutting the street.
(d) Rear yard: 30 feet minimum.
(e) Height of building: 40 feet maximum.
(2) Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
(3) Off-street loading regulations: as required by this chapter.
(4) Design and performance standards: as required by the nonresidential
design standards of this chapter.
(5) Signs: as required by this chapter.
D. The following regulations shall be observed for the development of lots
174,240 square feet (four acres) or larger.
(1) Area and bulk regulations. The following regulations shall be
observed:
(a) Lot coverage: 50% maximum.
(b) Building setback line: 50 feet minimum.
(c) Side yards (site): 15 feet minimum.
156. Editor's Note: Said chart is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 168-380 BALDWIN CODE § 168-380
1:528
§ 168-390. Airport District Overlay Zone.
(d) Rear yard (site): 50 feet minimum.
(e) Individual building length: 300 feet maximum.
(f) Building height: 40 feet maximum.
(g) Paved areas: 35% maximum.
(2) Off-street parking regulations and standards: as required by this
chapter.
(3) Off-street loading regulations: as required by this chapter.
(4) Design and performance standards: as required by the nonresidential
design standards of this chapter.
(5) Signs: as required by this chapter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to create an airport district
overlay that considers safety issues around the Allegheny County
Airport, regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures
and objects of natural growth, creates appropriate zones, establishing
the boundaries thereof and providing for changes in the restrictions
and boundaries of such zones, creates the permitting process for uses
within said zones and provides for enforcement, assessment of violation
penalties, an appeals process, and judicial review.
B. Relation to other zone districts. The Airport District Overlay shall not
modify the boundaries of any underlying zoning district. Where
identified, the Airport District Overlay shall impose certain
requirements on land use and construction in addition to those
contained in the underlying zoning district.
C. Establishment of airport zones. There are hereby created and
established certain zones within the Airport District Overlay Ordinance,
defined in this chapter depicted on Figure 1 and illustrated on the
Allegheny County Airport (AGC) Hazard Area Map (Drawing 6 of 14 of
the AGC Airport Master Plan, as amended) (Figure 1 and Drawing 6 of
14 of the AGC Airport Master Plan are on file in the Borough offices), all
hereby adopted as part of this article, which include:
(1) Approach surface zone.
(2) Conical surface zone.
(3) Horizontal surface zone.
(4) Primary surface zone.
(5) Transitional surface zone.
D. Permit applications.
§ 168-380 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-390
1:529
(1) As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 CFR § 77.13(a) (as
amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect a new
structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain
any object (natural or man-made) in the vicinity of the airport, shall
first notify the Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by
submitting PennDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of
the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The
Department's BOA response must be included with this permit
application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's
BOA returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the
permit request should be considered in compliance with the intent
of this overlay ordinance. If the Department's BOA returns a
determination of a penetration of airspace, the permit shall be
denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance from such
regulations as outlined in this chapter.
(2) No permit is required to make maintenance repairs or to replace
parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the
height of an existing structure.
E. Variance.
(1) Any request for a variance shall include documentation in
compliance with 14 CFR Part 77 Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1, as
amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a
variance will depend on the determinations made by the FAA and
the Department's BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the
operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of
navigable airspace. In particular, the request for a variance shall
consider which of the following categories the FAA has placed the
proposed construction in:
(a) No objection. The subject construction is determined not to
exceed obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not
required to mitigate potential hazard. Under this
determination a variance shall be granted.
(b) Conditional determination. The proposed construction/
alteration is determined to create some level of encroachment
into an airport hazard area which can be effectively mitigated.
Under this determination, a variance shall be granted
contingent upon implementation of mitigating measures as
described in § 168-390H, Obstruction marking and lighting.
(c) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A
variance shall be denied, and the reasons for this
determination shall be outlined to the applicant. Such requests
for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that a
literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result
in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be
§ 168-390 BALDWIN CODE § 168-390
1:530
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to
air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in
accordance with the intent of this article.
(2) Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found
that a literal application or the enforcement of the regulations will
result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air
navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance
with the intent of this chapter.
F. Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article,
no use shall be made of land or water within the Airport District Overlay
in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make
it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards
or otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the Allegheny County Airport.
G. Preexisting nonconforming uses. The regulations prescribed by this
article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this article or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of a nonconforming use. No nonconforming use
shall be structurally altered or permitted to grow higher so as to
increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once
substantially abated (subject to the underlying zoning ordinance), may
only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
H. Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted
pursuant to the provisions of this article may be conditioned according
to the process to require the owner of the structure or object of natural
growth in question to permit the municipality, at its own expense, or
require the person requesting the permit or variance to install, operate
and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed necessary to assure
both ground and air safety.
I. Violations and penalties. The enforcement and penalties regarding
violations of this article shall be the same as those set forth in this
chapter.
J. Appeals. All appeals from actions taken pursuant to this article shall be
the same as those set forth in this chapter.
K. Conflicting regulations. Where there exists a conflict between any of
the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other
regulation applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 168-390 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3100
1:531
§ 168-3100. Municipally owned property.
This chapter shall not apply to property owned by Baldwin Borough in the
exercise of its municipal functions. The Borough will develop and control
property in accordance with existing charters and codes, and will have no
obligation to enforce the provisions of this chapter on itself.
§ 168-3100 BALDWIN CODE § 168-3100
1:532
ARTICLE IV
Conditional Uses, Special Exceptions, and Supplemental
Regulations, Including Signs
This article describes land uses related to structures and land in the
Borough. It includes regulations such as setbacks and height restrictions.
Additionally, there are requirements that are specific to certain uses or
certain districts.
§ 168-400. Conditional uses.
A. Provisions for conditional uses.
(1) Conditional uses are to be allowed or denied by Borough Council
pursuant to the procedural requirements of the PA Municipalities
Planning Code and recommendations by the Planning Commission
and pursuant to expressed standards and criteria set forth for a
particular use listed under this article.
(2) In allowing a conditional use, Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed herein, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter.
B. General requirements and standards for all conditional uses.
(1) Borough Council shall grant a conditional use only if it finds
adequate evidence that any proposed development will meet all of
the following general requirements as well as any specific
requirements and standards set forth for a particular use listed
under this article.
(2) Borough Council shall, among other things, require that any
proposed use and location be:
(a) Consistent with the spirit, purposes and the intent of this
chapter.
(b) In the best interest of Baldwin, the convenience of the
community, the public welfare and be a substantial
improvement to the property in the immediate vicinity.
(c) Suitable for the property in question and designed,
constructed, operated and maintained so as to be in harmony
with and appropriate in appearance to the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity.
(d) In conformance with all applicable requirements of this
chapter and all other Baldwin Borough ordinances.
(3) The conditional use shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:533
property or persons, including traffic, light and noise impacts to
adjacent residential properties.
(4) The conditional use shall organize vehicular access and parking to
minimize traffic congestion and maximize safety, including the
provision of drop-off areas and vehicular pull-offs to minimize
vehicle backups onto public roadways.
(5) The landowner and/or developer shall have the burden of providing
evidence to Baldwin of compliance with the general requirements
of this section and the specific requirements of this article.
(6) The Borough Council may attach additional conditions pursuant to
this section, in order to protect the public's health, safety, and
welfare.
C. Accessory uses to conditional uses.
(1) Except for fences and signs, any accessory use or structure which
is not approved as part of the application for conditional approval
of the principal structure or use shall require submission of a
conditional use application in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter related to conditional uses.
(2) All parking and loading areas or expansion or redesign of parking
and loading areas shall be subject to the parking and loading
requirements of this chapter.
(3) In approving the accessory use or structure, the Borough Council
shall consider whether any conditions are warranted to be attached
to the approval to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Automobile fuel station.
(1) All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar materials
shall be stored within a completely enclosed building.
(2) There shall be no more than one motor vehicle per employee and
employer plus three customer's vehicles per repair bay parked
outside an enclosed building at any time.
(3) Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 40 feet from the centerline
of the right-of-way of any street.
(4) All fuel, oil or similar substances shall be stored at least 25 feet
from any property line.
(5) All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning district
classification shall be screened by a buffer area as defined by this
chapter which is at least six feet in depth measured from the
property line.
(6) All lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent properties and
streets.
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:534
E. Automobile service and repair.
(1) The minimum site area shall be two acres.
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector road, as defined by this chapter.
(3) The area used for the display of merchandise offered for sale and
the area used for the parking of customer and employee
automobiles shall be continuously paved and maintained in either
concrete or asphalt over a base of crushed stone compacted to not
less than six inches in depth, or other surfacing of an equivalent
character, if approved by the Zoning Officer.
(4) All lots used for the outdoor display of automobiles shall have a
completely enclosed building on the same lot which has not less
than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area where all repair,
servicing, sales and customer car washing shall be performed.
(5) No vehicle or other article or merchandise shall be displayed
outdoors less than five feet from the lot lines of adjacent properties
and no cars shall be parked on adjacent properties or in any street
right-of-way.
(6) No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale which does not
have all of the mechanical and body components necessary for the
safe and lawful operation thereof on the streets and highways of
the commonwealth.
(7) All lights and light poles shall be located at least 10 feet from any
street right-of-way or property line and all lighting shall be shielded
and reflected away from adjacent streets and properties.
(8) No oscillating or flashing permitted on the lot, on any or poles on
the lot or on any display outdoors.
(9) Except for temporary special event displays, no strings of lights or
flags, flashers or other display paraphernalia shall be permitted on
the lot, on any structures or poles attached thereto, or on or in the
merchandise displayed outdoors, except for such signs otherwise
allowed under this chapter.
(10) All required off-street parking spaces shall be reserved exclusively
for the parking of customer and employee automobiles and shall
not be used for the display of merchandise.
(11) Customer vehicles with external damage awaiting repairs shall be
located either inside a building or in an outdoor area which is
screened in such a fashion so that the vehicles will not be visible
from public streets or adjacent residential property.
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:535
(12) All property lines adjoining residential use or zoning classification
shall be screened by a buffer area, as defined by this chapter, which
is at least four feet in depth as measured from the property line.
F. Bar or nightclub.
(1) A bar or nightclub shall be located in accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(2) Hours of operation and activities must be appropriately scheduled
to protect surrounding residential neighborhoods from detrimental
noise, disturbance or interruption.
(3) The owner(s) and operator(s) of a bar or nightclub shall be
responsible for the conduct and safety of the patrons.
(4) No more than one identification sign shall be permitted; said sign
shall be a ground or a wall sign. The graphic area of the sign shall
not exceed 40 square feet.
G. Billboards.
(1) Billboards are a principal use, permitted only on property that is
within the industrial districts and such property must be a
minimum of 0.25 acres in size with frontage along an arterial or
collector roadway.
(2) Only one billboard is permitted per property and no additional
signs are permitted on a property occupied by a billboard.
(3) Billboards shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from an existing
residential structure, such that no part of the billboard or support
structure is within 250 feet of an existing residential structure.
(4) Billboards shall be set back a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
existing billboard or the location of a billboard for which a sign
permit is approved or pending.
(5) All billboards shall be maintained in good repair, even when there
is no occupied sign area within or on the billboard structure.
(6) The sign area of all billboards shall be a maximum of 100 square
feet per sign face.
(7) Billboards shall have no more than two sign faces and the sign
faces shall be mounted to the sign structure such that the faces are
completely parallel with each other.
(8) The maximum height of the structure and sign face of any billboard
shall be 20 feet.
(9) The illumination of any billboard shall be from exterior light
fixtures; internal illumination of the sign area or any portion of the
billboard is not permitted, except where the billboard is an LED
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:536
sign. The billboard lighting shall be directed only to the sign face of
the billboard and shall be provided by sharp cut-off, shielded light
fixtures to minimize illumination spillover beyond the sign face.
(10) All billboards shall be considered abandoned after a period of 12
months during which there is no occupied sign area within or on
the billboard structure, excluding announcement that the billboard
is available for rental. Abandoned billboards are prohibited.
(11) All billboards that are LED signs shall meet the applicable
requirements of this section pertaining to LED signs.
H. Building and landscape materials sales or storage yard.
(1) Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from the public right-ofway
and not conflict with off-street parking associated with the use.
No outdoor storage areas shall be located between the front lot line
of the lot and the front facade of the principal structure in which it
is located.
(2) A delivery plan for the use shall be submitted for Council approval.
I. Cemetery.
(1) The landowner and/or developer shall provide a statement of
guaranteed perpetual maintenance before approval is given.
(2) No burial sites shall be within 50 feet of any lot line or 100 feet of a
street right-of-way.
(3) Access drives shall be located to take maximum advantage of sight
distances for motorists.
J. Communications facilities. The granting of a conditional use for
communications facilities and tower sites shall be subject to the
following express standards and criteria:
(1) The minimum tower site area shall be two acres.
(2) No tower shall be located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling or
of the property line within a residential zoning district or 500 feet
of an existing school, hospital or similar use, measured from the
nearest property line to the nearest property line.
(3) No such tower shall be erected within 2,000 feet of another
existing tower, measured from the property line of the tower site to
the nearest property line of an existing tower.
(4) Shared use of towers and structures shall be encouraged. If shared
use of an existing tower is proposed, the applicant shall
demonstrate that:
(a) The proposed equipment would not exceed the structural
capacity of the existing or approved towers.
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:537
(b) The proposed equipment will not cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for
that tower or surrounding towers of residents in the vicinity.
(c) Addition of the proposed equipment would not result in NIER
(nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) levels which exceed
any adopted local, federal or state emission standards.
(5) Communications facilities and their associated structures may
exceed the height limitations of the district, subject, however, to
§ 168-420A, Exception to height limitations, hereof, provided that
they shall be set back from any property line or public street rightof-
way a minimum distance of 100% of the tower height or greater,
if necessary, to guarantee that in the event of collapse the structure
shall not fall on any adjacent property and all icefall or debris from
tower failure shall be contained on the tower site.
(6) Unless the communications facility is located on a building, the
tower structure shall be completely enclosed by a chain-link or
similar fence with self-latching gate to limit accessibility to the
general public, unless the entire property is secured by such a
fence. The fence shall be a minimum of eight feet high.
(7) All guy wires and all guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to
be visible at all times. All guy wires shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from any property line.
(8) The applicant shall submit evidence that the structure upon which
an antenna is to be constructed, or a tower upon which an antenna
is to be constructed, has been designed by a registered engineer
and is certified by a registered engineer, and is certified by that
registered engineer to be structurally sound and able to withstand
wind and other loads in accordance with accepted engineering
practice; every five years, an additional certification shall be
submitted to the Borough.
(9) The tower shall be subject to any applicable Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and airport zoning regulations.
(10)No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the tower, except as
may be required and approved by the FCC, FAA or other
governmental agency.
(11) All lighting, except required beacons, shall be shielded and
reflected away from adjoining properties.
(12) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided on
the tower site, plus one off-street parking space for each on-site
personnel.
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:538
(13) Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible, as determined by the Borough Environmental
Advisory Council.
(14) A minimum twenty-foot (in width) easement or right-of-way for
access shall be provided to the tower which is adequate to
accommodate maintenance and emergency vehicles and which is
improved with a dust-free, all-weather (chip and shot) surface
sufficient to accommodate the weight of vehicles proposed to use
the easement or right-of-way.
(15) In the event that any tower ceases to be used as a communication
facility for a period of six months, then the owner and/or operator
of the tower or the owner of the land on which the tower is located
shall be required to remove the same, and failing to do so, the
Borough may cause the same to be removed and charge the cost of
the removal to the foregoing parties. In addition, the Borough may
file a municipal lien against the land to recover the cost of the
removal and attorneys' fees as well as inspection fees incurred by
the Borough.
(16) The construction, erection, operation and maintenance shall
comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the
commonwealth and, in particular, the Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Air Quality, and its various
bureaus and departments and of the Allegheny County Health
Department.
(17) Shared uses of towers or existing structures.
(a) The shared use of towers and/or existing structures, such as
water tanks, steeples and buildings, shall be encouraged; if
shared use of an existing tower or structure is proposed, the
applicant shall demonstrate that it is in compliance with all of
the conditions of Subsection J(1) through (14) and (16) hereof,
and shall be subject further to the following express standards
and criteria:
[1] No antenna or groups of antennas upon a tower or placed
upon an existing structure shall have or create an
additional height to the structure of more than 20 feet.
[2] No antenna shall be located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling in a residential district or 500 feet of an existing
school, hospital or similar use, measured from the nearest
property line to the nearest property line.
[3] No antenna shall be located or situate within 750 feet of
another antenna, except that antennas may be located or
situated upon the same tower or upon the same structure.
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:539
[4] No antenna may be erected upon any structure having
historical designation or which is recognized as a historic
structure.
[5] Each provider of personal wireless service facilities
proposing to erect an antenna upon a structure, tower or
other facilities shall be required to obtain approval of the
enlargement or expansion of the conditional use and shall
be required to execute applications for enlargement or
expansion of said conditional use, which will be submitted
to the Council for a conditional use hearing.
K. Crematorium.
(1) Any and all odors and smoke generated as part of a crematorium
operation shall be in conformance with the performance standards
of this chapter.
(2) Loading areas/docks shall be screened with either landscaping or
fencing from neighboring uses.
(3) No outdoor storage shall be permitted on a lot associated with a
crematorium.
(4) No crematorium shall be within 200 feet of any lot line.
L. Dry-cleaning facility.
(1) The owner/operator must obtain and maintain pollution insurance
or other surety in a form satisfactory to the borough to cover
investigation and remediation costs associated with a potential spill
of water or nonwater-based dry-cleaning solvent, in an amount not
less than $500,000, naming the Borough of Baldwin for purposes of
cancellation notification, for the entire duration of the on-site drycleaning
operation.
(2) For facilities utilizing nonwater-based solvent dry-cleaning
machines, the applicant must maintain records of nonwater-based
solvent consumption and shall store said solvents in closed,
nonleaking containers.
(3) On-site dry-cleaning may not be located in the same building with
any residential use.
M. Entertainment facility.
(1) The applicant shall furnish expert evidence that the proposed use
will not be detrimental to the use of adjoining properties due to the
hours of operation, noise, light, litter, dust and pollution.
N. Farm.
(1) If the farm is made up of multiple properties, all property must be
under single ownership.
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:540
(2) A farm must be a minimum of five acres in size.
(3) The entire area must be wholly located within a single zoning
district.
(4) Any area where animals are kept must be set back a minimum of
100 feet from residentially zoned or used property.
O. Financial institution, with drive-through.
(1) The Borough shall require the landowner and/or developer to
prepare and submit a traffic impact analysis of the proposed
development.
(2) Paved off-street stacking spaces shall be arranged in an orderly
fashion so as not to cause blockage of any means of ingress or
egress and to insure that the traffic flow on public rights-of-way is
not endangered in any way. A separate means of ingress shall be
established and clearly marked as shall be a separate means of
egress from the bank. Should any traffic congestion occur in the
public right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to
direct traffic away from the facility by posting a "Temporarily
Closed" sign or other means. The Borough may require any traffic
studies and associated improvements as a condition of approval.
(3) No drive-through window, customer automated teller machine
(ATM), or the like shall be located in a front yard.
(4) The drive-through shall have direct access to a public right-of-way.
(5) A minimum of three stacking spaces shall be provided for each
drive-through lane.
(6) Stacking shall not interfere with the normal traffic flow within the
lot nor shall it cause the stopping of vehicles on any public right-ofway.
P. Hospital.
(1) The facility shall be accredited by the commonwealth and shall
have direct access to an arterial road/street.
(2) Emergency facilities shall be located to minimize conflicts of
circulation, parking, loading and delivery between surrounding
land uses.
(3) Access drives shall be located to take maximum advantage of sight
distances for motorists and shall be as remote as possible from
street intersections.
(4) Buildings shall be no higher than 55 feet.
Q. Institutional home and personal care home (large or small).
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:541
(1) The appropriate area, bulk and height regulations for the
appropriate district shall apply.
(2) The proposed use and operation thereof must comply with all
applicable environmental protection laws, statutes, regulations and
rules of all federal, state, county and local governments and
agencies, including all laws for the protection of the atmosphere,
surface waters, underground waters and other natural resources.
(3) The number of residents, including the operator's immediate
family, in any institutional home shall be limited to not more than
the number permitted by federal, state and/or county laws and
regulations.
(4) The lot area shall be provided at a minimum lot area of 8,000
square feet, plus an additional 500 square feet for each sleeping
room in excess of three. Every unit of two beds or fraction thereof
in a sleeping room shall be counted as a separate sleeping room.
(5) There shall not be more than one personal-care home located in
any one building or dwelling.
(6) No personal-care home shall be located in a building that is
occupied by any other residential type of use.
(7) No personal-care home shall be spaced closer than 800 feet to any
other personal-care home. Said distance of 800 feet shall be
measured by imposing a circular area on an accurate plan by
locating a point on the center of the subject building and by
extending a radius of 800 feet from said center point. Any other
building occupied or used as a personal-care home and located
totally or partially within said circular space shall be cause for
rejection of the application for conditional use.
(8) Prior to approval of any application for establishment or operation
of a personal-care home, the applicant shall provide proof
satisfactory to the Borough Council that the applicant either has
acquired or will be able to acquire all appropriate licenses and
permits from the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare and
the Allegheny County Department of Health prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy by the Borough. No building or other
structure shall be occupied as or used as a personal-care home
until the Borough certificate of occupancy is issued.
(9) Supervision of the use and operation of the personal-care home
shall be provided in accordance with all federal, state, county and
local regulations, under the supervision of all relevant certifying
agencies and by at least one responsible, nonclient adult available
on the premises on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis while any of
the clients are on the premises.
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:542
(10) Sleeping rooms, accommodations or facilities shall not be located
in any basement and shall comply with all applicable life safety and
health codes.
(11) The construction, modification, establishment, use and operation of
the personal-care home shall comply with all of the requirements of
the applicable BOCA Codes then currently in effect and applying to
new construction, reconstruction or modification, maintenance,
repair and fire safety.
(12) The applicant and/or operator shall provide adequate external
lighting facilities, as required in the discretion of the Borough
Council, for the protection of all clients, employees, operators and
visitors to the personal-care home.
(13) On-site parking facilities shall be provided at the ratio of one stall
for every two full-time staff members and/or operators and one
shall for every three nonstaff residents who are eligible and are
permitted by the operator of the home to operate a motor vehicle.
(14) The owner and/or operator of the personal-care home shall permit
inspections of the facility from time to time by Borough officials and
representatives of the Borough, including but not limited to the
Borough Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, any Borough police
officer, the Borough Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement
Officer and the Borough Engineer. Such inspections shall be
conducted at reasonable times but shall not be limited to daytime
hours nor to normal business hours. Such inspections shall be
conducted to ascertain the continued compliance by the operator
and/or owner with all applicable federal, state, county and local
statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules.
R. Mobile home park. For mobile home parks, the following regulations
shall be observed:
(1) Park size: 10 acres minimum.
(2) Lot width: 100 feet for portions used for general vehicular
entrances and exits.
(3) Minimum setback: 75 feet from any road right-of-way located
outside the mobile home park site.
(4) Side and rear yards: 50 feet minimum from any mobile home to any
property line.
(5) The only permitted use in a mobile home park shall be the
operation of detached single-family residential.
S. Private outdoor recreation.
(1) All s, tennis courts, or other comparable facilities shall be
considered structures for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-400
1:543
(2) Coverage, including structures, parking lots, and buildings, shall
not exceed 50% of the lot.
(3) The facility area and lot boundaries shall be landscaped as required
by the Borough to minimize noise projection and make the grounds
aesthetically compatible to the surrounding properties.
(4) All structures shall not be less than 100 feet from any lot line, and
no less than 200 feet from the nearest house.
(5) All facilities shall have a paved parking area in accordance with this
chapter; and it shall not be closer than 25 feet to any residential lot
line.
(6) All facilities shall abut a public road and have a permanent access
thereto.
(7) Alcoholic beverages without a Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
license, amplified music, and juke boxes shall be prohibited on the
premises.
(8) No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or any
other kind of light, shall be visible from adjoining public streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level.
(9) All s shall be surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height, the
entrance to which shall be kept locked when attendant is not
present; and shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
state requirements.
(10) Tennis courts shall be protected by a permanent fence 10 feet in
height behind each base line extending 10 feet beyond the playing
area in each direction.
(11) The landowner and/or developer shall demonstrate the proposal
will be compatible with the neighborhood and not adversely affect
adjoining lots.
(12) The amount of new traffic generated shall not have a detrimental
impact on the neighborhood.
(13) Plans shall clearly show ingress-egress facilities and provide
proper sight visibility for motorists.
(14) Hours of operation shall be scheduled to minimize negative
impacts on surrounding residential neighborhoods. The Borough
may limit hours within this time frame based on the use and
location of the facility. Operating hours for the purpose of this
section shall mean the period of time that the recreational or
athletic activity is occurring.
T. Restaurant, with drive-through.
§ 168-400 BALDWIN CODE § 168-400
1:544
§ 168-410. Special exceptions.
(1) Required off-street parking for the restaurant shall be clearly
designated and shall be located within 300 feet of the entrance to
the restaurant.
(2) Dumpsters and service areas shall be screened from the public
right-of-way and not conflict with off-street parking associated with
the use. No dumpsters and/or service areas shall be located
between the front lot line of the lot and the front facade of the
principal structure in which it is located.
(3) Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted.
(4) A delivery plan for the use shall be submitted for Council approval.
(5) No drive-through window or the like shall be located in a front
yard.
(6) The drive-through shall have direct access to a public right-of-way.
(7) A minimum of three stacking spaces shall be provided for each
drive-through lane.
(8) Stacking shall not interfere with the normal traffic flow within the
lot nor shall it cause the stopping of vehicles on any public right-ofway.
U. Single-family attached.
(1) All off-street parking spaces shall be incorporated into the building.
Guest parking shall be located no more than 300 feet from each
townhouse.
(2) All dumpsters and/or waste collection areas shall be located at a
minimum of 50 feet from the nearest residential unit and shall be
enclosed by a fence, wall or hedge screen that is minimum of eight
feet in height.
(3) The maximum number of contiguous units is 10.
A. Provisions for special exceptions.
(1) Special exceptions are to be allowed or denied by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the procedures and requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code157 and pursuant to
expressed standards and criteria set forth for a particular use listed
under this article.
B. General requirements and standards for all special exceptions. Special
exceptions are to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to standards and criteria for a particular special exception
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-400 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-410
1:545
stated in this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
upon written requests for such special exceptions in accordance with
such standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable condition and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed herein, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purpose of this chapter and Act 247 of the Municipalities Planning
Code. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part
of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may
request a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission
on the planning aspects of each application.
(1) The special exception shall be in accordance with the standards
specified for such classes of special exceptions.
(2) The special exception shall not involve any element or cause any
condition that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any other
property or persons.
(3) The special exception must be found to be beneficial to the public
at the proposed location.
(4) The application for a special exception listed herein shall be
accompanied by a site plan and all other pertinent information as
prescribed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(5) The special exception shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to
produce a safe relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent
buildings and properties and be consistent with the environment of
the neighborhood.
(6) The special exception shall organize vehicular access and parking
to minimize traffic congestion in the vicinity of the proposed special
exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not approve a use in
areas where a professional traffic engineering study indicates that
a proposed use or structure will burden existing traffic so as to
enhance the danger and congestion in travel and transportation
and increase the number of accidents unless the property owner or
applicant agrees to provide such traffic improvements as
determined by the study.
(7) The special exception shall preserve the spirit, intent and purpose
of this chapter.
(8) A public hearing shall be held prior to the Zoning Hearing Board
deciding each request for a special exception.
(9) The Zoning Hearing Board shall not approve a special exception
until:
§ 168-410 BALDWIN CODE § 168-410
1:546
(a) A written application for a special exception is submitted to the
Zoning Officer, indicating the section of this chapter under
which it is required.
(b) Notice is given.
(c) A public hearing is held.
(10) If the Zoning Hearing Board determines that the application for a
special exception meets all the applicable requirements of this
chapter, the Board shall direct the issuance of a building permit for
such special exception.
C. Sexually oriented businesses.
(1) It is the purpose and intent of this section of this chapter to
regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued
deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Borough. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent
nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material. The owner(s) and operator(s) of said use shall be
responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees and
patrons and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly
quell any disturbances caused by the employees and/or patrons.
(2) An adult book store or adult video store shall not be located within
1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business. Said distance
shall be measured from lot line of one facility to the nearest lot line
of the other facility.
(3) Said sexually oriented business shall not be permitted to be located
within 1,000 feet of any school, day care, day nursery, indoor or
outdoor public recreation facility, or any religious establishment;
nor be closer than 500 feet from a residential use, nor from where
any children are permitted and normally congregate.
(a) For the purpose of this subsection, measurement shall be made
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted to the nearest property line of the
premises of a church, public or private pre-elementary,
§ 168-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-410
1:547
elementary or secondary school, public library, day care, day
nursery; or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park.
(4) No more than one sexually oriented business may be located in the
same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor
areas of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(5) No materials, merchandise, film, or service offered for sale, rent,
lease, loan, or for view shall be exhibited, displayed or graphically
represented outside of a building or structure.
(6) Any building or structure used and occupied as said facility shall be
windowless or have an opaque covering over all windows or doors
of any area in which materials, merchandise, film, service or
entertainment are exhibited or displayed and no sale materials,
merchandise, film or offered items of service or entertainment shall
be visible from outside the structure.
(7) No sign shall be erected upon the premises depicting or giving a
visual representation of the type of materials, merchandise, film,
service or entertainment offered therein.
(8) Sufficient screening and buffering of parking areas must be
provided to protect the neighborhood from detrimental noise, dust
and other disturbances.
(9) Each and every entrance to the structure shall be posted with a
notice of at least four square feet that the use is an adult-oriented
establishment, that persons under the age of 18 are not permitted
to enter, and warning all others that they may be offended upon
entry.
D. Uses not listed.
(1) Uses not listed. If a use clearly is not permitted by right, conditional
use or as a special exception use by this chapter within any zoning
district, the use is prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing
Board may permit such use as a special exception use if the
applicant specifically proves to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that all of the following conditions would be met:
(a) Proposed use would be less intensive in external impacts and
nuisances than uses that are permitted in the zoning district.
(b) Proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character
to uses permitted in that zoning district.
(c) Use is not specifically prohibited in that zoning district.
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board will determine which permitted use (by
right, conditional use or special exception) is most similar to the
proposed use not listed. The use not listed will be subject to the
§ 168-410 BALDWIN CODE § 168-410
1:548
§ 168-420. Supplemental regulations.
same approval criteria, review process, dimensional standards, and
development standards as the use to which it is found to be most
similar.
A. Exception to height limitations. In no event shall chimneys, exhaust
stacks and roof-mounted equipment exceed a height above the building
by a distance equal to 1/2 of the height of the building (from ground
level) upon which such structure is to be placed. Church steeples shall
in no event exceed a height in excess of 75 feet from the ground level of
the church structure; communications facilities in no event shall exceed
a height of 200 feet from ground level, except for communications
facilities designed and intended strictly for use by governmental or
quasigovernmental entities, such as police, emergency medical
communications, public works communications, etc.
B. Construction within easements. No Borough permit shall be issued for
use of on construction on land or property within a public or private
easement or right-of-way without the express written consent of all
affected easement or right-of-way holders. Additionally, no construction
of private or nonpublic facilities or buildings shall take place within five
feet of an easement or right-of-way.
C. Fences, walls and hedges.
(1) Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted by right in all zoning
districts. Any fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences or walls that have deteriorated shall be
replaced or removed.
(2) No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the clear-sight triangle
requirements of this chapter.
(3) No fence, wall, hedge, or structure shall be permitted or erected in
a public or private drainage, utility or access easement, unless
otherwise required by this chapter or other ordinance. Any such
fence erected in violation of this section shall be removed or
relocated at the owner's expense.
(4) It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any fence or wall over
three feet high without first having secured a building permit.
Fences and walls less than three feet high shall be considered
ornamental and shall not require a permit. It shall be unlawful to
vary materially from the approved submitted plans and
specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended
application to the Zoning Officer or other designated municipal
official and approved by this official.
(5) Fences shall comply with the following:
§ 168-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:549
(a) Any fence located in the required front yard in a residential
district shall:
[1] Be an open-type of fence (such as picket, metal post,
wrought iron or split rail) with a minimum ratio of 1:1 of
open structural areas.
[2] Not exceed 38 inches in height.
[3] Not be constructed of chain link metal. Fences are
encouraged to be constructed using weather-resistant
wood, vinyl materials that resemble wood, or vinyl
materials that resemble historic style metal post fences.
(b) In a residential district on a corner lot at the intersection of
two streets, the maximum height of a fence shall be 38 inches
along the street from which the residence takes its address;
the maximum in other yards shall be six feet, all subject to
Subsection C(5)(a)[2] above.
(c) Brick may be used for posts or as a base for a fence, provided
the maximum fence height is not exceeded.
(d) A fence shall not be required to comply with minimum setbacks
for accessory structures.
(e) Fences that are not within a residential district shall have a
maximum height of eight feet, subject to Subsection C(2)
above.
(f) A maximum height of 12 feet shall be permitted where the
applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that such taller height is
necessary to protect public safety around a specific hazard,
such as around an electric substation.
(g) Structural posts of a fence may extend above the height of the
fence.
(h) All fence heights shall be measured from the average
surrounding ground level.
(i) No fence shall be built within an existing street right-of-way.
(j) A fence may be built without a setback from a lot line; however,
a small setback is recommended to provide future maintenance
of the fence.
(k) Barbed wire shall not be used as part of fences around
dwellings.
(l) No fence shall be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk vehicles,
appliances, tanks or barrels.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:550
(m) If one side of a fence includes posts or supports, those posts or
supports shall be placed on the interior of the fence, as
opposed to facing onto a street or another lot.
(n) If a fence is finished only on one side, the finished side shall
face outward away from the lot or parcel upon which it is
located.
(6) Walls shall comply with the following:
(a) Engineered retaining walls needed to hold back slopes are
exempted from the regulations of this section and are
permitted by right as needed in all zoning districts.
(b) Walls, except a retaining wall, in the minimum front yard in a
residential district shall have a maximum height of 38 inches.
In a residential district on a corner lot at the intersection of
two streets, the maximum height of a wall shall be 38 inches
along the street from which the residence takes its address;
the maximum in other yards shall be six feet.
(c) Walls that are structurally part of a building shall be regulated
as part of that building.
(d) All wall, fence and hedge heights shall be measured from the
average surrounding ground level.
D. Off-street parking standards.
(1) Off-street parking spaces are required as follows:
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Residential Uses
Multiple-family 2 for each family dwelling unit
Multistory multiplefamily
1 indoor and 1 outdoor per dwelling unit
Single-family
attached
2 for each family dwelling unit
Single-family
detached
2 for each family dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling 2 for each family dwelling unit
Nonresidential
Uses
Artist and
photography studio
Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 2 for each person regularly
employed on the premises
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:551
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Automobile fuel
station
Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 1 space for each gas pump, 3
spaces for each grease rack or similar
facility and 1 space for every 2 persons
employed on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift
Automobile laundry Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 1 space for every 2 persons
employed on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift
Automobile service
and repair
Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 1 space for each gas pump, 3
spaces for each grease rack or similar
facility and 1 space for every 2 persons
employed on the premises at maximum
employment on a single shift
Bar or nightclub 1 for each table or booth, plus 1 for every 2
stools at the bar or counter, plus 1 for every
2 employees on peak shift
Billboard None
Building and
landscape materials
sales or storage yard
Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 2 for each person regularly
employed on the premises; plus 1 space for
each 250 square feet of total floor area
devoted to sales
Cemetery Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 2 for each person regularly
employed on the premises. For every 25
employees, there shall be at least 2 parking
spaces provided for visitors
Communications
facility
None
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:552
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Crematorium Parking or storage space for vehicles used
directly in the conduct of such business,
both owned or operated by the business
itself or by the customers or users of the
facility, plus 2 spaces for each employee
regularly employed on the premises during
peak shift; 1 for every 2,000 square feet of
total floor area in the structure, whichever
results in the greater number of spaces; or
1 parking space shall be provided for each
employee or each 1,500 square feet of floor
area in manufacturing establishments or
2,500 square feet of floor space in other
types of establishments. The formula
providing the greater number of parking
spaces shall be enforced; however, in
computing the number of employees, those
of maximum day shifts shall be counted.
For each 25 employees, there shall be at
least 1 parking space provided for visitors
Day care or day
nursery
1 for each employee on peak shift, plus 1
for every 5 students/children that can be
accommodated in the facility
Dry cleaning (retail) Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the operation of such
establishment, plus 1 space for each 250
square feet of total floor area
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:553
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Dry cleaning facility Parking or storage space for vehicles used
directly in the conduct of such business,
both owned or operated by the business
itself or by the customers or users of the
facility, plus 2 spaces for each employee
regularly employed on the premises during
peak shift; 1 for every 2,000 square feet of
total floor area in the structure, whichever
results in the greater number of spaces; or
1 parking space shall be provided for each
employee or each 1,500 square feet of floor
area in manufacturing establishments or
2,500 square feet of floor space in other
types of establishments. The formula
providing the greater number of parking
spaces shall be enforced; however, in
computing the number of employees, those
of maximum day shifts shall be counted.
For each 25 employees, there shall be at
least 1 parking space provided for visitors
Entertainment
facility
1 for every 6 seats available at maximum
capacity
Essential services None
Farm Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 2 for each person regularly
employed on the premises
Financial institution,
with drive-through
1 for every 4 customers computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
1 time, plus 1 additional space for every 2
persons regularly employed during peak
shift on the premises
Financial institution,
without drivethrough
1 for every 4 customers computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
1 time, plus 1 additional space for every 2
persons regularly employed during peak
shift on the premises
Funeral home Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of the
business, plus 1 space for every 2 persons
regularly employed on the premises at any
1 time, plus 1 space for every 25 square
feet of floor area in the parlors of the
establishment
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:554
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Garden center Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such
business, plus 1 parking space for each 250
square feet of total area, or 150 square feet
of floor space used for retail trade or 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Hospital 1 for each 4 beds intended for patients,
excluding bassinets, plus 1 per doctor, plus
1 per 2 employees on peak shift, plus 1 per
hospital vehicle
Institutional home 1 for each 3 beds intended for patient
occupancy, plus 1 space for each doctor,
plus 1 space for every 2 employees
regularly employed during peak shift, plus
1 space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the business
Library or museum 1 for every 4 customers computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
1 time, plus 1 additional space for every 2
persons regularly employed during peak
shift on the premises
Manufacturing Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such
industrial use, plus 1 parking space for
every 3 employees on the premises at
maximum employment on the peak shift, or
1 parking space per 2,000 square feet of
floor space, whichever results in the
greater number of spaces; or 1 parking
space shall be provided for each employee
or each 1,500 square feet of floor area in
manufacturing establishments or 2,500
square feet of floor space in other types of
establishments. The formula providing the
greater number of parking spaces shall be
enforced; however, in computing the
number of employees, those of maximum
day shifts shall be counted. For each 25
employees, there shall be at least 1 parking
space provided for visitors
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:555
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Mixed-use or live/
work building
2 for each family dwelling unit; for offices,
1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area exclusive of the area used for storage,
utilities and building service areas; for
other non-residential uses, parking or
storage space for all vehicles used directly
in the conduct of such business, plus 1
parking space for each 250 square feet of
total area
Mobile home park 2 for each family dwelling unit
Motel-hotel 1 for each sleeping room offered for tourist
accommodation, plus 1 space for each
dwelling unit on the premises and plus 1
additional space for every 2 persons
regularly employed on the premises during
peak shift; or 1 off-street parking space for
each separate sleeping unit in addition to 5
off-street visitor parking spaces per 100
units or fraction thereof and 1 off-street
parking space for each employee. If the
motel-hotel facility also has related uses
such as restaurants or public meeting
facilities, additional parking shall be
provided in accordance with the
requirements for restaurants, meeting
places, etc.
Municipal facilities As determined by the Borough
Personal care
residence, large
1 for each 3 beds intended for patient
occupancy, plus 1 space for each doctor,
plus 1 space for every 2 employees
regularly employed during peak shift, plus
1 space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the business
Personal care
residence, small
1 for each 3 beds intended for patient
occupancy, plus 1 space for each doctor,
plus 1 space for every 2 employees
regularly employed during peak shift, plus
1 space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the business
Personal services Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the operation of such
establishment, plus 1 space for each 250
square feet of total floor area
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:556
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Private outdoor
recreation
1 for every 4 customers computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
1 time, plus 1 additional space for every 2
persons regularly employed during peak
shift on the premises
Professional office 2 for each doctor or dentist, plus 1 space
for every 2 regular employees, plus 1 space
for each 250 square feet of total floor area
For other offices, 1 for each 300 square feet
of gross floor area exclusive of the area
used for storage, utilities and building
service areas
Public
administration or
education facility
1 for every 6 seats available at maximum
capacity in the assembly hall, auditorium,
stadium or gymnasium of greatest capacity
on the school grounds or campus. If the
school has no assembly hall, auditorium,
stadium or gymnasium, 1 space shall be
provided for each person regularly
employed at such school plus 2 additional
spaces for each classroom; or 20 students
in elementary schools; 10 classroom seats
in other schools or each 125 square feet of
auditorium space provided or for every 3
fixed auditorium seats, whichever is
greater
Public recreation As determined by the Borough
Public utility service
buildings, structures
or facilities
As determined by the Borough
Religious
establishment
1 for every 6 seats available at maximum
capacity
Restaurant, with
drive-through
1 for each table or booth, plus 1 for every 2
stools at the bar or counter, plus 1 for every
2 employees on peak shift
Restaurant, without
drive-through
1 for each table or booth, plus 1 for every 2
stools at the bar or counter, plus 1 for every
2 employees on peak shift
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:557
Off-Street Parking
Land Use Required Parking
Retail, large Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such
business, plus 1 parking space for each 250
square feet of total area, or 150 square feet
of floor space used for retail trade or 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Retail, small Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such
business, plus 1 parking space for each 250
square feet of total area, or 150 square feet
of floor space used for retail trade or 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Self-service laundry Parking or storage space for all vehicles
used directly in the conduct of such
business, plus 1 parking space for each 250
square feet of total area, or 150 square feet
of floor space used for retail trade or 250
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Sexually oriented
businesses
1 for every 2 customers computed on the
basis of maximum servicing capacity at any
1 time, plus 1 additional space for every
person regularly employed during peak
shift on the premises
Uses not listed Subject to the parking standards for the
similar use as determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board
Veterinarian facility 2 for each veterinarian, plus 1 space for
every 2 regular employees, plus 1 space for
each 250 square feet of total floor area
E. Aisle widths. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, all parking spaces shall be required to show an aisle width of
20 feet for 90° parking and a minimum aisle width of 15 feet where
angle parking is to be used.
F. Off-street loading regulations.
(1) Loading space description. An off-street loading space shall be a
hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or
public way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading
of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A required
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:558
loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, not less
than 14 feet in height and of adequate length to suit the specific
use, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as
otherwise specifically dimensioned herein.
G. Location. No permitted or required loading space shall be closer than
50 feet to any property in a residential district unless completely
enclosed by building walls or an ornamental fence or wall or any
combination thereof not less than six feet in height. No permitted or
required loading space shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest
point of intersection of any two streets. Loading space open to the sky
may be located in any required yards.
H. Measurement of spaces. When determination of the number of required
off-street loading spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction up to and including 1/2 may be disregarded and fractions
over 1/2 shall be interpreted as one loading space.
I. Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted base, surfaced with all-weather dustless material of
adequate thickness to support the weight of a fully loaded vehicle.
J. Spaces required. Every building or structure used for business, trade or
industry shall provide space as herein indicated for the loading and
unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such spaces shall
have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. Off-street
loading and unloading space shall be in addition to and not considered
as meeting a part of the requirements for off-street parking space. Offstreet
loading and unloading space shall not be used or designed,
intended or constructed to be used in a manner to obstruct or interfere
with the free use of any street, alley or adjoining property. The following
off-street loading and unloading space requirements for specific
requirements for specific uses shall be provided:
(1) Multiple-family multistory dwellings: one off-street loading and
unloading space for every 12 dwelling units, such spaces to be not
less than 10 feet wide and 30 feet long, provided that at least one of
such required spaces shall be not less than 55 feet long to
accommodate a moving van.
(2) All uses in non-residential districts: one off-street loading and
unloading space at least 10 feet wide and 30 feet long for every
3,000 square feet of total floor area.
(3) Multistory multiple-family dwellings and all uses in non-residential
districts: one off-street loading and unloading space at least 10 feet
wide by 30 feet long for every 30,000 square feet of total floor area.
(4) Industrial uses, manufacturing, dry-cleaning facility, crematorium:
one off-street loading and unloading space at least 12 feet by 50
feet for every 10,000 square feet of total floor area.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:559
K. Outdoor storage.
(1) Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such
storage is a part of the normal operations conducted on the
premises, subject to design and performance standards for the
prevailing zoning district.
(2) Any permitted outdoor storage shall be screened from view of
adjacent residential dwellings and public streets by a landscaped
area, fence or wall.
L. Microwave antennas or parabolic disks. Microwave antennas or
parabolic disks for use of television satellite communications,
transmissions or receptions (hereinafter called "microwave antennas")
shall be subject to the following regulations.
(1) All residential zones. Microwave antennas shall be considered as a
permissible accessory use, subject to the following:
(a) The diameter of the microwave antenna shall not exceed 10
feet.
(b) When separately supported, the total height of the microwave
antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.
(c) The microwave antenna shall be located only in the rear yard
and not closer than 15 feet to any property line.
(d) When roof-mounted, the microwave antenna shall be located
on the portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot,
and no part thereof shall project above the height line; except,
however, that those satellite dishes that are less than one
meter (39 inches) in diameter may be mounted on that portion
of the roof sloping toward the front of the lot. The Zoning
Officer may waive the provisions of this section of the chapter
if the property owner can definitively demonstrate that the
property owner's reception will be of an unacceptable quality
or that the installation, maintenance or use will be prevented
by this section of this chapter.
(e) No more than one microwave antenna shall be permitted on
any lot.
(f) When not roof-mounted, the microwave antenna shall be
screened from adjoining lots by the installation and
maintenance of a completely planted visual barrier to consist
of evergreen plantings or any other inexpensive shrubbery.
(g) Before the erection of any microwave antenna which requires a
height in excess of 12 feet, or which has a diameter of more
than one meter (39 inches), a permit application shall be made
to the Borough and a permit shall be issued, provided that the
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:560
construction meets all acceptable safety standards and other
provisions of this chapter.
(2) All commercial and industrial districts. Microwave antennas shall
be considered a permissible accessory use, subject to the following
regulations.
(3) Microwave antennas up to 16 feet in diameter may be installed.
(4) General regulations. Microwave antennas shall, in all districts, be
subject to the following additional general regulations:
(a) No microwave antenna may be erected in any district or any
location within a district which is prohibited by regulation of
the Federal Communications Commission or other regulatory
agency having jurisdiction.
(b) Microwave antennas shall be properly anchored and installed
to resist a minimum wind load of 30 pounds per square foot of
projected horizontal area. Supports, anchors and foundations
shall take into account overturning movements and forces
created by wind loading. The safety factor against overturning
or sliding for wind forces on microwave antennas shall be 2.0.
(c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit
as a permissible accessory use a microwave antenna for
satellite communication used or intended to be used for the
propagation or transmission of radio or electromagnetic
waves.
M. Accessory uses.
(1) This section applies to any subordinate use of a building, structure
or use of land that is:
(a) Conducted on the same lot as the principal use to which it is
related; and
(b) Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection
with, the principal use or structure.
(2) Where a principal use or structure is permitted, such use may
include accessory uses and structures subject to this section.
(3) No use shall be permitted as accessory to a dwelling unit in any
residential district that involves or requires any construction
features or alterations not residential in character, except a private
detached garage, and except that one accessory use building may
be erected on each lot in a residential district subject to the
following regulations:
(a) The construction and location of any accessory use building
shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:561
(b) No person shall erect or install an accessory use building
without having first obtained a building permit.
(c) All accessory use buildings shall be fully enclosed and shall
have a maximum floor area of 150 square feet and a maximum
external height of 12 feet measured from grade level at the
door entrance.
(d) All accessory use buildings shall be located in the rear yard.
The minimum distance between a side lot line and the
accessory use building shall be the same as the distance
between the dwelling and the side lot line but not less than five
feet. The minimum distance between the accessory use
building and the rear lot line shall be five feet. Accessory use
buildings shall not be located or enlarged by additions without
obtaining a new building permit.
(e) All accessory use buildings shall be painted in harmony with
the dwelling located on the lot; the building shall be
maintained in suitable repair and shall not be permitted to
become unsafe or unsightly; the building shall not be used for
any habitable purpose or for the storage, either temporary or
permanent, of any vehicle licensed to travel on any road or
highway; the building shall be kept free from objectionable
odors; and the area immediately adjacent to the building shall
not be used for the storage of any material; nor shall any
accessory building be located within or upon any easement
running over and upon the subject property.
(4) If any accessory use building is not used for its intended or
permitted purpose, or is found unsafe by the Zoning Officer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the Zoning
Officer shall give notice in writing to the owner of said accessory
use building to immediately repair said building or to remove the
same within 10 days from the receipt of said written notice, or the
owner shall be considered in violation of this chapter and subject to
all of the penalties contained herein.
N. Parking of commercial vehicles on residential streets. Commercial
vehicles and/or trucks exceeding one-ton load capacity are hereby
prohibited from parking on residential streets in the Borough of
Baldwin at all times; except, however, that the loading or unloading of
the same for deliveries and moving shall not be prohibited nor shall the
parking of such vehicles be prohibited on residential streets when the
same are so parked so as to provide services or accommodate the
residents of the Borough of Baldwin in providing services,
improvements or repairs needed by such residents or intended for use
of a resident, which vehicles are customarily and ordinarily used in
providing such services or repairs. The prohibitions contained herein
shall not apply to pickup trucks and panel trucks, which trucks are
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:562
ordinarily and primarily used as family vehicles and do not exceed the
weight limitations prescribed herein.
O. Carports.
(1) Carports shall be no less than 10 feet from the side yard of any
adjacent property and 35 feet from the rear yard line of any
adjacent property.
(2) Carports shall stand in measurement no more than 10 feet by 20
feet at the widest portion. Carports shall have a maximum height of
14 feet.
P. Air conditioners. An air conditioner shall be located either in front or
back of the home and as close as possible to the center of the home. A
whole house air conditioner may be permitted on the side of the home
where there is a minimum of 15 feet between structures and
landscaping provided. Such air conditioners shall be subject to noise
levels as measured in decibels not to exceed 60 at a distance of 20 feet
from the unit (Source: Pennsylvania Department of Community Affairs
— Model Municipal Ordinance for the Regulation of Noise: Figure II). A
plan showing the location and landscaping must be submitted prior to
the issuance of a permit.
Q. Yard or garage sales.
(1) All goods offered for sale shall be sold or removed immediately
after the sale.
(2) Such sales shall be limited to two per calendar year per property.
(3) Each sale shall not exceed two days in duration.
R. Non-residential design standards.
(1) Off-street parking design standards.
(a) Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted lines or
markers.
(b) Stalls shall be provided with bumper guards or wheel stops
when necessary for safety or protection to adjacent structures
or landscaped areas.
(c) Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing or
proposed drainage system.
(d) All vehicular entrances and exits to parking areas shall be
clearly designated for all conditions.
(e) Short-term visitor parking spaces shall be differentiated from
long-term employee spaces by suitable markings.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:563
(f) If spaces are used during evening hours, appropriate lighting
shall be provided.
(2) Screening.
(a) A planted visual barrier or landscape screen shall be provided
and maintained by the owner or lessee of a property between
any district and contiguous residentially zoned districts, except
where natural or physical man-made barriers exist. This screen
shall be composed of plants and trees arranged to form a low
level and a high level screen. The buffer area for screening
when abutting a residential district shall be a minimum of 25
feet. The high level screen shall consist of trees planted with
specimens no younger than three years in age and planted at
intervals of not more than 10 feet. The low level screen shall
consist of shrubs or hedges planted at an initial height of not
less than two feet and spaced at intervals of not more than five
feet. The low level screen shall be placed in alternating rows to
produce a more effective barrier. The low screen shall consist
of a spread of 2 1/2 feet. The high screen shall consist of the
calibration of 2 1/2 inches and a minimum of 15 feet in height.
Screening must be maintained and replaced when necessary
by the property owner.
(b) Any existing business affected by these regulations at the time
of passage of this chapter shall not be required to comply with
the above screening requirements except in case of
enlargement or major alteration of such business. Similarly, for
any zoning district boundary change after the passage of this
chapter initiated by a residential developer abutting a
commercially or industrially zoned property for which these
regulations apply, these screening requirements shall not be
imposed upon such commercial or industrial property.
(3) Storage.
(a) Any article or material stored temporarily outside an enclosed
building or as an incidental part of the primary operation shall
be so screened by opaque ornamental fencing, walls or
evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public
streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on
the ground level. All organic rubbish or storage shall be
contained in airtight verminproof containers which shall also
be screened from public view.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings,
other structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be planted with
an all-season ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees
and shrubs in accordance with an overall landscape plan and
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:564
shall be in keeping with natural surroundings. A replacement
program for nonsurviving plants should be included.
(b) The plot plan must show a satisfactory method of irrigating all
planted areas. This may be either by a permanent water system
or by hose. Any single parking area with 50 or more spaces
shall utilize at least 5% of its area in landscaping, which shall
be in addition to open area requirements of the district.
(5) Shopping cart storage. Any establishment which furnishes carts or
mobile baskets as an adjunct to shopping shall provide definite
areas within the required parking space areas for storage of said
carts. Each designed storage area shall be clearly marked for
storage of shopping carts.
(6) Lighting. All parking areas, driveways and loading areas shall be
provided with a lighting system which shall furnish a minimum of
35 footcandles at any point during hours of operation, with lighting
standards in parking areas being located not farther than 100 feet
apart. All lighting shall be completely shielded from traffic on any
public right-of-way and from any residential district.
(7) Interior circulation, access and traffic control.
(a) The interior circulation of traffic shall be designed so that no
driveway or street providing parking spaces shall be used as a
through street. If parking spaces are indicated by lines with
angles other than 90°, then traffic lanes shall be restricted to
one-way, permitting head-in parking. No driveway or street
used for interior circulation shall have traffic lanes less than 10
feet in width.
(b) Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks
and other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse
collection, fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in
size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without
blockage or interference with the use of accessways or
automobile parking facilities.
(c) All accessways to any public street or highway shall be
designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress, as
determined by the Planning Commission and the Borough
Council. Where practicable, exits shall be located on minor,
rather than major, streets or highways.
(d) No design shall be approved which is likely to create
substantial traffic hazards endangering the public safety.
Safety requirements which may be imposed in such a review
shall include traffic control devices, acceleration or
deceleration lanes, turning lanes, traffic and lane markings
and signs. The developer shall be responsible for the
construction of any such traffic control devices.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:565
(8) Building design. Buildings shall be designed to take advantage of
the natural terrain and shall not be physically located to
unnecessarily concentrate activity in one portion of the lot. At least
one entranceway shall be maintained at ground level. All
pedestrian entrances shall be paved with an all-weather surface. A
curbing shall be provided to separate parking areas, streets and
driveways.
(9) Vehicles. Any movable structure, trailer, automobile, truck or parts
of these items or any other items of similar nature allowed to
remain on the premises a longer time than that required to load,
unload or otherwise discharge its normal functions shall be
considered subject to all regulations set forth in this chapter for
buildings and structures, as defined herein.
S. Signs.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit such signs that
will not, by their size, location, construction or manner of display,
obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise
endanger public health, safety and morals; and to permit and
regulate signs in such a way to support and compliment Baldwin
Borough's community character and advance the community
objectives set forth in the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
Additionally, the purpose of the Borough's sign regulations are to:
(a) Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
identification and communication.
(b) To maintain and enhance the Borough's unique community
aesthetic and character.
(c) To promote pedestrian and vehicular safety and prohibit the
erection of signs in such numbers, sizes and designs, and
locations that may create a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
(d) To minimize adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property.
(e) To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the Borough.
(f) To promote the installation of signs that are complementary to
the buildings they serve and consistent with the general
character of the surrounding development.
(g) To provide adequate identification for locations within the
Borough while minimizing sign clutter and confusion.
(h) To avoid the uncontrolled proliferation of signs.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:566
(i) To promote legibility, reduce the time needed to read signs,
and reduce vehicular driver distraction.
(j) To restrict signs that overload the public's capacity to receive
information or that increase the probability of traffic
congestion and accidents by distracting attention or
obstructing vision.
(k) To avoid potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians using
the public streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way.
(l) To control public nuisances created by signs.
(2) Permits, inspection, maintenance.
(a) No sign or sign structure shall be erected, displayed, altered,
or relocated, except as provided for herein, until a sign permit
has been issued by the Zoning Officer. A separate permit shall
be required for each sign requiring a permit.
[1] Regular, routine, and customary maintenance, including
the repainting of an existing sign, where no change in
lettering size, no new graphic elements or new content of
any kind is contemplated, shall not require a sign permit.
[2] Repairs to damaged sign faces or sign structures shall not
require a sign permit.
[3] Replacement of a sign face with an identical sign face
utilizing identical materials, shall not require a sign
permit.
(b) Applications for a permit shall be submitted on a form provided
by the Borough and fee paid as set forth by the Borough fee
schedule, as amended from time to time.
[1] Provided the application is in order, applicable fees are
paid, and the requirements of this article are met, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a building permit for the
erection of the sign. Such permit shall expire 12 months
from the date of issuance. If construction or erection of the
sign is not completed within this time frame, the permit
shall be deemed null and void.
[2] Inspections by the Zoning Officer shall be made to
determine compliance with those regulations and
specifications. Any discrepancies shall be identified, in
writing, citing the irregularities and the action(s) required
to address the requirements. If no action has been taken
by the sign owner within 30 days, the sign shall be deemed
in violation and the permit shall be revoked, the sign may
be requested to be removed, and legal actions may be
undertaken.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:567
[3] The Zoning Officer may remove, or order the removal of,
any sign erected, or placed, in violation of this chapter, at
the expense of the sign owner.
[4] Signs that are found to present an immediate hazard to the
public may be ordered removed, immediately by the
Zoning Officer, without notice, and the cost assessed to the
sign owner.
(3) Exempt signs. The following types of signs shall not require the
issuance of a sign permit:
(a) Address markers.
(b) Signs erected by a public agency or utility providing warning
or information to the public, and any signs erected by the
Borough or under direction of the Borough.
(c) Signs denoting the availability of property for lease or sale, a
maximum of 12 square feet in area and a maximum of one sign
per property. Such signs shall be permitted only if the property
on which the sign is located, or a building thereon, is for lease
or sale. No such sign shall be located within the public right of
way.
(d) Political signs. Such signs shall be removed within seven days
after the political event for which they were intended.
(4) Temporary signs.
(a) Temporary event signs and banners announcing a nonprofit
event of a civic organization for noncommercial purposes,
provided that there is only one sign per property and the sign
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and the sign shall be
erected for a period not to exceed 30 days prior to the start of
the event and removed within three days after the conclusion
of the event.
(b) Signs announcing special events, including but not limited to:
auctions, grand openings, new management, going-out-ofbusiness
and similar special, limited-time events of a defined
duration, provided that such signs shall be displayed for a
maximum of 14 consecutive days per special event and there
shall be only one sign per occupied tenant space. The sign
permit application for such signs shall define the special event
duration and dates.
(c) The following temporary signs may be erected without a sign
permit:
[1] Portable sign (excluding changeable letter signs) including
A-frame, sandwich-board or tent signs provided that:
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:568
[a] The sign has a maximum of two sign faces.
[b] The sign shall be located within the sidewalk frontage
of a non-residential or mixed-use building provided
that only one temporary sign is permitted per building
and the sign shall be placed on the sidewalk
immediately in front of the building with which the
sign content is associated.
[c] The sign face size shall be a maximum of five square
feet per sign face of the sign.
[d] Such signs shall be removed at the end of the business
day and during non-business operating hours.
[e] Such signs shall not obstruct pedestrian traffic.
[2] Signs announcing new building or construction projects
and identification of the contractors associated with the
projects, provided the sign is erected after the beginning
of the construction activity and removed upon completion
of the construction project or issuance of an occupancy
permit, if required.
(d) Other temporary signs. All other temporary signs, including
but not limited to those which advertise or announce
community, civic, educational, charitable, or religious projects,
special events, political campaigns, and the like, and including,
but not limited to, signs placed in anticipation of an upcoming
election or during other similar political campaigns or events,
shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Shall not exceed 12 square feet in area per side, except
that one such sign per property may be no more than 20
square feet in sign area per side.
[2] Shall not be more than four feet tall, measured from
ground level to the top of the sign, except where one such
sign may be attached to a building, existing sign structure,
or other permanent structure.
[3] Where more than one such sign is placed on a single
property, parcel, or lot, the signs shall be separated by a
distance of no less than 10 feet.
[4] Shall not be erected sooner than 30 days prior to the
scheduled date of the advertised event, election, or the
like.
[5] Shall be removed within seven days after completion of the
project, or after the date on which the advertised special
event, election, or the like, has taken place or otherwise
concluded.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:569
[6] Shall be removed no later than 60 days after the sign is
erected.
(5) General regulations.
(a) Prohibited signs.
[1] Animated signs are not permitted.
[2] Signs illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent
internal or external light source are not permitted.
Internal illumination that changes intensity with a
frequency of less than 15 seconds shall be considered
flashing.
[3] Signs that create glare on adjacent properties or any
adjacent street are not permitted.
[4] Signs constructed from temporary materials, such as
nonrigid plastic, nylon, fabric, or untreated or unpainted
wood, except as permitted as a temporary sign by this
section.
(b) Setbacks and location.
[1] Signs shall be placed no closer than 10 feet to any property
line or any right-of-way line, measured horizontally from
the sign edge, and shall not project within an existing
street right-of-way.
[2] Monument signs shall be placed no closer than five feet to
the closest property line and 18 inches from an abutting
street right-of-way line.
[3] No sign shall be erected in such a manner or location that
would obstruct vision, ingress and/or egress, or interfere
with safe traffic flow.
[4] No sign shall be located so as to block doors, operable
windows or fire escapes, or access to them; nor shall a sign
be attached to a fire escape.
[5] Such sign shall extend vertically past the roofline of the
building upon which the sign is located.
[6] No sign shall project over a street, alley, or driveway, nor
be closer than two feet from the closest perpendicular
edge of the curb or paved edge of any such vehicular way.
(c) Lighting.
[1] Signs in residential zoning districts shall be illuminated
externally from concealed light fixtures and the
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:570
illumination shall be directed to the sign face only to
minimize light spillover beyond the edges of the sign face.
[2] Signs in commercial and zoning districts may be
illuminated internally, provided that only the name and
official logo of the business or entity are illuminated.
[3] Where a sign is illuminated with an external light source,
such lighting shall be provided through sharp cut-off,
directed-light fixtures that are decorative in nature or
concealed from view and the illumination shall be directed
to the sign face to minimize light spillover beyond the
edges of the sign face.
[4] No sign lighting shall be installed in a manner or of such a
brightness as to create excessive glare on adjacent
property or uses such that such lighting inhibits the use
and enjoyment of the adjacent property or uses.
[5] Flashing signs and signs with flashing lights are not
permitted.
(6) Residential district signs.
(a) The following signs are permitted in residential zoning
districts:
[1] Building signs for identification of home occupations or noimpact
home-based businesses shall be permitted
provided that such sign is a maximum of five square feet
and shall not be illuminated.
[2] Monument signs identifying a residential development or
neighborhood, provided that the maximum sign area shall
be 18 square feet per sign face and the sign shall not
exceed four feet in height.
[3] Signs displaying name, activities and/or functions for
public institutions (churches, public schools, accredited
private schools, and publicly owned or operated
buildings), provided that:
[a] One monument sign is permitted on a property.
[b] The maximum sign area shall not exceed 30 square
feet per sign face and there shall be a maximum of two
sign faces.
[c] Changeable copy/lettering and LED signs are
permitted provided that they do not comprise more
than 50% of the total sign area. Except as to permitted
location, all other requirements of this chapter for
LED signs shall be met.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:571
[d] The maximum height shall be four feet.
[e] No monument sign shall be located in such a manner
as to obstruct traffic sight visibility.
[f] One building sign is permitted per building.
(7) Nonresidential zoning districts signs.
(a) In nonresidential zoning districts, all of the following signs are
permitted:
[1] One freestanding sign for each building.
[2] One building, awning, canopy, wall or marquee sign for
each building.
[3] One building, awning, canopy, wall or marquee sign for
each building tenant, for which a Borough occupancy
permit is issued or otherwise required.
[4] Directional signs, a maximum of five square feet in size per
sign face, up to a maximum of four signs on a property.
(b) All signs shall meet the following requirements, unless
otherwise specified.
[1] A sign shall have a maximum of two sign faces.
[2] Freestanding signs.
[a] No freestanding sign shall have more than two sign
faces.
[b] The maximum height of any freestanding sign,
measured from ground level to the top of the sign,
shall be 10 feet.
[c] Each sign face of a freestanding sign shall have a
maximum of 40 square feet of sign area per sign face.
[d] Where a building includes multiple occupied tenant
spaces, the maximum freestanding sign area shall be
50 square feet of sign area per sign face.
[e] Where two or more buildings are located on the same
lot or under common ownership, the maximum
freestanding sign area shall be 60 square feet of sign
area per sign face, provided that a total of only one
freestanding sign is permitted for all buildings on the
same lot or under common ownership.
[f] No freestanding sign shall be located in such a
manner as to obstruct traffic sight visibility.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:572
[3] The maximum sign area of any building, wall, canopy,
awning, or marquee sign shall be 30 square feet and shall
meet the following criteria:
[a] The sign shall not project above the wall, roofline, or
surface to which it is mounted nor obstruct building
windows.
[b] The sign shall not encroach upon any road right-ofway
nor shall it in any way interfere with normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
[c] No sign shall extend below a point measured from
grade to a height of nine feet. In all instances, signs
must comply with the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Accessibility Guidelines on
protruding objects and head room.
[d] The sign shall not project more than five feet from the
building facade to which it is attached.
[4] LED signs are permitted in non-residential zoning
districts.
[a] All LED sign images, messages, and graphics
displayed on the sign face must be static. Animation
and video displays are prohibited.
[b] The transition from one static display on the LED sign
face to another must be instantaneous without any
special effects, including but not limited to flashing,
spinning, revolving transition methods, scrolling from
left to right or top to bottom, slot machine, splice,
mesh, radar, kaleidoscope, spin, or any other animated
transition.
[c] The images and messages displayed must be complete
in themselves, without continuation in content to the
next image or message or to any other sign.
[d] Each message displayed must remain displayed
continuously for a minimum of 10 seconds.
[e] No sign shall be brighter than 5,000 nits between
sunrise and sunset and 250 nits between sunset and
sunrise, measured according to recognized industry
standards for brightness measurement.
(8) Billboards.
(a) See § 168-400G, Billboards.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:573
(9) Nonconforming signs: Any physical change or alteration to the
structure of an existing, nonconforming sign, excluding regular
maintenance and in-kind replacement of the sign face, requires
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
T. Visibility at intersections. On the corner lot or at any point of entry on a
public road, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner which obscures the vision above the height of 2
1/2 feet and below 10 feet, measured from the center-line grade of the
intersecting streets or driveways and within the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points on these street
lines 75 feet from their intersection along the lot lines. [Added
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 883158]
U. Swimming pools. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 883]
(1) As used in this section, a "private swimming pool" shall mean a pool
of 24 inches or more in depth, above the ground or in the ground,
used or intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with
a single-family residence and available only to the householder and
his guests.
(2) An application for a permit to construct, install, alter or repair a
private swimming pool shall be submitted to the Building Inspector
on a form supplied by him and shall be accompanied by detailed
plans and specifications in duplicate setting forth the extent and
character of the installation in all its structural parts and a plot
drawn to scale, showing the location of the proposed swimming
pool, and inspected by the Building Inspector.
(3) The construction drawings accompanying the application for a
permit shall bear the seal of an architect or engineer registered in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, certifying the adequacy of the
construction of the proposed installation and the location as shown
on the accompanying plot plan. This subsection is applicable for inthe-
ground swimming pools only.
(4) All private swimming pool installations shall comply with the health
and sanitary regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the County of Allegheny regulating private swimming pools.
(5) All in-the-ground private swimming pool installations shall comply
with all plumbing regulations of the Borough of Baldwin.
(6) The depth of the rear yard after the installation of a swimming pool
shall be no less than 15 feet.
(7) All private swimming pool installations shall be constructed with an
outlet drain connected to the sanitary sewer system of the Borough
158. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections T and U were redesignated
as Subsections V and W, respectively.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:574
of Baldwin, which drain shall contain a gate-type valve of a
maximum two inches in diameter; provided, however, that in the
event that such in-the-ground private swimming pool is equipped
with an approved filtering system with provisions for the backwash
of the water used therein, such private swimming pool may be
emptied into the sanitary sewer system of the Borough through
such backwash so long as the pump on such approved filtering
system shall be used to empty the swimming pool through the
backwash into the sewer system of the Borough, in which event
said private swimming pool installations may be constructed
without an outlet drain connected to such sewer system as
aforesaid. This subsection is applicable to in-the-ground pools.
(8) All private swimming pool installations shall be enclosed by a
security-type fence no less than four feet in height nor more than
six feet in height. All fences shall have a self-closing, self-latching
gate of such a character as is necessary to prevent access to the
pool. Any fence constructed for purposes of this subsection shall
not be permitted in the front yard areas of any residential district.
On aboveground pools, a fold-up ladder that closes the opening on
a deck with a fence will be permitted.
(9) Open private swimming pools are considered structures for the
purpose of permits and regulations of other ordinances. For the
purpose of this chapter, they are not counted as floor area in
computing the lot coverage but shall not be located in any required
setback area. All swimming pools shall be at least 15 feet from any
property line.
(10)No swimming pool shall be constructed in the Borough except in
accordance with a permit therefor previously secured from the
Zoning Officer of the Borough, upon the written application
accompanied by a plan showing the size, shape, location of the
swimming pool and its enclosure and such other information as
may be necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to determine
whether the pool complies with this chapter.
(11) The permit fee for installation or alteration of a private swimming
pool shall be set from time to time by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Baldwin by resolution. The permit fees and inspection
fees shall be required for both above-the-ground pools and in-theground
pools, and the amounts of such fees shall be determined as
aforesaid by Council.
(12) All inspection and enforcement provisions of this Code shall apply
to private swimming pools.
V. Topsoil removal; excavation of clay, sand, gravel or rock. The following
shall apply in all districts:
(1) Topsoil or sod may be removed only under the following conditions:
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:575
(a) As a part of the construction or alteration of a building or the
grading incidental to such building;
(b) In connection with normal lawn preparation and maintenance;
(c) In connection with the construction or alteration of a street or
utility improvement.
(2) Reseeding all disturbed areas. In any improvement or construction
work, including individual home construction, all ground areas
disturbed must be reseeded, in accordance with PennDOT Form
408, Section 804, using Formula E for unimproved areas. No
disturbed area shall remain unseeded for more than six months.
W. Illumination and lighting standards.
(1) Purpose. To require and set minimum standards for outdoor
lighting to:
(a) Provide for and control lighting in outdoor public places where
public health, safety and welfare are potential concerns.
(b) Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular
light sources.
(c) Protect neighbors, the environment and the night sky from
nuisance glare and light trespass from improperly selected,
placed, aimed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources.
(d) Promote energy-efficient lighting design and operation.
(e) Protect and retain the intended visual character of the various
municipality venues.
(2) Applicability.
(a) All uses within the municipality where there is interior or
exterior lighting that creates a nuisance or hazard as viewed
from the outside, including, but not limited to, residential,
commercial, industrial, public and park/sports and institutional
uses, and sign, billboard, architectural and landscape lighting.
(b) The municipality may require lighting be incorporated for
other uses, applications and locations or may restrict lighting
in any of the above uses or applications when health, safety
and/or welfare are issues.
(c) The glare-control requirements herein contained apply to
lighting in all uses, applications and locations.
(d) Temporary seasonal decorative lighting is exempt from all but
the glare-control requirements of this section. Temporary
seasonal decorative lighting is defined as temporary electrical
power and lighting installations to be used for holiday
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:576
decorative lighting and similar purposes. Temporary
decorative lighting shall not be permitted, or exist, for a period
exceeding 60 days.
(e) Emergency lighting, as may be required by any public agency
while engaged in the performance of its duties, or for
illumination of the path of egress during an emergency as
described in NFPA 75 and NFPA 101, are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
(3) Criteria.
(a) Illumination levels. Lighting, where required by this section, or
otherwise required or allowed by the municipality or other
applicable jurisdiction, shall have illuminances, uniformities
and glare control in accordance with the recommended
practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA), unless otherwise directed by the
municipality.
(b) Luminaire design.
[1] Luminaires shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application and shall be aesthetically acceptable
to the municipality.
[2] For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces, such
as, but not limited to, parking areas, roadways, vehicular
and pedestrian passage areas, merchandising and storage
areas, automotive-fuel-dispensing facilities, automotive
sales areas, loading docks, culs-de-sac, active and passive
recreational areas, building entrances, sidewalks, bicycle
and pedestrian paths, and site entrances, luminaires shall
be aimed straight down and shall meet IESNA full-cutoff
criteria. Luminaires with an aggregate-rated lamp output
not exceeding 500 lumens, e.g., the rated output of a
standard no directional forty-watt incandescent or 10-watt
compact fluorescent lamp, are exempt from the
requirements of this subsection. In the case of decorative
street lighting, the municipality may approve the use of
luminaires that are fully shielded or comply with IESNA
cutoff criteria rather than full cutoff.
[3] For the lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal surfaces,
such as, but not limited to, facades, landscaping, signs,
billboards, fountains, displays and statuary, when their use
is specifically permitted by the municipality, luminaires
shall be shielded and shall be installed and aimed so as not
to project their output into the windows of neighboring
residences, adjacent uses, past the object being
illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway. Luminaires
with an aggregate-rated lamp output not exceeding 500
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:577
lumens, e.g., the rated output of a standard no directional
40-watt incandescent or 10-watt compact fluorescent
lamp, are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection.
(c) Control of glare.
[1] All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or
pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse
and so as not to create a nuisance by projecting or
reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use or
property.
[2] Directional luminaires, such as floodlights and spotlights,
when their use is specifically approved by the municipality,
shall be so shielded, installed and aimed that they do not
project their output into the windows of neighboring
residences, adjacent uses, past the object being
illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway or
pedestrian way. Floodlights installed above grade on
residential properties, except when motion-sensor
actuated, shall not be aimed out more than 45° from
straight down. When a floodlight creates glare as viewed
from an adjacent residential property, the floodlight shall
be required to be re-aimed and/or fitted with a shielding
device to block the view of the glare source from that
property.
[3] Illumination for signs, billboards, building facades and/or
surrounding landscapes for decorative, advertising or
aesthetic purposes is prohibited between 11:00 p.m. and
dawn, except that such lighting situated on the premises
for a commercial establishment may remain illuminated
while the establishment is actually open for business and
until no more than 1/2 hour after closing. Such lighting
shall be automatically extinguished using a programmable
controller.
[4] "Barn lights," aka "dusk to dawn lights," when a source of
glare as viewed from an adjacent property, shall not be
permitted unless effectively shielded as viewed from that
property.
[5] The use of floodlights and wall-mounted luminaires (wall
packs) shall not be permitted to illuminate parking areas
unless it can be proven to the satisfaction of the
municipality that the employment of no other means is
possible.
[6] Parking facility and vehicular and pedestrian way lighting
(except for safety and security applications and all-night
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:578
business operations) for commercial, industrial and
institutional uses shall be automatically extinguished no
later than 1/2 hour after the close of business or facility
operation. When safety or security lighting is proposed for
after-hours illumination, it shall not be in excess of 25% of
the number of luminaires or illumination level required or
permitted for illumination during regular business hours.
When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
municipality that an elevated security risk exists, e.g., a
history of relevant crime, an appropriate increase above
the 25% limit may be permitted.
[7] Luminaires shall be automatically controlled through the
use of a programmable controller with battery poweroutage
reset, which accommodates daily and weekly
variations in operating hours, annual time changes and
seasonable variations in hours of darkness. The use of
photocells is permitted when in combination with the
programmable controller to turn luminaires on at dusk and
also for all-night safety/security dusk-to-dawn luminaire
operation when such lighting is specifically approved by
the municipality. The use of motion detectors is permitted.
[8] Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the
primary means for controlling glare. Rather, glare control
shall be achieved primarily through the use of such means
as cutoff luminaires, shields and baffles, and appropriate
application of luminaire mounting height, wattage, aiming
angle and luminaire placement.
[9] The illumination projected from any use onto a residential
use shall at no time exceed 0.1 footcandle, measured lineof-
sight at any time and from any point on the receiving
residential property.
[10] The illumination projected from any property onto a
nonresidential use shall at no time exceed 1.0 initial
footcandle, measured line-of-sight from any point on the
receiving property.
[11] Except as permitted for certain recreational lighting and
permitted elsewhere in this subsection, luminaires shall
not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above finished grade of
the surface being illuminated. Luminaires not meeting fullcutoff
criteria, when their use is specifically allowed by the
municipality, shall not be mounted in excess of 16 feet
above finished grade (AFG). Mounting height shall be
defined as the distance from the finished grade to the
surface being illuminated to the optical center of the
luminaire. Where proposed parking lots consist of 100 or
more contiguous spaces, the municipality may, at its sole
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:579
discretion, based partially on mitigation of potential offsite
impacts, allow a luminaire mounting height not to
exceed 25 feet AFG. For recreational lighting maximum
mounting height requirements, refer to "recreational uses"
elsewhere in this section.
[12] Only the flags of the United States and the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania shall be permitted to be illuminated past
11:00 p.m. Flag lighting sources shall not exceed 7,000
aggregate lamp lumens per flagpole. The light source shall
have a beam spread no greater than necessary to
illuminate the flag and shall be shielded so that light
source (lamp and reflector) is not visible at normal viewing
angles.
[13] Under-canopy lighting for such applications as gas/service
stations, hotel/theater marquees, fast food/bank/drugstore
drive-ups and the like shall be accomplished using flat-lens
full-cutoff luminaires aimed straight down and shielded in
such a manner that the lowest opaque edge of the
luminaire shall be below the light source and its lightdirecting
surfaces at all lateral angles around the
luminaire. The average maintained illumination in the area
directly below the canopy shall not exceed 20 initial
footcandles, and the maximum shall not exceed 30 initial
footcandles.
(d) Installation.
[1] Electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run
underground, not overhead, and shall be in accordance
with the National Electrical Code (NEC) and National Fire
Protection Association 70 (NFPA 70).
[2] Poles supporting luminaries for the illumination of parking
areas and located within the parking area or directly
behind parking spaces, or where they could be hit by
snowplows or wide-swinging vehicles, shall be suitably
protected by being placed a minimum of five feet outside
the paved area or tire stops, or placed on concrete
pedestals at least 30 inches high above the pavement,
shielded by steel bollards or protected by other
municipality-approved means.
[3] Pole-mounted luminaires for lighting horizontal tasks shall
be aimed straight down, and poles shall be plumb.
[4] Poles and brackets for supporting luminaires shall be
those specifically manufactured for that purpose and shall
be designed and rated for the luminaire and mounting
accessory weights and wind loads involved.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:580
[5] Pole foundations shall be designed consistent with
manufacturer's wind load requirements and local soil
conditions involved.
(e) Maintenance. Luminaires and ancillary equipment shall be
maintained so as to always meet the requirements of this
section.
(f) Billboards and signs. The lighting of new, or the relighting of
existing, billboards and signs shall require a building permit,
which shall be granted when the municipality is satisfied that
excessive illumination, light pollution, glare and light trespass
have been adequately mitigated, and shall be subject to the
following requirements:
[1] Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
luminaires mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and
aimed downward. The luminaries shall be designed, fitted
and aimed to shield the lamp and its reflective surfaces
from off-site view and to place the light output onto, and
not beyond, the sign or billboard. Lighting shall be by
linear fluorescent unless it can be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the municipality that such a mounting
arrangement is not possible. At no point on the face of the
sign or billboard, and at no time, shall the illumination
exceed 30 vertical footcandles during hours of darkness.
[2] Internally illuminated signs shall have a dark field and
light message. The aggregate output of the light sources
shall not exceed 500 initial lumens per square foot of sign
face per side.
[3] Channel letter signs shall have dimming capability to allow
adjustment of sign brightness to meet local ambient
conditions.
[4] The illumination of billboards shall be limited to
commercial and industrial districts, and the illumination of
billboards within 400 feet of a residential use shall not be
permitted.
[5] Off-premises billboards and signs shall be extinguished
automatically by a programmable controller, with
astronomical and daylight saving time control, and spring
or battery power-outage reset, by no later than 11:00 each
evening until dawn, except that signs for establishments
(not companies) that operate or remain open past 11:00
p.m. may remain on no later than 1/2 hour past the close of
the establishment.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:581
[6] Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing or oscillating light
sources, lasers, beacons, searchlights or strobe lighting
shall not be permitted.
[7] LED billboard and sign lighting shall only be permitted in
commercial and industrial districts, shall be static, shall
not be allowed to operate between 11:00 p.m. and dawn
when located where visible from a residential district or
use, and shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an
approaching interchange or traffic-merging lanes. Except
for time-and-weather signs, the message shall not be
permitted to change more than once each hour. The LED
output shall be automatically reduced to a brightness level
that does not create glare during hours of darkness.
[8] The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard shall not be permitted.
(4) Residential development luminaire placement.
(a) For residential developments where lot sizes are, or average,
less than 20,000 square feet, if the municipality so directs,
street lighting shall be provided at:
[1] The intersection of public roads with entrance roads to the
proposed development.
[2] Intersections involving proposed public or nonpublic
major-thoroughfare roads within the proposed
development.
[3] The apex of the curve of any major-thoroughfare road,
public or nonpublic, within the proposed development,
having a radius of 300 feet or less.
[4] Cul-de-sac bulbs.
[5] Terminal ends of center median islands having concrete
structure curbing, trees and/or other fixed objects not
having breakaway design for speeds of 25 miles per hour
or greater.
[6] Defined pedestrian crossings located within the
development.
[7] Where lot sizes permit the parking of less than three
vehicles on the residential lot, thereby necessitating onstreet
parking.
[8] At other locations along the street as deemed necessary by
the municipality.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:582
(b) In residential developments with lots of less than 20,000
square feet, where five or more common contiguous parking
spaces are proposed, such spaces shall be illuminated.
(c) In multifamily developments, common parking areas of four
spaces or greater shall be illuminated.
(5) Recreational uses. The nighttime illumination of outdoor
recreational facilities for such aerial sports as baseball, basketball,
soccer, tennis, track and field, and football typically necessitate
higher than normally allowed luminaire mounting heights and
aiming angles, utilize very-high-wattage lamps and potentially
produce unacceptable levels of light trespass and glare when
located near residential properties. Permission to illuminate such
facilities shall be granted only when the municipality is satisfied
that the health, safety and welfare rights of nearby property
owners and the municipality as a whole have been properly
protected. When recreational uses are specifically permitted by the
municipality for operation during hours of darkness, the following
requirements shall apply:
(a) Racetracks and such recreational venues as golf driving ranges
and trapshooting facilities that necessitate the horizontal or
near horizontal aiming of luminaires and projection of
illumination shall not be permitted to be artificially
illuminated.
(b) Sporting events shall be timed to end at such time that all
lighting in the sports facility, other than lighting for safe exit of
patrons and participants, shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m.,
regardless of such occurrences as extra innings or overtimes.
(c) The municipality reserves the right to limit the number of
illuminated sporting events per week or season.
(d) Maximum mounting heights for recreational lighting shall be
in accordance with the following.
[1] Basketball: 20 feet.
[2] Football: 70 feet.
[3] Soccer: 70 feet.
[4] Lacrosse: 70 feet.
[5] Baseball:
[a] Two-hundred-foot radius: 60 feet.
[b] Three-hundred-foot radius: 70 feet.
[6] Miniature golf: 20 feet.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:583
[7] Swimming pool aprons: 20 feet.
[8] Tennis: 20 feet.
[9] Track: 20 feet.
(e) To assist the municipality in determining whether the potential
impacts of proposed lighting have been suitably managed,
applications for illuminating recreational facilities shall be
accompanied not only with the information required under
Subsection U(6) below, but also by a visual impact plan that
contains the following:
[1] Plan views containing a layout of the recreational facility
and showing pole locations and the location of residences
on adjoining properties.
[2] Elevations containing pole and luminaire mounting
heights, horizontal and vertical aiming angles and
luminaire arrays for each pole location.
[3] Elevations containing initial vertical illuminance plots at
the boundary of the site, taken at a height of five feet lineof-
sight.
[4] Elevations containing initial vertical illuminance plots on
the windowed facades of all residences facing and
adjacent to the recreational facility. Such plots shall
demonstrate compliance with the light trespass and glare
control requirements of this section.
[5] Proposed frequency of use of the facility during hours of
darkness on a month-by-month basis and proposed time
when the sports lighting will be extinguished.
[6] A narrative describing the measures proposed to achieve
minimum off-site disturbance.
(6) Plan submission. Where site lighting is required by this section, is
otherwise required by the municipality, or is proposed by the
applicant, lighting plans shall be submitted for municipality review
and approval for subdivision and land development, conditional
use, variance, building permit and special exception applications.
The submitted information shall include the following:
(a) A plan or plans of the site, complete with all structures,
parking spaces, building entrances, traffic areas (both
vehicular and pedestrian), existing and proposed trees, and
adjacent uses that might be adversely impacted by the lighting.
The lighting plan shall contain a layout of all proposed and
existing luminaires, including, but not limited to, area,
architectural, building entrance, canopy, soffit, landscape, flag,
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:584
sign, etc., by location, orientation, aiming direction, mounting
height, lamp, photometry and type.
(b) A ten-foot-by-ten-foot illuminance grid (point-by-point) plot of
maintained horizontal footcandles overlaid on the site plan,
plotted out to 0.0 footcandles, which demonstrates compliance
with the light trespass, illuminance and uniformity
requirements as set forth in this section or as otherwise
required by the municipality. When the scale of the plan, as
judged by the municipality, makes a ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid
plot illegible, a more legible grid spacing may be permitted.
(c) Light-loss factors, IES candela test-filename, initial lamplumen
ratings and specific lamp manufacturer's lamp ordering
nomenclature used in calculating the plotted luminance levels.
(d) Description of the proposed equipment, including luminaire
catalog cuts, photometries, glare-reduction devices, lamps, on/
off control devices, mounting heights, pole foundation details,
pole protection means and mounting methods.
(e) Landscaping plans shall contain luminaire locations,
demonstrating that the site lighting and landscaping have been
coordinated to minimize conflict between vegetation and
intended light distribution, both initially and at vegetation
maturity.
(f) When requested by the municipality, applicant shall also
submit a visual-impact plan that demonstrates appropriate
steps have been taken to mitigate potential consequences of
on-site and off-site glare and to retain the intended character
of the municipality. This plan may require the inclusion of
initial vertical footcandle values at specific off-site venues, e.g.,
bedroom windows of adjacent residential uses.
(g) Plan notes. The following notes shall appear on the lighting
plan:
[1] Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended
substitutions for specified lighting equipment on the
approved plan shall be submitted to the municipality for
review and approval prior to installation. Requests for
substitutions shall be accompanied by catalog cuts of the
proposed equipment that demonstrate the proposed
substitution is equal to or exceeds the optical quality and
maintainability of the specified luminaires and
accompanied by a lighting plan, including a point-by-point
plot, which demonstrates that proposed substitutions will
result in a lighting design that equals or exceeds the
quality of the approved plan.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-420
1:585
[2] The municipality reserves the right to conduct postinstallation
inspections to verify compliance with the
section requirements and approved lighting plan
commitments and, if deemed appropriate by the
municipality, to require remedial action at no expense to
the municipality.
[3] All exterior lighting, including building-mounted lighting,
shall meet IESNA full-cutoff criteria unless otherwise
specifically approved by the municipality.
[4] Installer shall notify municipality to arrange for inspection
and approval of all exterior lighting, including buildingmounted
lighting, prior to its installation.
(7) Compliance monitoring.
(a) Safety hazards.
[1] If the municipality judges a lighting installation creates a
safety hazard, the person(s) responsible for the lighting
shall be notified and required to take remedial action.
[2] If appropriate corrective action has not been effected
within 15 days of notification, the municipality may take
appropriate legal action.
(b) Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels.
[1] When the municipality judges an installation produces
unacceptable levels of nuisance glare, skyward light,
excessive or insufficient illumination levels or otherwise
varies from this section, the municipality may cause
notification of the person(s) responsible for the lighting
and require appropriate remedial action.
[2] If the infraction so warrants, the municipality may act to
have the problem corrected as in Subsection U(6)(g)[2]
above.
(8) Nonconforming lighting.
(a) Any luminaire or lighting installation existing on the effective
date of this section that does not conform with the
requirements of this section shall be considered lawful
nonconformance.
(b) A nonconforming luminaire or lighting installation shall be
made to conform with the requirements of this section when:
[1] Minor corrective action, such as re-aiming or shielding,
can achieve conformity with the applicable requirements
of this section.
§ 168-420 BALDWIN CODE § 168-420
1:586
§ 168-430. Nonconforming uses or structures.
[2] It is deemed by the municipality to create a safety hazard
or a nuisance.
[3] It is replaced by another luminaire or luminaires or
abandoned or relocated.
[4] The number of existing luminaires is increased by 50% or
more.
[5] There is a change in use.
(c) Regardless of the requirements above, when requested by the
municipality, nonconforming luminaires and lighting
installations shall be made to conform with the requirements of
this section or removed within three years from the effective
date of this section.
(9) Reporting of violations and penalties.
(a) A violation, or suspected violation, of this section may be
reported to the Borough through any of it officers, agents or
employees, who shall report same to the Code Enforcement
Official, designated as such by the Borough from time to time.
(b) Any person or entity violating any of the requirements of this
section be issued a citation by the proper municipality official
and, upon conviction of same before the District Justice, shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500
and/or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day that
a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and a
separate fine may be imposed.
A. Statement of intent.
(1) The zoning districts established by this chapter are designed to
guide future use of land in the Borough by encouraging the
development of desirable residential, commercial and industrial
areas, with appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses,
to the end of promoting and protecting the public health, safety,
comfort, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare.
(2) To achieve this end, lawful existing uses which would be prohibited
or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments,
and which do not conform to the character and regulations of the
zoning district in which they are located, shall be subject to certain
limitations. The regulations set forth below are intended to provide
a gradual remedy for the undesirable conditions resulting from
indiscriminate mixing of uses, and to afford a means whereby
nonconforming uses can be gradually eliminated and reestablished
in more suitable locations within the Borough.
§ 168-420 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-430
1:587
(3) Similarly, buildings or other structures which do not comply with
one or more of the applicable district requirements as to lot width,
minimum lot area and yard spaces, lot coverages or building height
are deemed to be nonconforming.
(4) Nonconforming uses and structures will be generally permitted to
remain; the purpose of regulating them is to restrict further
investment in uses or structures which are inappropriate to their
location.
(5) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in plans, construction or intended use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to
the effective date or amendment of this chapter and on which
actual building construction has been diligently carried on.
B. Nonconforming use regulations.
(1) Continuation.
(a) Lawful uses located either within a building or other structure,
or part thereof, or on the land or in combination of both which,
at the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment
thereto, become nonconforming, may be continued so long as
they remain otherwise lawful, including subsequent sales of
the property.
(2) Alteration or enlargement of nonconforming buildings, structures
or land.
(a) Nonconforming buildings, structures or land shall not be
added to or enlarged upon any manner, unless said building,
structure or land, including additions and enlargements, is
made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which
they are located. No structure alterations may be made other
than those ordered by an authorized public officer to assure
the safety of a nonconforming building or structure.
(b) If a building or structure is conforming as to use, but
nonconforming as to area and bulk regulations or off-street
parking requirements, said building or structure may be
enlarged or added to, provided that the enlargement or
addition complies with the area and bulk regulations and the
existing building and the addition comply with the off-street
parking regulations of the district in which said building or
structure is located.
(c) No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved, in
whole or in part, to another location on the lot unless every
portion of said building or structure is made to conform to all
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 168-430 BALDWIN CODE § 168-430
1:588
(3) Discontinuance.
(a) If a nonconforming use of land or building ceases operations
for a continuous period of more than 12 months, then this shall
be deemed to be an intent to abandon such use, and any
subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations of this
chapter.
(4) Change in use.
(a) A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure
(i.e., residential use of a commercial building) shall not be
expanded into any other portion of such conforming building or
structure nor changed except to a conforming use. If such a
nonconforming use or a portion thereof is discontinued or
changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building,
structure or portion shall be in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.
(b) Whenever a use district shall be hereinafter changed, any
existing nonconforming use in such changed district may be
continued or changed to another nonconforming use of the
same or higher classification, provided that no structural
alterations are made other than those ordered by an
authorized public officer to assure the safety of the building or
structure.
(5) Damage or destruction.
(a) In the event that a nonconforming use in any district is
destroyed or partially destroyed by fire, explosion or other
cause, or otherwise damaged to the extent of 50% or more or
of its bulk of all buildings, structures and other improvements
on the lot, such nonconforming use shall terminate and the lot
shall thereafter be used only for conforming uses. Nothing in
this article shall be construed to prevent the restoration and
the resumption of a former lawful use of any building that is
damaged or partially destroyed by fire or other calamity or by
act of God to the extent of 50% or less, provided that such
restoration is started within one year and diligently prosecuted
to completion. No nonconforming building that is completely
destroyed or damaged or partially destroyed in any of the
above manners to a greater extent than 50% or voluntarily
razed or required by any law to be razed by the owner thereof
may thereafter be restored except in full conformity with all
the provisions of this chapter as to building and use. The
proportionate extent of damage or partial destruction shall be
based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the
building to its condition prior to such damage or partial
destruction, to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire
§ 168-430 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-430
1:589
building as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose
shall be furnished by the Borough Engineer.
(b) In any case, whether conforming or nonconforming, the
remains of any building, if destroyed, must be removed from
the premises within three calendar months so that the same is
not or shall not remain as a nuisance thereon, and in any event,
a residence in a commercial area which has been completely or
partially destroyed may be rebuilt without any variance.
C. Nonconforming lot regulations. Nothing in this chapter is intended to
unreasonably restrict the development of lots of record existing in any
residential district on the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter. Where existing lots of record are rendered nonconforming
lots by this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
structures may be erected subject to the regulations of the ordinance
prevailing at the time the lots were recorded, provided that the lot in
question satisfied not less than 60% of the required minimum area, yard
and bulk regulations of the district in which the subject lot is located.
D. Nonconforming signs. Signs in existence at the effective date of this
chapter or amendments thereto may be continued, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Moving. No nonconforming advertising sign, billboard, commercial
advertising structure or statuary shall be moved to another position
of the building or lot on which it is located after the effective date of
this chapter or amendment thereto.
(2) Structure alterations. A nonconforming sign on a nonconforming
use may be continued, but the area of such sign or signs shall not
be structurally altered.
(3) Damage or destruction. In the event that any nonconforming
advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or
statuary is damaged to the extent of 25% of its cost or replacement
at the time of destruction, such sign shall not be restored or
replaced.
(4) Discontinuance of signs. Whenever any use of a building or
structure of land or of a combination of buildings, structures and
land ceases, all signs accessory to such use shall be deemed to
become nonconforming and shall be removed within six calendar
months.
§ 168-430 BALDWIN CODE § 168-430
1:590
ARTICLE V
Administration
This article describes the roles for individuals and groups as they apply to
this chapter. These include the Borough Council, Zoning Officer, Building
Inspector, Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing Board. It is the
purpose of this article to prescribe the procedures by which the
administration of this chapter shall take place. Nothing contained within
the article shall be interpreted as limiting the adoption of administrative
regulations which do not supersede required stated procedures.
§ 168-500. Borough Council.
A. Duties of Council.
(1) The Council. Under this chapter, Council shall have the duties of
considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this chapter, as provided by law; and of establishing a
schedule of fees and charges. Under no circumstances shall the
duties of the Council include hearing and deciding questions of
enforcement that may arise.
(2) Appoint the members of the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Hearing Board and the Zoning Officer.
(3) Receive and consider the recommendations of the Planning
Commission on matters the Commission reviews pursuant to this
chapter.
(4) Ask for recommendations of the Planning Commission on the
adoption or amendment of this chapter if such recommendations
are not prepared by the Planning Commission. In accordance with
§ 303(a) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,159
Council must ask for recommendations from the Planning
Commission for proposed actions related to:
(a) The location, opening, vacation, extension, widening,
narrowing or enlargement of any street, public ground,
pierhead or watercourse;
(b) The location, erection, demolition, removal or sale of any
public structure located within the municipality;
(c) The adoption, amendment or repeal of an official map, SALDO,
zoning ordinance or provisions for planned residential
development, or capital improvements program: or
(d) The construction, extension or abandonment of any water line,
sewer line or sewage treatment facility.
159. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10303(a).
§ 168-500 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-500
1:591
§ 168-510. Zoning Officer and Building Inspector.
(5) Advertise and host a public hearing before adopting a zoning
ordinance or any amendment thereto.
(6) May remove members of the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Hearing Board or the Zoning Officer from their positions upon just
cause and after a formal hearing.
(7) Establish fees for the issuance of land development, building,
occupancy and sign permits. In accordance with § 617.3(e) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,160 Council may also
prescribe fees for conditional use applications, landowner curative
amendments, municipal curative amendments and for hearings
before the Zoning Hearing Board.
(8) Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final
adjudications in the following matters:
(9) All applications pursuant to § 508 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10508, for approval of
subdivisions or land developments under Part V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
(10) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of
this chapter.
(11) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
§ 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a).
(12) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P. S. § 10609.
(13) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management as enabled by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(14) Applications for approvals of planned residential development.
A. Duties of Zoning Officer.
(1) The day-to-day administrative procedures provided for in this
chapter are the responsibility of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Officer's duties generally involve receiving, reviewing, and issuing
building and zoning permits and certificates of occupancy,
maintaining records of applications and permits, performing
inspections to determine compliance with this chapter, notifying
160. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10617.3(e).
§ 168-500 BALDWIN CODE § 168-510
1:592
persons violating this chapter, keeping this chapter and map upto-
date and accepting applications for and presenting facts at
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Council may amend the
duties of the Zoning Officer as deemed necessary for the health,
safety and welfare of the residents. The Zoning Officer must
administer this chapter by its literal terms; the Zoning Officer does
not have any discretionary power and can neither waive nor tighten
any requirement of the chapter. The Zoning Officer is required
to meet qualifications established by the Borough and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code161 and must be able to
demonstrate a working knowledge of the municipal zoning. The
Zoning Officer may also serve as the Building Inspector.
B. Zoning permits, building permits and certificate of occupancy. Before
issuing the zoning permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy,
the Zoning Officer shall assure that the proposed construction or use is
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, as well as other
applicable ordinances of the Borough.
C. Application for special exception. Any applicant for a building permit or
certificate of occupancy for a structure or use which may be permitted
in the district concerned only as a special exception shall be informed
by the Zoning Officer of the rules and procedures of the Zoning Hearing
Board relating to such applications.
D. Other duties. Other duties of the Zoning Officer are to:
(1) Act on behalf of the municipality in any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, demolition,
maintenance or use of any building or structure, to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, so as to prevent the occupancy or use of
any building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
(2) Revoke by order any building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy issued under a mistake of fact or contrary to the law or
the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Record and file all applications and plans for permits and the action
taken thereon. All applications, plans and documents shall be a
public record.
(4) Maintain the Official Zoning Map showing the current zoning
districts for all the land within the municipality. Upon request, the
Zoning Officer shall make determination of any Zoning Map district
boundary question. Such determination may be appealed to the
Zoning Hearing Board.
161. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-510
1:593
§ 168-520. Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing Board.
(5) Upon the request of the Council, Planning Commission or Zoning
Hearing Board, present facts, records or information to assist them
in making decisions.
(6) Provide testimony at hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board, if
requested.
(7) Conduct inspections and surveys as prescribed by Council or
ordinance to determine compliance or noncompliance with the
terms of this chapter.
A. Planning Commission specific intent. It is the purpose of this article to
cite the responsibilities of the Planning Commission in the
administration of designated duties and functions according to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,162 as amended.
B. Planning Commission administration and procedure.
(1) Continuance of commission. There shall be in and for the Borough
of Baldwin a Planning Commission, as previously created by
Borough Ordinance pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247.
(2) Appointment, term and vacancy. The Planning Commission of the
Borough of Baldwin shall consist of five members, all of whom shall
be full-time residents of the Borough, appointed by Council in the
manner prescribed by Act 247 of the Municipalities Planning Code,
as amended. The term of each member shall be for four years; not
more than two shall expire during any calendar year. The Chairman
of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify Council
concerning vacancies in the Planning Commission for any reason,
and Council shall fill the vacancy only for the unexpired term. Such
appointments shall be made within a period of 60 days after such
vacancy occurs.
(3) Meetings. The Planning Commission shall meet as required and as
deemed necessary.
(4) Conduct of business. The Planning Commission shall elect its own
Chairman and Vice Chairman and create and fill such other offices
as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual terms and may
succeed themselves. The Planning Commission may make and alter
bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures
consistent with the ordinances of Borough of Baldwin and the laws
of the commonwealth.
C. Planning Commission powers, duties and other functions.
162. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-510 BALDWIN CODE § 168-520
1:594
(1) Conduct. The Planning Commission shall at the request of the
Council have the power and shall be required to:
(a) Prepare the comprehensive plan for the development of the
Borough as set forth in this chapter, and present it for the
consideration of the Council.
(b) Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and
files of the Planning Commission shall be in the possession of
Council.
(2) Conduct. The Planning Commission at the request of Council may:
(a) Make recommendations to Council concerning the adoption or
amendment of an Official Zoning Map.
(b) Prepare and present to Council a zoning ordinance, and make
recommendations to the Council on proposed amendments to it
as set forth in this chapter.
(c) Prepare, recommend and present subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations
for the consideration of Council.
(d) Prepare and present to Council a building code and a housing
code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto following review and approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
(e) Review and present recommendation to Council on conditional
use applications.
(f) Complete other actions, including but not limited to the review
and recommendation on conditional use application to Council,
or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill the duties
and obligations imposed by this chapter.
(g) Prepare and present to Council an environmental study.
Submit to Council a recommended capital improvements
program.
(h) Prepare and present to Council a water survey which shall be
consistent with the state water plan and any applicable water
resources plan adopted by a river basin commission. The water
survey shall be conducted in consultation with any public
water supplier in the area to be surveyed.
(i) Promote public interest in, and understanding of, the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
(j) Make recommendations to individuals, governmental, civic and
private agencies as to the effectiveness of such agencies'
proposals.
§ 168-520 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-520
1:595
(k) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(l) Present testimony before any board.
(m) Require from other departments or agencies of the Borough
such available information as relates to the work of the
Planning Commission.
(n) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to
make examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(o) Prepare and present to Council a study regarding the
feasibility and practicability of using renewable energy sources
in specific areas within the Borough.
(p) Review the zoning, subdivision and land development
ordinance, Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Baldwin,
provisions for planned residential development, and
regulations governing the development of land no less
frequently than it reviews the comprehensive plan.
(3) Conduct. Provide recommendations for proposed actions related
to:
(a) The location, opening, vacation, extension, widening,
narrowing or enlargement of any street, public ground,
pierhead or watercourse;
(b) The location, erection, demolition, removal or sale of any
public structure located within the municipality;
(c) The adoption, amendment or repeal of an official map, SALDO,
zoning ordinance or provisions for planned residential
development, or capital improvements program; or
(d) The construction, extension or abandonment of any water line,
sewer line or sewage treatment facility.
D. Planning Commission administrative and technical assistance. Council
may employ administrative and technical services to aid in carrying out
the provisions of Act 247, the Municipalities Planning Code, either as
consultants on particular matters or as regular employees of the
Borough of Baldwin.
E. Planning Commission assistance. The Planning Commission may, with
consent of Council, accept and utilize any funds, personnel or other
assistance made available by Allegheny County, the commonwealth or
the federal government or any of their agencies or from private
sources.
F. Planning Commission removal. Any member of the Planning
Commission once qualified and appointed may be removed from office
for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
§ 168-520 BALDWIN CODE § 168-520
1:596
cause by a majority vote of Council, taken after the member has
received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing. Any appointment to fill a vacancy created by
removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
G. Membership of Zoning Hearing Board. The membership of the Zoning
Hearing Board shall consist of five residents of Borough of Baldwin
appointed by Council. Their terms of office shall be five years and shall
be so fixed that the term of one member shall expire each year. The
Board shall promptly notify Council of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other elected or
appointed office in Borough of Baldwin nor shall any member be an
employee of the Borough.
H. Organization of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall elect from
its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such
and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and taking
of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the
members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a Hearing Officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearings on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board as provided by law. The
Board shall adopt rules consistent with this chapter and the laws of the
commonwealth. Such rules shall include, but not be limited to, the
manner of filing appeals and the manner of filing applications for
special exceptions and variances. The Borough Manager or his or her
representative shall serve as Secretary to the Zoning Hearing Board.
I. Removal of Zoning Hearing Board members. Any Board member may
be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or
for other just cause by a majority vote of Council which appointed the
member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
J. Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction, meetings, hearings and other
matters.
(1) Zoning Hearing Board. Council shall appoint a Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the provisions of the Borough's Code of
Ordinances and § 901 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.163 The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the following
powers:
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901.
§ 168-520 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-520
1:597
(b) To hear and decide all variances to the terms of this chapter;
the Zoning Hearing Board is required to act under provisions
of this chapter including approval of the expansion, extension
or enlargement of nonconforming uses only as provided for in
this chapter and/or as otherwise prescribed within the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code § 909.1.164
(c) To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in an
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(d) To hear and decide substantive challenges to the validity of any
land use ordinance, except those brought before the governing
body pursuant to §§ 609.1 and § 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.165
(e) To hear and decide appeals from a determination by a
municipal engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or
such provisions within a land use ordinance.
(f) To hear and decide appeals from the Zoning Officer's
determination under § 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.166
(g) To hear and decide appeals from the determination of the
Zoning Officer or municipal engineer in the administration of
any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving Article V or VII applications prescribed within the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(h) To hear and decide applications for special exceptions under
the zoning ordinance pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code § 912.1.167
(2) In exercising the above mentioned powers, such Zoning Hearing
Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this section,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may
make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made. Notice of such decision shall forthwith
164. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.1.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a)(2), respectively.
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
§ 168-520 BALDWIN CODE § 168-520
1:598
be given to all parties in interest and shall be filed immediately with
the Zoning Officer.
K. Zoning Hearing Board meetings. Meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the
Board may determine as per its rules and procedures. All meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question
or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed with the permanent records of the Board and shall
be a public record.
L. Zoning Hearing Board hearings. The Board shall conduct hearings and
make decisions in accordance with the requirements and provisions
under § 908, Hearings, Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.168
Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and such other persons who have
registered a name and address for this purpose with the Zoning
Hearing Board.
M. Zoning Hearing Board mediation option. Parties to proceedings may
utilize mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings as per the
provisions of § 908.1, Mediation option, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. 169
N. Zoning Hearing Board expenditure for services. Within the limits of
funds appropriated by the Council, the Board may employ or contract
for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical
and clerical services. Members of the Board may receive compensation
for the performance of their duties, as may be fixed by Council and as
per the provisions of § 907 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.170
168. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
169. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.1.
170. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10907.
§ 168-520 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-520
1:599

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement and Penalties
This article describes application processes that allow for meaningful
review and consideration of zoning permits, including approvals for
conditional uses and special exceptions.
§ 168-600. Processes, violations and penalties, and fees.
A. Building permits.
(1) Requirements. A building permit shall be required prior to the
razing, erection, enlargement and structural alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof (including added porches,
carports and decks) and prior to the moving of a building into the
Borough or from one place in the Borough to another. A building
permit is not necessary for exterior painting or the removal and
replacement of lights or roofing shingles, siding, windows, doors,
chimneys or entrances.
(2) Application for building permit. Applications for building permits
shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer on such forms as may
be furnished by the Borough. Such application shall include, when
deemed necessary, building and plot plans of a satisfactory nature
and shall contain all information necessary for said officer to
ascertain whether the proposed erection, alteration, use or change
in use complies with the provisions of this chapter. Application for a
permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the building or
structure or agent of either or by the licensed engineer or architect
employed in connection with the proposed work. If the application
is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be
accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or the qualified applicant
or a signed statement of the qualified applicant witnessed by the
Zoning Officer or his designee to the effect that the proposed work
is authorized by the owner in fee and that the applicant is
authorized to make such application. The full names and addresses
of the owner, lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the
owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the
application.
(3) Requisites. All applicants for building permits shall be required to
furnish with their applications and plans, as otherwise required in
this section, the following specific data:
(a) For new structures:
[1] The elevation of the proposed foundation and of the first
floor with reference to the nearest abutting street level; in
case of a corner lot, the elevation should be given as to
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-600
1:601
both the front and side street, alley or highway abutting
thereon.
[2] Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures.
[3] All required setbacks, yards and existing easements.
[4] The nearest available sanitary and drainage sewers and
the elevation of the basement and first floor above both the
sanitary and drainage sewers with which connection is to
be made for service of the property.
[5] The information required shall be furnished by profile
plans or other data of a satisfactory nature sufficient to
satisfy the above requirements. Failure to furnish such
information and satisfactory proof that suitable sewerage
and drainage facilities will be available shall constitute
grounds for denial of a building permit.
(b) For additions, alterations and decks, porches and landscape
structures.
[1] The nature, location, dimension and kinds of materials
shall be furnished as part of the building permit
application for all additions and alterations including
decks, porches and landscape structures. All such
structures shall conform to lot and yard requirements.
[2] Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures.
[3] All required setbacks, yards and existing easements.
[4] Adequate information, plans and other data shall be
required to provide for privacy and quiet of adjacent
landowners by the use of solid screen fences, buffers of
landscaping or changes in elevation.
(4) Industry approval. Any application for a permit for a building the
construction or alteration of which requires the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry shall be
accompanied by satisfactory evidence that said Department has
approved the plans for said building.
B. Expiration of building permits. No permit for the erection, razing,
change, alteration or removal of a building or for the construction of
decks, porches or landscape structures shall be valid or effective after
six months from the date of issuance thereof and shall thereafter be
void, unless the work authorized by the permit shall have been
substantially commenced within six months from the date of issuance
and carried on with due diligence. If, however, the applicant has been
delayed in proceeding with the work for which the permit was granted
by reason of any reasonable cause not due to his own negligence, the
permit may be renewed without additional cost to the applicant.
§ 168-600 BALDWIN CODE § 168-600
1:602
C. Zoning permits.
(1) No structure or building shall be erected, added to or otherwise
have any structure alterations made to it and no use listed in this
chapter may be established or changed until a zoning permit has
been issued by the Borough. No zoning permit shall be issued for
any structure or building where said construction, addition,
structural alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter. Any zoning permit issued in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. A zoning
permit need not precede subdivision or land development
applications.
(a) Application requirements. All applications for zoning permits
shall be made in writing by the owner, tenant, vendee under
contract of sale or authorized agent on a form supplied by the
Borough and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. The
application shall include four copies of the following
information:
[1] A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
[2] A site layout drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions and height of proposed buildings, structures or
uses and any existing buildings in relation to property and
lot lines. If the application relates to property scheduled to
be developed in successive stages, such plans shall show
the relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
developments to the proposed layout of the entire
property.
[3] The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open
spaces and yards, including methods to be employed for
screening.
[4] The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to
be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
[5] The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for
signs, if applicable.
[6] The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other
areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
[7] Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of
sewage and industrial wastes, water supply and storm
drainage.
[8] The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-600
1:603
proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per
acre of land.
[9] A description of any proposed industrial or commercial
operations in sufficient detail to indicate effects of those
operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion or other safety
hazards.
[10] Description of methods to be employed in controlling any
excess noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution,
fire hazards or other safety hazards as determined from
review of operations.
[11] Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer to
enable him to determine the compliance of the proposed
development with the terms of this chapter.
(2) A decision either approving or disapproving an application for a
zoning permit shall be rendered within 90 days after the
application is filed. Any disapproval of the application shall contain
a brief explanation setting forth the reasons for the disapproval and
the manner in which the application can be corrected and/or
modified to obtain the required approval. If no decision is rendered
on the application within 90 days, the application shall be deemed
to have been granted immediately, unless the application has
agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
D. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) Requirements.
(a) No building or part thereof hereafter erected, altered,
enlarged or changed in use shall be occupied or used without a
certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Officer, certifying
that the work has been inspected and approved as being in
conformity with the building permit, the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable ordinances.
(b) A new certificate of occupancy shall be required for all change
of occupancy through sale of property or for continued
occupancy of any structure determined uninhabitable by the
Building Inspector until the same is brought up to acceptable
standards.
(2) Application.
(a) Upon completion of any erection, movement, alteration or
razing of a building and prior to the use or occupancy of the
property, the holder of the building permit shall notify the
Zoning Officer of said completion and shall request issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
§ 168-600 BALDWIN CODE § 168-600
1:604
(b) The owner or occupant of a parcel of land or an existing
structure who desires to change the use of said land or
structure without alterations requiring a building permit shall
apply for a certificate of occupancy on such forms as the
Borough may provide, setting forth the existing and proposed
uses of said land or structure. In accordance with the
requirements in Subsection D(1) above, the owner or occupant
of any nonconforming use shall apply for a certificate of
occupancy within six months after the effective date of this
chapter. Such application shall constitute registration of the
nonconforming use. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
notify owners or occupants of nonconforming uses of the
provisions of this section.
E. Fees. Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule to
be adopted by resolution of Council, and all such fees shall be paid to
the Borough for deposit into the Borough Treasury. Each applicant for
an appeal, special exception, variance or other procedures requiring a
fee shall, at the time of making application, pay a fee, in accordance
with the aforementioned fee schedule, for the cost of advertising and
mailing notices as required by this chapter.
F. Schedule of fees.
(1) The Council shall by resolution establish a schedule of fees and
shall post said schedule conspicuously in the Borough Building.
(2) No permit, certificate, application or variance shall be issued
unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses as established
by such resolution have been paid in full; nor shall any action be
taken by the Council and/or Zoning Hearing Board take action
unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
G. Amendments.
(1) Power to amend. The regulations, restrictions, boundaries and
requirements set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended, supplemented, changed or repealed through amendment
by the Borough Council in accordance with the procedures and
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.171
H. Variances.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where
it is alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing Board may by
rule prescribe the form of application and may require preliminary
application to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-600
1:605
grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary
to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board unless and until:
(a) A written application for the variance is submitted that
includes:
[1] Dimensions of all existing and proposed structures.
[2] All required setbacks, yards and existing easements.
(b) The required fees are paid.
(c) Public notice by advertising shall be given at least two weeks in
advance of the hearing. The owner of the property for which
the variance is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail.
(d) The hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or
by agent or by attorney.
(e) The Zoning Hearing Board shall make findings that the
requirements of this section have been met by the applicant for
the variance.
§ 168-600 BALDWIN CODE § 168-600
1:606
(f) The Zoning Hearing Board shall further make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the
variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that
will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or
structure.
(g) The Zoning Hearing Board shall further make a finding that the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
(h) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and such
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(i) Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Hearing Board grant
a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of
this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by
implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said
district.
I. Purpose of rezoning.
(1) The purpose of rezoning is to protect the safety, capacity and
efficiency of the Borough's existing infrastructure systems; to
maintain fiscal responsibility; and to uphold the objectives of the
Baldwin Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Rezoning considerations shall be based on the projected benefits
and/or detrimental effects to the Borough of Baldwin as a whole.
J. Rezoning application forms.
(1) All applicants submitting rezoning applications shall demonstrate
the compatibility of a rezoning proposal.
K. Review of rezoning applications.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall review the application in compliance with
the following procedural guidelines:
(a) Upon receipt of a rezoning application, the Zoning Officer will
perform a desk check review of the package to determine the
completeness of the application.
(b) The Zoning Officer will provide the applicant a letter within
seven business days stating that the application has been
submitted with all required information attached.
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-600
1:607
(c) If the Zoning Officer finds the application to be incomplete or
insufficient, the rezoning application will be returned to the
applicant.
(d) When the rezoning application is found to be complete, the
Zoning Officer shall compile a report and forward the
application package and report to the Planning Commission for
review.
(2) As part of the rezoning approval process, the Planning Commission
and Council shall consider the motivation and implications of each
plan, analysis and report.
(3) The Planning Commission shall review the application in
compliance with the following procedural guidelines:
(a) If the rezoning proposal is found to be generally consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission shall
consider any projected beneficial and/or detrimental effects on
the Borough. The Planning Commission may host a public
hearing on the application if they deem it applicable.
(b) Based on these analyses, the Planning Commission shall
submit a written recommendation either in favor or not in favor
of the rezoning proposal including a specific statement as to
whether or not the proposed rezoning is in accordance with the
objectives of the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
(4) The final recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the Council.
(5) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's final recommendations,
the Council may review and consider for adoption the proposed
zoning map amendment, in accordance with the requirements of
the Municipalities Planning Code.
L. Application criteria.
(1) Application requirements. The following outlines the plans,
analyses and reports that a landowner and/or developer shall
submit as part of rezoning applications. The plans, analyses and
reports to be submitted include:
(a) Site plan.
(b) Estimated infrastructure (sanitary sewer and potable water)
demands (gallons per day).
(c) Off-street parking projections (number of parking spaces)
available on site.
§ 168-600 BALDWIN CODE § 168-600
1:608
(d) A summary of anticipated impacts on adjoining lots including
but not limited to noise, vibration, night-time lighting, service
area locations and visibility, hours of operation.
(e) Depending upon the location of lot access, infrastructure
service/demands and impacts on adjoining lots, the Council
may require a landowner and/or developer to prepare other
potential related studies.
M. Additional information. The Planning Commission and the Council
reserve the right to request additional information as part of the
rezoning review and approval process in order to evaluate the
applicability of the rezoning.
N. Enactment of zoning ordinance amendments.
(1) The Council may amend, supplement, or repeal any of the
regulations and provisions of this chapter as set forth in
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(2) The Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Council shall
hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice and
pursuant to mailed notice and electronic notice to an owner of a
tract or parcel of land located within the borough, or an owner of
the mineral rights in a tract or parcel of land within the
municipality who has made a timely request in accordance with
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Section 109.172
(3) In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Council shall submit each such
amendment to the Planning Commission to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
(4) If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Council shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to mailed and electronic public notice as
specified by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
(5) Prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the Council, the
amendment shall be forwarded to Allegheny County and
surrounding municipalities for recommendations.
(6) A copy of the adopted amendment to this chapter shall be
forwarded to Allegheny County for record.
O. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10109.
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-600
1:609
(1) A landowner and/or developer who desires to challenge on
substantive grounds the validity of this chapter or the Official
Zoning Map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts
the use or development of land in which he has an interest may
submit a curative amendment to the Council with a written request
that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided
as provided in § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10916.1. The curative amendment and challenge
shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the county
planning agency as provided in § 609 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and notice of the hearing thereon
shall be given as provided in § 610 and § 916.1 of the Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P. S. §§ 10609, 10610, and 10916.1.
(2) The Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. If
the Borough does not accept a landowner and/or developer's
curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection
and a court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire chapter and Official Zoning Map, but only for those
provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
amendment and challenge.
(3) The Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has merit,
may adopt landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure
the challenged defects. The Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, school and other public service facilities;
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this
chapter or Official Zoning Map;
(c) The suitability of the lot for the intensity of use proposed by the
lot's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the lot's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
P. Procedure for Borough curative amendments.
§ 168-600 BALDWIN CODE § 168-600
1:610
§ 168-610. Enforcement and violations.
(1) If the Borough determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof,
is substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(a) The Borough shall declare, by formal action, this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30
days following such declaration and proposal, Council shall:
[1] By resolution make specific findings setting forth the
declared invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
[a] References to specific uses that are either not
permitted or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[b] Reference to a class of use or uses which requires
revision; or
[c] Reference to this entire chapter which requires
revisions.
[2] Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to
this chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
(b) Council will conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
A. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this chapter.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of the lot on
which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a
written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that lot,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of
record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(b) The location of the lot in violation.
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
§ 168-600 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-610
1:611
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within the timeframe as defined by the
enforcement notice.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
B. Remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by
the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
district justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter
shall be paid over to the Borough.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 168-610 BALDWIN CODE § 168-610
1:612
Appendix
Chapter A174
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television rate review — See Ch. 8.
§ A174-1. Adoption of SHACOG resolution.
The Borough of Baldwin hereby adopts SHACOG Board Resolution No.
04-94173 and agrees to participate in the SHACOG Cable Television
Franchising Program.
§ A174-2. Resolution to be binding upon Borough.
SHACOG Board Resolution No. 04-94 shall be binding upon the Borough of
Baldwin as provided in that resolution until such time as Borough Council
withdraws pursuant to the procedures established in SHACOG Resolution
No. 04-94.
§ A174-3. Assignation of present franchise agreement.
The present cable television franchise agreement between TCI of
Pennsylvania and its affiliate is hereby assigned, delegated and/or
transferred to SHACOG, and all of the Borough's rights and responsibilities
shall be assumed by SHACOG pursuant to SHACOG Resolution No. 04-94.
§ A174-4. Authority to sign agreement.
The appropriate municipal officers are authorized to sign the attached
agreement174 between SHACOG and the Borough of BALDWIN to
participate in the SHACOG Cable Television Franchising Authority
Program.
§ A174-5. SHACOG authorized to act on behalf of Borough.
SHACOG, through its Franchising Authority Board, is hereby authorized to
act on behalf of the Borough of Baldwin within the confines of the Authority
set forth in the attached agreement and SHACOG Resolution No. 04-94 for
so long as the Borough participates in that process.
§ A174-6. Ratification of program transfer. [Added 11-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 747]
173. Editor's Note: Res. No. 04-94 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
174. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 168-610 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A174-6
1:613
Chapter A175
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
§ A175-1. Authority to construct, maintain and operate granted.
Permission is hereby granted to the Bell Telephone Company of
Pennsylvania, its successors and assigns to construct, maintain and operate
its posts, poles, booths, telephones, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains, manholes,
cables, wires and all necessary overhead and underground apparatus and
appliances on, over, under and through the streets, alleys and highways
within the present or future limits of the Borough of Baldwin, in the County
of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; to use the property of
other companies and to permit other companies that possess authority
to operate within the said Borough; and to use its property, upon such
arrangements as the two companies may agree to, subject to the following
provisions.
§ A175-2. Height and location of poles; street openings.
All poles erected by said company shall extend not less than 20 feet above
the surface of the ground and shall be so located as in no way to interfere
with the safety or convenience of persons traveling on or over the said
streets, alleys and highways, and in the installation and maintenance of its
underground system, said company shall not open or encumber more of any
street, alley or highway than will be necessary to enable it to perform the
work with proper economy and efficiency.
§ A175-3. Submission of plans.
Whenever the said company shall desire to erect, lay down or construct
any booths, posts, poles, conduits or manholes, it shall present a plan or
plans showing the location, number and size thereof to the Council of the
Borough, who shall approve or disapprove the same as to location, which
plan or plans, or copy thereof, with approval endorsed thereon shall be
filed with the Borough Secretary before any work shown thereon is started.
In case the said Council disapproves any plan or plans, it shall designate
A. Ordinance No. 675 is hereby amended to ratify the decision to merge
the TRCOG program into the SHACOG Telecommunications
Franchising Authority Program.
B. The Borough of Baldwin hereby adopts and agrees to be bound by the
provisions of the SHACOG Telecommunications Franchising Authority
Program as defined in SHACOG Board Resolution No. 02-97.
§ A174-6 BALDWIN CODE § A175-3
1:614
thereon, by the use of appropriate words or marks, or both, some other
location suitable for the purposes of the said company.
§ A175-4. Supervision; restoration.
The erection of booths and poles and the construction of conduits and
manholes under the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the
supervision of the Council of the Borough, and said company shall replace
and properly relay that portion of any sidewalk or street pavement which
may have been displaced or damaged by it in the construction and
maintenance of its system.
§ A175-5. Use of poles by Borough.
Space on the poles erected and in the conduit constructed under the
provisions of this ordinance may be used, free of charge, for the purpose
of carrying wires of any fire alarm or police telegraph system owned and
maintained by the said Borough, provided that the said wires are placed and
maintained in such a manner as may be prescribed by the said company,
and that no use shall be made of such space by the said Borough which
will result in interfering with or impairing the operation or use of the said
company's property or service or will endanger its property or employees.
§ A175-6. Maintenance required.
The said company shall maintain all posts, poles, booths, telephones, cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, mains, pipes, manholes and all other apparatus
erected or constructed under the provisions of this ordinance in good and
safe order and condition, and shall at all times fully indemnify, protect
and save harmless the said Borough from and against all actions, claims,
suits, damages and charges and against all loss and necessary expenditures
arising from the erection, construction and maintenance of its system, or
from its neglect or failure to maintain the said apparatus in good and safe
order and condition.
§ A175-7. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to grant unto the
said company any exclusive right, or to prevent a grant of similar privileges
to other companies, nor to conflict with the powers and jurisdiction now or
hereafter vested by law in the Pennsylvania Department of Highways or its
successors over certain highways or with any rules and regulations issued
from time to time by the said Department or its successors governing the
use of such highways by public service corporations.
§ A175-8. Compliance with other provisions.
The said company shall be governed by all legal ordinances of a general
nature affecting its operations in the Borough of Baldwin that are now in
force and enacted under and by virtue of the police powers of the said
Borough or the laws of the commonwealth, as well as all such ordinances
§ A175-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A175-8
1:615
hereafter so enacted, provided that the terms, conditions and regulations
prescribed therein do not impair or abridge the permission contained in this
ordinance.
§ A175-9. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days from the date
when a copy thereof shall have been filed in the office of the Secretary of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, provided that, if the Commission
shall, prior to the expiration of such period, institute a proceeding under the
provisions of Section 901 of the Public Utility Law affecting its validity, this
ordinance shall become effective only upon approval by said Commission.
§ A175-10. Acceptance by company.
The said company shall, under its seal and by its proper officers, within
60 days from the date of the final enactment of this ordinance, signify
in writing its acceptance of all the terms, conditions, regulations and
restrictions herein contained, in default of which this ordinance shall
become null and void and of no effect.
§ A175-11. Bond required.
The said company shall, at the time of filing its acceptance of this ordinance,
also file its bond in the sum of $10,000 conditioned for the faithful
compliance with all and singular the terms, conditions, regulations and
restrictions in this ordinance contained, and in default of so doing, this
ordinance shall become null and void and of no effect, anything herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding; and said bond shall be in lieu
of any bond or monetary deposits to ensure the replacement of highways
which may be required by any general ordinance now in force or hereafter
enacted.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
780 1-19-2004 2004 tax rate NCM
781 1-19-2004 Administrative salaries
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 49,
Art. II)
782 2-16-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
783 4-12-2004 Bond NCM
§ A175-8 BALDWIN CODE § DL-1
1:616
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
784 7-19-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
785 5-17-2004 Uniform Construction
Code administration and
enforcement
Ch. 83
786 7-19-2004 Bond NCM
787 7-19-2004 Pleasant Hills Authority
pretreatment standards
Ch. 134, Art. X
788 8-16-2004 Collection of sewer tap-in
fees
Ch. 134, Art. XI
789 9-20-2004 Borough Planning
Commission amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
790 10-18-2004 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
791 1-17-2005 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Repealed by Ord.
No. 809
792 1-17-2005 2005 tax rate NCM
793 1-17-2005 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
794 1-17-2005 Administrative salaries
amendment
NCM (See Ch. 49,
Art. II)
795 1-17-2005 Tax Collector salary
amendment
NCM
796 12-19-2005 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
797 12-19-2005 Employee pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. II)
798 12-19-2005 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
799 12-19-2005 Manager Ch. 21
800 12-29-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
801 2-28-2006 Dogs amendment Ch. 85
802 2-28-2006 Cats amendment Ch. 82
803 2-28-2006 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
804 2-28-2006 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
805 11-28-2006 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:617
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
806 11-28-2006 Taxation: realty transfer
tax
Ch. 146, Art. II
807 1-23-2007 2007 tax rate NCM
808 8-28-2007 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
809 12-18-2007 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 146, Art. III
810 12-18-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
811 1-22-2008 Sewers: Pleasant Hills
Authority pretreatment
standards amendment
Ch. 134, Art. X
812 7-22-2008 Pension funds; retirement:
police pension fund
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. I
813 9-23-2008 Street vacation NCM
814 10-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
815 12-24-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
816 12-24-2008 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 825
817 1-27-2008 Service employees pension
plan
Ch. 29, Art. II
818 5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
819 6-23-2009 Employee pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. II)
820 7-28-2009 Residential rental property
registration, occupancy
permits and transfer
inspections
Ch. 133, Art. I
821 9-22-2009 Fire insurance claims Ch. 103, Art. I
822 9-22-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 127
823 10-27-2009 Police pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. I)
824 12-22-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
825 12-22-2009 Sewer rents and charges
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 832
826 2-16-2010 Burning, open Ch. 81
827 4-20-2010 Pension funds; retirement:
police pension fund
amendment
NCM, see Ch. 29,
Art. I
§ DL-1 BALDWIN CODE § DL-1
1:618
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
828 5-18-2010 Street vacation NCM
829 5-17-2010 Subdivision and land
development: stormwater
management amendment
Ch. 142, Part 2
830 10-19-2010 Pension funds; retirement:
police pension fund
amendment
NCM, see Ch. 29,
Art. I
831 12-29-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
832 12-29-2010 Sewers: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
833 2-15-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
834 3-15-2011 Sewers: Pleasant Hills
Authority pretreatment
standards amendment
Ch. 134, Art. X
835 4-19-2011 Loan guaranty agreement NCM
836 5-16-2011 Pension funds; retirement:
service employees pension
plan amendment
NCM, see Ch. 29,
Art. II
837 6-21-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 168
838 6-21-2011 Natural gas extraction Ch. 121
839 9-20-2011 Parks and recreation:
smoking and/or tobacco
use
Ch. 123, Art. V
840 10-18-2011 Pension funds; retirement:
service employees pension
plan amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
841 11-15-2011 Pension funds; retirement:
service employees pension
plan amendment
NCM, see Ch. 29,
Art. II
842 12-20-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
843 12-20-2011 Sewers: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
844 3-20-2012 Inspection and
certification of sanitary
and storm sewers
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. VIII
845 4-17-2012 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement:
multi-municipal Shade
Tree Commission
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:619
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
846 4-17-2012 Annexation NCM
847 10-16-2012 Bond NCM
848 12-18-2012 Fees: delinquent claims Ch. 88, Art. I
849 1-22-2013 Tax rate 2013 NCM
850 2-19-2013 Employee pension plan
amendment
NCM (see Ch. 29,
Art. II)
851 2-19-2013 Tax rate 2013 NCM
852 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 873
853 12-17-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
854 6-17-2014 Intergovernmental
cooperative agreement:
utilization of Brentwood
Recreation Director in
2014
NCM
855 7-15-2014 Flood damage prevention Ch. 92
856 8-12-2014 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 127
857 10-21-2014 Bulk storage containers Ch. 80A
858 12-16-2014 Sewers: MS4 prohibited
discharges
Ch. 134, Art. XII
859 12-16-2014 Subdivision and land
development: stormwater
management
Ch. 142, Part 2
860 12-23-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
861 3-17-2015 Intergovernmental
agreement: Whitehall
Borough cost allocation of
basin facility and sewer
improvements
NCM
862 3-17-2016 Debt NCM
863 4-21-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 131
864 11-17-2015 Debt NCM
865 12-15-2015 Tax rate 2016 NCM
866 12-15-2015 Sewers: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
§ DL-1 BALDWIN CODE § DL-1
1:620
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
867 2-16-2016 Sewers: Pleasant Hills
Authority pretreatment
standards
Ch. 134, Art. X
868 4-19-2016 Sewers: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
869 4-19-2016 Sewers: fees for
delinquent sewer accounts
and delinquent claims
Ch. 134, Art. XIII
870 4-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 154
871 5-17-2016 Sewers: rents and charges
amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I
872 Tabled
873 6-21-2016 Zoning Ch. 168
874 10-18-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 154
875 12-20-2016 Tax Rate 2017 NCM
876 12-20-2016 Sewers Amendment Ch. 134
877 1-17-2017 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 29, Art. I
878 3-21-2017 Debt NCM
879 5-17-2017 Revenue Note NCM
880 6-20-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Openings and
Excavations Amendment;
Curb Cuts Amendment
Ch. 139, Art. I; Ch.
139, Art. II
881 8-1-2017 Vacant and Abandoned
Property
Ch. 131A
882 8-1-2017 General Obligation Note NCM
883 11-21-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 168
884 11-21-2017 Loan NCM
885 11-21-2017 General Obligation Note NCM
886 12-19-2017 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
887 12-19-2017 Sewers Amendment Ch. 134
888 1-16-2018 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit Program
Ch. 146, Art. V
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:621
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
889 6-12-2018 Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 62 4
890 Pending
Codification
4
891 11-20-2018 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 138 4
892 11-20-2018 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 139 4
893 12-18-2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM 4
894 12-18-2018 Sewers: Rents and
Charges
Amendment
Ch. 134, Art. I 4
895 4-16-2019 Employee Pension
Plan Amendment
See Ch. 29,
Art. II
4
896 6-18-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 41 4
897 9-17-2019 Chickens Ch. 82A 4
898 9-17-2019 Peddling and
Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 127 4
899 11-19-2019 Taxation: Volunteer
Service Credit
Program
Amendment
Ch. 146, Art. V 4
900 Pending
Codification
4
901 11-19-2019 Street Acceptance NCM 4
§ DL-1 BALDWIN CODE § DL-1
1:622