Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152012-001
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Bellefonte,
County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 575, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Bellefonte, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the “Code of the Borough of Bellefonte,” hereinafter referred to as the
“Code.”
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Bellefonte, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-4, ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
ordinance are hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Bellefonte
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances/resolutions. The Council of the Borough of
Bellefonte has determined that the following ordinances/resolutions are
no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following
legislation:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
(1) Former Part Two, Title Two, Chapter 209, Programs and Services
for Handicapped Persons, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(2) Former Part Two, Title Six, Chapter 230, Secretary, of the 1979
Code of Ordinances.
(3) Former Part Two, Title Eight, Chapter 268, Park and Recreation
Board; Chapter 272, Historical Site Commission; and Chapter 276,
Air Pollution Control Board, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(4) Former Part Two, Title Ten, Section 290.01, Social Security;
Section 290.02, Grievance Procedure, of the 1979 Code of
Ordinances.
(5) Former Part Six, Ch. 672, Radio Interference, of the 1979 Code of
Ordinances.
(6) Former Part Eight, Title Four, Chapter 880, Exoneration of Tax
Collectors, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(7) Former Part Ten, Title Four, Sections 1044.01 to 1044.25 and
1044.99, Sewers; Section 1044.26, Sewage Haulers; and Chapter
1047, Pretreatment of Industrial Waste, of the 1979 Code of
Ordinances.
(8) Former Part Ten, Title Six, Chapter 1064, Bellefonte Swimming
Pool, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(9) Former Part Twelve, Title Two, Chapter 1230, Subdivision
Regulations, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(10) Former Part Fourteen, Title Two, Sections 1420.01 to 1420.04, of
the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(11) Former Part Fourteen, Chapter 1434, Fences; Chapter 1460,
Numbering of Buildings; Chapter 1468, Permits and Fees; and
Chapter 1470, Condominiums, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(12) Former Part Sixteen, Chapter 1610, A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code;
Chapter 1630, Sections 1630.01 to 1630.04, Inspections;
Regulations, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
(13) Former Part Eighteen, Health and Sanitation Code, Ch. 1810,
Administration, of the 1979 Code of Ordinances.
§ 1-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 1-4
1:4
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 2-20-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:5
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following outdated terms, where they appeared in
the Borough’s ordinances, have been changed:
(1) “Building Official” and “Building Inspector” to “Building Code
Official.”
(2) “Justice of the Peace,” “District Magistrate” or “Alderman” to
“Magisterial District Judge.”
(3) “Department of Environmental Resources” to “Department of
Environmental Protection,” where applicable.
(4) “Department of Community Affairs” to “Department of Community
and Economic Development.”
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
§ 1-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.1
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 10-15-2012 by Ord. No.
10152012-001.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on
file in the Village offices.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
§ 1-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 1-14
1:8
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after October 15, 2012.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Adopted 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 834 (Ch. 202, Sec. 202.03, of the
1979 Codified Ordinances); amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No.
10152012-001]
§ 1-16. Definitions of terms.
In the construction of the Code, the following rules and definitions shall
control, except those that are inconsistent with the manifest intent of
Council as disclosed in a particular provision, section or chapter:
ADOPTING ORDINANCE — The ordinance of the Borough adopting the
Code of Bellefonte, Pennsylvania, 2012, in conformity with the Borough
Code of Pennsylvania2 and this Chapter 1.
AUTHORITY — Whenever in the Code authority is given to an officer or
an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised and
such act may be performed at the instance of such officer, by a deputy
or subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such
particular provision.
BOROUGH and MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Bellefonte, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH CODE — The Act of the General Assembly No. 581, passed
February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656, as amended.3
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Bellefonte, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
JOINT AUTHORITY — Words giving authority to a board, commission,
authority or to three or more officers or employees or other persons shall
be construed as giving authority to a majority thereof, unless otherwise
specifically provided.
KEEPER and PROPRIETOR — Persons, firms, associations, corporations,
clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant,
agent or employee.
LAND AND REAL ESTATE — Includes rights and easements of an
incorporeal nature.
OATH — Includes "affirmation." When an oath is required or authorized
by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken by a person having
conscientious scruples about taking an oath. An affirmation shall have the
same force and effect as an oath.
OWNER — When applied to property, includes a part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or any part of such property.
PERSON — An individual, association, club, corporation, firm, partnership
or body politic.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 46201 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11
PREMISES — When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. "Personal property" includes every kind of
property except real property; "real property" includes lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where provision is made for an act to
be done or notice to be given within a "reasonable time," it shall be deemed
to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
such act or the giving of such notice.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STATE and COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STREET — Alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, streets, state
highways and other public ways in the Borough.
TENANT and OCCUPANT — As applied to buildings or land, shall extend
and be applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who
occupies the whole or any part of, a building or land, alone or with others.
§ 1-17. Word usage.
General rule. Except as otherwise provided in this article, words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the language;
provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed
according to such technical or special meaning.
A. Gender. Words importing the masculine shall extend and be applied to
the feminine and neuter genders.
B. Number. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural number.
C. Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future.
D. Conjunctions: "And" includes "or" and "or" includes "and," if the sense
so requires.
E. Calendar computation of time. The terms "month" and "year" mean the
calendar month or year. The time expressed in days within which an act
is to be done or a period is to expire shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday, in which
case it shall be excluded. If time is expressed in hours, the whole of
Sunday shall be excluded.
F. Time. Whenever any time established in the Code for the taking of any
action expires on a Sunday or legal holiday, such time shall not expire
on such day but shall expire on the next weekday.
§ 1-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 1-17
1:12
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 11-20-1989 by Ord. No. 1021 (Ch. 202, Sec. 202.99, of the
1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 1-18. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Code dealing with building, housing, property maintenance, health, fire
or public safety, and/or relating to or for water, air and/or noise
pollution violations, including any provision of any standard, technical
or other code adopted by reference in this Code, and including any rule
or regulation promulgated under authority of any such standard,
technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code, or under
authority of any other provision of this Code, for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned
not more than 30 days, or both, plus costs of prosecution for each
offense.
B. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any other provision of this
Code, including any provision of any standard, technical or other code
adopted by reference in this Code, and including any rule or regulation
promulgated under authority of any such standard, technical or other
code adopted by reference in this Code, or under authority of any other
provision of this Code, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall
be fined not more than $600 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense.
C. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. The penalties
provided for herein shall be in addition to any equitable remedy
provided in this Code or in any rule or regulation promulgated under
authority of this Code.
D. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Code dealing with Parks and Recreation, upon conviction thereof before
a Magisterial District Judge, will be subject to a civil fine as set forth in
the schedule below, plus all costs of prosecution, including court costs
and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the municipality. Range of
fines. [Added 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 10032016-01]
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses: $100.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:13
Chapter 12
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers authority — See Ch. 455, Art. I.
§ 1-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 1-18
1:14
ARTICLE I
Bellefonte Borough Authority
Under the provisions of the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as
amended by the Act of May 20, 1937, P.L. 739, the Bellefonte
Borough Authority was created by Council on August 15, 1938,
amended 3-16-1966 by an unnumbered resolution; 4-4-1966 by Ord.
No. 540; and 7-17-1967 by Ord. No. 577. Ordinance No. 975,
adopted October 5, 1987, amended the Articles of Incorporation of
the Authority.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:15

ARTICLE II
Bellefonte Area Industrial Development Authority
Under the provisions of the Act of August 23, 1967, P.L. 1609, as
supplemented and amended, the Bellefonte Area Industrial
Development Authority was created by Ord. No. 620, adopted May
5, 1969.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:17
Chapter 18
CLAIMS AGAINST THE BOROUGH
§ 18-1. Authority and purpose.4
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8563(a) of the Judicial
Code, see 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., "Political Subdivision Tort Claims
Act," in order to implement the intent of such Act.
§ 18-2. Filing of claims with Borough Secretary.
Any person claiming damages from the Borough pursuant to the Political
Subdivision Tort Claims Act shall, within 180 days of the date of origin of the
claim, notify the Borough Secretary of such claim, in writing, upon a claim
form to be provided by the Secretary, stating the facts upon which the claim
is based and the circumstances under which the claim arose.
§ 18-3. Filing of claim form with insurance carriers.
Immediately upon receipt of the claim form referred to in § 18-2, properly
executed by the claimant and/or his or her attorney under oath, the Borough
Secretary shall file a copy of such form with the appropriate insurance
carrier of the Borough.
§ 18-4. Presentation of claim to Council; referral of claims; action
upon claims and notification.
Within 10 days of the filing of such claim form, the Borough Secretary shall
present the claim to Council for review. Council may refer consideration
of such claim to an appropriate committee of the Borough and/or to the
Borough Solicitor for consideration and advice. Within 30 days of the first
consideration of such claim by Council, the Borough shall take appropriate
action upon such claim and notify the claimant or his or her attorney of the
actions so taken, which may include referral of such claim to the Borough
insurance carrier involved, further consideration of such claim, outright
denial of such claim or such other action as Council, in its wisdom, deems
prudent at the time and under the circumstances of such claim.
§ 18-5. Failure to file claims on time.
If the claimant or his or her attorney fails to file the required claim form
within 180 days of the event or occurrence resulting in the alleged damages
or within such other period of time as is allowed by Section 504(a) of
the Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act, then such claim form shall have
appended to it a statement of the reason for the failure of the claimant
to file such claim form as required by law. In determining whether or not
such failure to file within the aforesaid period is reasonable, the Borough
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 18-5
1:18
shall consider only evidence under oath presented by the claimant as to
his or her absence from the commonwealth from a period of time directly
after the event or occurrence until the expiration of the 180 days, or an
explanation by the claimant that he or she was not aware of his or her legal
right to file such a claim, or evidence presented by the claimant that he or
she was refused access to records, documents or other material necessary
to establish his or her claim.
§ 18-6. Claims against Borough employees.
If a Borough employee is notified of a claim against him or her or the
Borough, either verbally or in writing, such employee shall immediately
notify the Borough Secretary and give him or her all the details of such
claim or cause, including copies of any written notification or suit papers. At
such time, if appropriate, the employee shall, upon a form to be furnished
by the Secretary, make a claim for indemnification and/or a legal defense,
as provided by the Political Subdivision Tort Claims Act. As a condition of
such legal assistance, the employee shall acknowledge, in writing, upon
such form, that the Borough is entitled to his or her full and complete
cooperation in the investigation and defense of any such claim and, further,
that the employee will approve any or all settlements which may be made by
the Borough and/or its requisite insurance carriers of any claim so brought
against the Borough or any of its employees.
§ 18-7. Identifying and minimizing risks of claims; reports.
The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized, required and requested, from
time to time, to implement programs with the employees of the Borough
for the purpose of identifying and minimizing risks of claims against the
Borough and/or its employees and to implement such programs as may be
required to receive from Borough employees a report of all incidents or
conditions which they believe may give rise to liability on the part of the
Borough and/or its employees. Further, the Secretary is hereby required
and requested to maintain a record of such conditions and incidents for
future reference by the Borough.
§ 18-8. Statements prohibited; exceptions.
The employees of the Borough are hereby required, requested, warned
and cautioned to give no statement to any person relating to any incident,
condition or claim which may be made or has been made against the
Borough or any employee thereof, unless such statement is made with the
advice and consent of the Borough Solicitor or required by an authorized
insurance carrier of the Borough or under order of a court.
§ 18-9. Operational changes and inspections.
The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized to make such operational
changes and inspections as may from time to time be necessary to minimize
risk of damages leading to claims against the Borough for personal injuries
§ 18-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-9
1:19
or property damage and shall maintain records of such changes and
inspections.
Chapter 23
COUNCIL, BOROUGH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mayor — See Ch. 80.
§ 18-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 18-9
1:20
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 2-17-1964 by Ord. No. 485 (Ch. 210, Sec. 210.02, of the
1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 23-1. Monthly payment.
Compensation of Councilmen shall be payable monthly from the general
fund. No compensation shall be paid in any month to a Councilman who has
failed to attend at least one regular meeting of Council during the month.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-1
1:21

ARTICLE II
Rules of Council
[Adopted 1-31-1966 (Ch. 210, Sec. 210.01, of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 23-2. Rules of order and procedure.
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations of
Council and the committees thereof:
A. Rule 1. Regular meetings of Council shall be held on the first and third
Monday evenings of each calendar month at 8:00 p.m. Any regular
meeting falling upon a legal holiday shall be held on the next following
secular day, at the same hour and place. All meetings of Council shall be
held in the Borough Hall, including special and adjourned meetings.
B. Rule 2. Special meetings may be called by the President or by 1/3 of the
Councilmen, in writing, filed with the Secretary at least 24 hours prior
to the time specified for such meetings. The Secretary shall
immediately notify each Councilman of the time and purpose of such
meetings by causing a written notice thereof to be delivered to each
Councilman personally if he can be found, and if he cannot be found,
then by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of each Councilman in
the presence of an adult member of the family of the Councilman. The
Secretary shall cause an affidavit to be made showing the service of
such meeting. Special meetings shall be held without such notice when
all members of Council are present in person or consent in writing to
the holding of such a meeting, such written consent to be filed with the
Secretary prior to the beginning of the meetings.
C. Rule 3. Council may, by a majority vote of those present, adjourn from
time to time to a specific date and hour.
D. Rule 4.
(1) The business of Council shall be conducted in the following order:
(a) Call to order by presiding officer.
(b) Roll call. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall
thereupon adjourn, which may be to a specific date pursuant to
Rule 3. Five Councilmen constitute a quorum.
(c) Reading the minutes of the preceding meeting and approving
the same, if correct, and rectifying mistakes, if any exist. The
minutes need not be read except upon request of any member.
(d) Communications and announcements.
(e) Reports of committees and officials.
(f) Unfinished business from previous meeting.
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:23
(g) New business, including the introduction of ordinances and
resolutions.
(h) Miscellaneous business.
(2) In the absence of the Secretary, the President shall appoint a
Secretary pro tem.
E. Rule 5. The President, at the stated hour, shall call the meeting to order.
He shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order and
conduct the proceedings of the meeting in accordance with the
parliamentary rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, unless
otherwise provided by statute or by these rules. Any member shall have
the right of appeal from a decision of the presiding officer. No appeal
shall be debatable, and the appeal may be sustained by a majority of the
members present, exclusive of the President.
F. Rule 6. If the President is absent at the designated time for any
meeting, the Vice President shall call the meeting to order and preside
until such time as the President may arrive. When the President of
Council is the Acting Mayor in the Mayor's absence, the President shall
also retain his duties as Council President, unless, at his option, he
appoints the Vice President to assume any or all of the President's
duties and responsibilities.
G. Rule 7. Whenever the presiding officer desires to speak upon any
question or to make any motion, he shall vacate the Chair and designate
a Councilman to preside temporarily.
H. Rule 8.
(1) The following committees shall be appointed by the President at
the first regular meeting after the organizational meeting:5
(a) Water/sanitation.
(b) Building and property.
(c) Finance.
(d) Public safety.
(e) Parks and recreation.
(f) Streets.
(g) Energy and environment.
(h) Personnel.
(i) Special committees as required.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 23-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 23-2
1:24
(2) Each committee shall consist of three members, and the President
shall be an ex officio member of all committees. The chairmen of
other committees shall be designated by the President. Each
member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of
the members of Council. The Borough Manager shall attend all
committee meetings.
I. Rule 9. The President, at his discretion, may remove or replace any
chairman or committee member from any committee, subject to Council
approval by a majority vote.
J. Rule 10. All ordinances, resolutions, communications and other matters
submitted to Council shall be read by title and author and referred to
the appropriate committee by the President. The Secretary shall read
and record each such reference by title. Any Councilman may require
the reading in full of any matter at any time it is before Council. Any
committee may require any Borough officer to confer with it and supply
information needed in connection with any matter pending before the
committee.
K. Rule 11. An aye and nay vote shall be taken on each committee report
immediately following its submission, provided that any Councilman
may require a separate vote on any ordinance, resolution or other
matter in any report. Action upon a specific matter included in any
committee report shall be deferred until the next meeting following the
submission of the report upon the request of any two Councilmen.
L. Rule 12. No ordinance or resolution shall be considered by Council
unless presented by a Councilman or the Borough Manager.
M. Rule 13. The deliberations of Council shall be conducted in the
following manner:
(1) No Councilman shall address Council until he has been recognized
by the presiding officer. He shall thereupon address himself to the
President and confine his remarks to the question under discussion
and avoid all personalities.
(2) When two or more members simultaneously seek recognition, the
President shall name the member who is to speak first.
(3) No person other than a Councilman shall address Council except by
a vote of a majority of the members present.
(4) No motion shall be discussed or acted upon unless and until it has
been seconded, unless the rules permit one Councilman to initiate
action. No motion shall be withdrawn without the consent of the
person making the same and the person seconding it.
(5) Actions while question under discussion.
(a) When a question is under discussion, no action shall be in
order, except:
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:25
[1] To fix the time of adjournment;
[2] To adjourn;
[3] To call for a recess;
[4] To raise a question of privilege;
[5] To call for orders of the day;
[6] To lay on the table;
[7] To move the previous question;
[8] To set the limit for debate;
[9] To postpone to a certain date;
[10] To refer to a committee;
[11] To amend;
[12] To postpone indefinitely; or
[13] To make a motion.
(b) These actions shall have precedence in the order listed.
(6) Any member desirous of terminating the debate may move the
previous question (if it is seconded), in which event the President
shall announce the question as "Shall the main question now be
put?". If a majority of the members present vote in the affirmative,
the main question shall then be taken without further debate, its
effect being to put an end to all debate and bring Council to a direct
vote, first upon any pending amendments and then upon the main
question.
(7) Any Councilman may demand an aye and nay vote on any matter,
and such vote shall be entered in the proceedings. Every
Councilman shall vote when a question is put, unless Council, by a
majority vote of those present, excuses him for special cause. A
majority vote of the quorum present in favor of any proposed
ordinance, resolution or appointment is necessary for passage or
approval unless a larger number is required by statute.
N. Rule 14. All ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or creating
any charge against the Borough, other than the payment of claims for
purchases of work previously authorized by Council, shall only be acted
on by Council at the next regular meeting, provided that this provision
may be suspended by an affirmative vote of 3/4 of all members of
Council. A roll-call vote shall be taken and recorded on all
appropriations.
O. Rule 15. It shall be in order for any member voting in the majority to
move for a reconsideration of the vote on any question at the meeting or
§ 23-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 23-2
1:26
at the next succeeding regular meeting. A motion to reconsider being
put and lost shall not be renewed. A Councilman may not change his
vote on any question after the result has been announced.
P. Rule 16. These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote
of 2/3 of the members present.
Q. Rule 17. These rules or any part thereof may be amended by 2/3 of the
members present.
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:27

ARTICLE III
Personnel Committee
[Adopted 6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1051 (Ch. 210, Sec. 210.03, of the
1979 Codified Ordinances]
§ 23-3. Committee created.
A Personnel Committee is hereby created as a standing committee of
Council. Such Committee shall be appointed by the President of the Council
in accordance with the rules and general law governing the conduct of
Council.
§ 23-4. Membership.
The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and two members. All other
committee chairmen shall be ex-officio members of the Personnel
Committee and will be automatically included in personnel matters that
affect Borough departments under their committee structure, creating a
four-man committee as the situation arises.
§ 23-5. Duties and responsibilities.
The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities as a
committee of Council:
A. To recommend to Council the creation or elimination of jobs as may be
necessary to effectively staff the various municipal departments of the
Borough, as recommended by the Borough Manager;
B. To formulate and continually review the personnel policies of the
Borough with the objective of maintaining municipal employment
attractive to all concerned;
C. To recommend to Council action relative to changes in salary and wage
scales, employment practices, employee health services and fringe
benefit programs;
D. To plan and coordinate all employee recognition functions;
E. To coordinate the personnel of the Borough in their relationship with
Borough employment; and
F. To recommend to Council appropriate individuals to serve upon the
diverse and various boards, commissions and authorities of the
Borough.
§ 23-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-5
1:29
Chapter 30
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE AGENCY
§ 30-1. Establishment; purpose.6
There is hereby established an educational service agency, pursuant to 43
P.S. § 802.1. The agency is established and operated exclusively for the
purpose of employing school crossing guards in a program supported by the
Borough and the Bellefonte Area School District.
§ 30-2. Membership.
The membership of the Educational Service Agency shall consist of the
Borough Manager, the Chief of Police and the Chairman of the Public Safety
Committee of Council.
§ 30-3. Duties; responsibilities.
The Educational Service Agency shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 30-4. Enforcement; file copy.
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby required, requested, directed
and authorized to do all things necessary and proper to carry out the
intention of this chapter, and the Borough Secretary is specifically directed
to cause a copy of this chapter to be filed with the appropriate authority
of the commonwealth at such time and under such circumstances as it
prescribes.
A. The preparation of a proposal for an annual budget for the school
crossing guard program and submission of such proposal to Council;
B. The employment, discharge and supervision of the activities of school
crossing guards, which responsibilities may be assigned by the Agency
to one of its members; and
C. Such other duties as may be delegated to it in connection with the
school crossing guard program.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 23-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 30-4
1:30
Chapter 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 39.
False alarms — See Ch. 185, Art. I.
Fire limits — See Ch. 294.
Conduct at fires — See Ch. 302.
§ 35-1. Establishment; certificate of recognition of fire companies.
§ 35-2. Establishment and duties of Bellefonte Fire Department
Executive Committee (BFDEC).
A. All fire companies now in existence and recognized in Bellefonte
Borough as belonging to and being a part of the Bellefonte Fire
Department of Bellefonte Borough, and any which may hereafter be
organized or chartered and recognized by Bellefonte Borough, shall
together form the Bellefonte Fire Department of Bellefonte Borough.
B. Each of the companies now recognized as forming a part of the
Bellefonte Fire Department of Bellefonte Borough shall be issued a
certificate of recognition by Bellefonte Borough Council, signed by the
Bellefonte Borough Council President and attested by the Bellefonte
Borough Secretary, on which the corporate or common seal of
Bellefonte Borough is affixed. A similar certificate may be granted by
Bellefonte Borough Council to any new company which may be formed
and thus recognized by Bellefonte Borough Council as forming a part of
the Bellefonte Fire Department and which shall be required to comply
with the same conditions applicable to the present companies.
A. The purpose of this Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Review and recommend changes in the Bellefonte Borough codes
pertaining to the Bellefonte Fire Department, the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and Fire Codes.
(2) Establish and enforce Bellefonte Fire Department standard
operating procedures and/or guidelines.
(3) Keep Bellefonte Borough Council informed relative to the
Bellefonte Fire Department; oversee operation of Bellefonte Fire
Department and provide assistance to the Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief as needed.
(4) Establish ten-year strategic plan for the Bellefonte Fire
Department.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-2
1:31
(5) Review and approve all expenditures for major purchases as
defined as those that require advertised bids under the
Pennsylvania Borough Code.
(6) Review and recommend the annual budget for the Bellefonte Fire
Department.
(7) Ensure that the Bellefonte Fire Department is functioning in an
efficient and fiscally responsible fashion.
B. Meetings of this Committee will be conducted at least once every other
month, or more often if needed, to take care of business, and will be
held in the Bellefonte Borough Building whenever possible.
C. The Bellefonte Fire Department Executive Committee is comprised of
the following members:
(1) Benner Township Supervisor, Spring Township Supervisor, Marion
Township Supervisor or, in each respective instance, his/her
designee, Bellefonte Councilperson Safety Chairman, Chair of the
BFDEC.
(2) Bellefonte Fire Department Chief (only votes in the event of a tie).
(3) Undine Company Chief.
(4) Logan Company Chief.
(5) Undine Company Deputy Chief and two at-large members of the
fire company.
(6) Logan Company Deputy Chief and two at-large members of the fire
company.
D. Meetings can be called by the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief,
Borough Manager, Bellefonte Borough Safety Chair, or at the request of
four or more members of the Board.
(1) A quorum consists of a minimum of seven voting members
excluding the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief. Decisions are
made by a simple majority vote.
(2) The members at-large of the fire companies (5 and 6) shall be
appointed based on criteria established
(3) Effective January 2013, the following criteria shall be used by each
fire company for selecting their respective members at-large to sit
as active members for the BFDEC:
(a) Must have been an active member of either company for a
minimum of four consecutive years. An active member includes
firefighter, fire officer, or administrative officer;
§ 35-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 35-2
1:32
§ 35-3. Authority of Bellefonte Fire Department Chief and Deputies.
§ 35-4. Tenure of Bellefonte Fire Department Chief.
(b) Must have been a firefighter technician level as defined by the
Bellefonte Fire Department SOGs during their time;
(c) One at-large member from each company may be appointed
solely based on outside qualifications without the need to meet
the minimum firefighter requirements.
(d) The Committee member must maintain membership status
within his/her respective organization;
(e) The Committee member cannot miss more than 25% of
meetings, which includes special meetings;
(f) The Committee member can hold successive terms if he/she
meets the above criteria;
(g) Each appointed member will declare at the November meeting
if he/she is interested in serving the following year.
A. The Bellefonte Fire Department shall at all times be under the
direction, control and supervision of an officer who shall be titled the
Bellefonte Fire Department Chief. The Company Chief of each of the
recognized fire companies, now or hereafter recognized as part of the
Bellefonte Fire Department, shall be Deputies to the Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief. The companies and their subordinate officers shall
at all times be subject to the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief's order
and direction. All changes or repairs to any fire apparatus or equipment
shall be authorized by the order of the Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief, who shall also authorize the purchase of all supplies by signing
all vouchers for said purchases.
B. Company Chiefs from both companies shall submit to the Bellefonte
Fire Department Executive Committee a list of fire officers (Deputy
Chiefs, Assistant Chiefs, and Captains).
A. The Bellefonte Fire Department Executive Committee (BFDEC) shall
recommend for appointment to Bellefonte Borough Council the
Bellefonte Fire Department Chief to a three-year term, commencing
July 1. The initial term shall be commenced in the year 2012. Prior to
the expiration of The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief's term on June
30 of a third year of the term, the BFDEC shall announce the vacancy by
posting an announcement along with the job description during the
month of April. At the May meeting, the BFDEC shall review the list of
applicants' qualifications and make a determination and forward a
recommendation to the Bellefonte Borough Council for appointment of
a Bellefonte Fire Department Chief for a three-year term. Bellefonte
Borough Council shall vote on the recommendation at one of their two
June meetings. With Bellefonte Borough Council's approval, the
§ 35-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-4
1:33
appointment shall become effective July 1. An incumbent Bellefonte
Fire Department Chief is eligible to reapply at the end of a threeyear
term for up to no more than one additional term for a total
of six consecutive years. Should a Bellefonte Fire Department Chief
be selected for two consecutive terms or six years, the individual is
not eligible for any further appointment without a minimum threeyear
hiatus as Bellefonte Fire Department Chief. The exception to this
qualification is if there are no qualified applicants to fill the vacancy.
B. The qualifications for the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall be as
follows:
(1) Must be an active member of the Bellefonte Fire Department for a
minimum of six years;
(2) Must have been a chief officer for at least three years, with one of
those years as the ranking Company Chief of one of the Bellefonte
fire companies;
(3) Must be certified as either ProBoard or IFSAC Firefighter-1, and
complete certification as either ProBoard or IFSAC Firefighter-2 by
the completion of the individual's first term.
(4) Must have successfully completed ICS 100, ICS 200, ICS 700, ICS
800, and ICS 300;
(5) Must have successfully completed a course on Incident Safety
Officer training.
(6) Must be certified as either ProBoard or IFSAC to the level of Haz-
Mat Operations; or must have obtained the current operational
level standard and/or certification at the operational hazardous
materials level.
(7) Must be a legal resident within a radius extending 6.75 miles from
the center of Bellefonte Borough. (Radius will be from the Court
House to the maximum distance of primary coverage area based on
Centre County GIS.)
C. All eligible candidates wishing to be considered for the position of
Bellefonte Fire Department Chief will be required to submit a cover
letter, resume, and supporting documentation outlining their
qualifications during the posting timeline, which will be the month of
April on the year ending a three-year term.
D. All application packets will be reviewed by the selection committee,
which is comprised of three members of the BFDEC (two members to be
appointed by the Company Chiefs and the third member to be
appointed by a municipal representative).
E. In the event that no one meets the qualifications for Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief, the BFDEC has the authority to reopen and/or
extend the submission period with revised criteria.
§ 35-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 35-4
1:34
§ 35-5. Filling of vacancies in office of Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief; declaration of vacancy.
§ 35-6. Investigation of complaints against Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief.
Whenever a complaint is made against the Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief, the complaint shall be made in writing with required signature.
The complaint shall be addressed to the BFDEC The BFDEC will take
the necessary measures to investigate the complaint, appointing municipal
members to investigate. Recusal is mandatory where a conflict of interest
exists by virtue of the Investigative Committee member's professional,
financial or personal relationship with the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief.
The Bellefonte Borough Council, upon receiving a signed complaint and
recommendation of the BFDEC, may place the Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief on administrative suspension pending investigation. If investigation is
sustained and appropriate to do so, the BFDEC shall recommend dismissal
of the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief from office to the Bellefonte
Borough Council for a decision. If a dismissal occurs pursuant to this
section, the BFDEC will recommend an interim Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief to Bellefonte Borough Council for approval of recommendation to fill
the unexpired term.
§ 35-7. Oath of Bellefonte Fire Department Chief and Deputies.
The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief and Deputies, when appointed to
such offices, shall be sworn into office by the Mayor to perform their
respective duties with fidelity and to the best of their ability.
§ 35-8. Control of firefighters, apparatus and equipment at fires.
F. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief may appoint a support staff as
necessary.
A. In the event of the vacancy of the office of Bellefonte Fire Department
Chief for any reason, the BFDEC must convene a special meeting within
seven working days. Such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term
by a recommendation of the BFDEC This recommendation shall be
forwarded to Bellefonte Borough Council within two weeks for
approval. The BFDEC has seven days to name an interim Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief and three months to select a new Department Chief.
B. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief position description is on file at
the Municipal Building and shall be included in any vacancy
announcement package.
A. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall be responsible for the
direction of all firefighters and all fire apparatus and equipment at the
time of incidents. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief may delegate
responsibility to either Fire Company Chief or their authorized fire
ground officers.
§ 35-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-8
1:35
§ 35-9. Exclusion of persons interfering with functions of Fire
Department at fires.
The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief, or his/her delegate, is hereby
authorized, with the aid of the Police Department and the Fire Police,
hereinafter provided for, to prevent every person from in any manner
interfering with the functions of the Bellefonte Fire Department while on
duty at an emergency scene.
§ 35-10. Inspections by Bellefonte Department Chief; reports.
§ 35-11. Drivers, operators and members.
B. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief may suspend any member for
such period as he may deem proper, and not to exceed 90 days, subject
to an appeal by such member to the BFDEC, which shall thereupon
investigate the circumstances of such suspension and recommend
concurrence of the action of the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief or
reinstatement of the member so suspended. Persons sitting on the
BFDEC who supervise or work under the accused party, or who initiated
a complaint against the suspended member, shall recuse themselves
from participating in such investigation. Recusal is also mandatory
where a conflict of interest exists by virtue of the Committee member's
professional, financial or personal relationship with the accused party.
A. It shall be the duty of the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief to verify
through Company Chief certification that fire apparatus has been
inspected based on the recommendation of the manufacturer and state
mandates. It shall be the duty of the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief
to verify through Company Chief certification that fire equipment has
been inspected based on the recommendation of the manufacturer of
said fire equipment. Records of such tests shall be maintained by each
respective company Chief for a minimum of five years.
B. At the first Bellefonte Borough Council meeting in November each year,
the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall appear before Council and
present a report detailing the state of the Bellefonte Fire Department,
the number and type of response incidents, the condition of apparatus
and key equipment, personnel status, and proposed major purchases
for the upcoming year.
A. By February 15 of each year, the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall
submit to the Bellefonte Borough Police Department, for a background
check, the names and operator's license numbers of members
requesting to be qualified drivers and operators of fire apparatus. After
the background check has been completed, a copy of the list shall be
given to the Bellefonte Borough Manager for addition of those approved
names to the insurance records. Each Company Chief shall be
responsible for the training and testing of the operators of such
companies.
§ 35-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 35-11
1:36
§ 35-12. Rules and regulations.
The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief and the Company Chiefs of the
Bellefonte Fire Companies, with the assistance of the BFDEC, shall make
such rules and regulations as they deem proper and necessary to regulate
the work of the recognized fire companies in the Department during
training, upon arriving at incidents, while remaining at incidents and while
returning from incidents and in caring for and preserving all property,
apparatus and equipment of the Bellefonte Fire Department.
§ 35-13. Appointment and duties of Fire Police.
§ 35-14. Oath of members of Fire Police.
Each and every member of the Fire Police shall be sworn before the
Bellefonte Mayor.
§ 35-15. Conditions for removal of fire apparatus and equipment
from Borough.
At no time and under no circumstances shall any truck, fire apparatus or
other equipment belonging to the Bellefonte Fire Department be removed
from the Bellefonte Fire Department primary coverage area without the
consent of the Bellefonte Fire Department Chief, unless the same is
required to assist at a fire in a neighboring municipality, in which event the
following regulations shall apply:
B. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall submit a list of members of
such companies who are qualified to act as drivers and operators of fire
apparatus to Bellefonte Borough Council, Bellefonte Police Department,
Spring Township Police Department and State Police entities within the
Bellefonte Fire Department's jurisdiction.
A. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief shall annually appoint the Fire
Police Captain and those members who are eligible to be and wish to be
members of the Fire Department Fire Police. It shall be the primary
duty of those fire police officers to aid in traffic and crowd control and
to secure property as needed and to assist the Bellefonte Fire
Department Chief during emergencies as needed and any other duties
assigned by the Bellefonte Department Chief or the incident
commander.
B. Each fire police officer shall at all times be subject to and under the
order and direction of each respective Company Chief.
A. The Bellefonte Fire Department Chief and the company Chiefs are
jointly responsible for the instruction of all officers of the Bellefonte
Fire Department in such a manner that the exercise of good judgment
with respect to the authority granted in the preceding subsections will
be assured so that trucks, fire apparatus and other equipment not
§ 35-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-15
1:37
§ 35-16. Bellefonte Borough Council members ineligible for
election as Department Chief.
A member of Bellefonte Borough Council shall not be eligible for the
election to the office of Bellefonte Fire Department Chief of the Bellefonte
Fire Department during the term of office for which he/she has been
elected. No member of Bellefonte Borough Council who belongs to a
Bellefonte Fire Company in the primary response area shall be appointed
to the Bellefonte Fire Executive Committee and shall abstain from casting a
vote at a Bellefonte Borough Council Meeting related to a motion affecting
the Bellefonte Fire Department.
Chapter 39
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 35. Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 290.
§ 39-1. Establishment; supervision; inspectors.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the Borough is
hereby established, which Bureau shall be operated under the supervision
of the Department Chief, who shall designate an officer or member of the
Department as Chief Inspector of the Bureau, who shall hold his office at
the pleasure of Council. The Fire Chief shall also designate two Assistant
Inspectors, who shall be the Chief of the Logan Fire Company and the
Chief of the Undine Fire Company. The Fire Chief may also designate for
temporary service such other Assistant Inspectors as the business of the
Bureau may require.
§ 39-2. Duties of officers.
necessary to fulfill the fire protection responsibility at any given fire will
be available in reserve to meet other emergencies.
A. The officers of the Bureau of Fire Prevention may enforce the provisions
of the Bellefonte Borough Safety and Property Maintenance Code,
investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires, and
enforce all laws and ordinances of the Borough covering the prevention
of fires.
B. They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are
set forth in other sections of this chapter and as may be conferred and
imposed, from time to time, by law. The Fire Chief may delegate any of
his powers or duties under this chapter to the Chief Inspector or
Assistant Inspectors.
§ 35-15 BELLEFONTE CODE § 39-3
1:38
§ 39-3. Recommendation of additional ordinances.
It shall be the duty of the Department Chief to investigate and to
recommend to Council such additional ordinances, or amendments to
existing ordinances, as he may deem necessary for safeguarding life and
property against fire.
§ 39-4. Preparation of instructions and forms.
The Department Chief shall prepare instructions for the Chief Inspector and
his Assistant Inspectors and forms for their use in the reports required by
this chapter.
§ 39-5. Investigation of fires; reports.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention may investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of any fire occurring in the Borough by which property has
been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether
the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation should
begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire, and, if it appears to
the officer making such investigation that such fire is of suspicious origin,
the Department Chief shall be notified at the earliest reasonable time of
such fact. The ranking Fire Chief on scene shall then take immediate charge
of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by
law to pursue the investigation of such matters and shall further cooperate
with the authorities in the collection of evidence and the prosecution of the
case. Every fire shall be reported in writing to the Bureau within one week
after the occurrence of the same by the officer in charge of each company.
Such report shall be in such form as is prescribed by the Department Chief
and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and
circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, and such other
information as may be required.
§ 39-6. Access to premises.
The Department Chief, the Chief Inspector or any Assistant Inspector may,
in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Bellefonte Borough Safety
and Property Maintenance Code, enter a building or premises within his
jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which,
under the provisions of this chapter, he may deem necessary to be made.
§ 39-7. Records of fires.
The Department Chief shall keep, in the office of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same,
including statistics as to the extent of such fires, and the damage caused
thereby. Such record shall be made monthly from the reports made by the
Inspectors under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 39-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-8
1:39
§ 39-8. Annual report.
The annual report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made at the
first meeting of Council in February of each year. The report shall contain
all proceedings under this chapter, with such statistics as the Department
Chief may wish to include therein. The Department Chief shall also
recommend any amendments to this chapter which, in his judgment, are
desirable.
Chapter 62
HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 330. Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 62-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 10-3-2016 by Ord.
No. 10032016-03]
A board of historical architectural review is hereby established. Such Board
shall be composed of seven members appointed by Council, one of whom
shall be a registered architect or landscape architect, one a licensed real
estate broker, one the Borough Building Code Official, one a business owner
with their principal place of business in the Bellefonte Borough Historic
District, and three additional persons with a knowledge of or an interest in
the preservation of the District. The initial terms of the first five members
of the Board shall be as follows: one shall serve until the first Monday of
January 1972, two until the first Monday of January 1973, and two until
the first Monday of January 1974. Their successors shall serve for terms of
five years. The first of the additional appointments shall serve until the first
Monday in January 1980, and the second shall serve until the first Monday
of January 1981. The position of any member of the Board appointed in
his capacity as a registered architect, a licensed real estate broker or as
the Borough Building Code Official who ceases to be so engaged shall be
automatically considered vacant. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be
only for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 62-2. Function; organization and procedures; compensation.
The Board of Historical Architectural Review shall give counsel to Council
regarding the advisability of issuing certificates required to be issued
pursuant to the Act of June 13, 1961,7 referred to in § 330-1 and Chapter
330. For that purpose, the Board may make and alter rules and regulations
for its own organization and procedure consistent with this chapter, Chapter
330 and the laws of the commonwealth. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum, and action taken at any meeting shall require the
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq., the Municipal Historic Districts Law.
§ 39-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 62-2
1:40
affirmative vote of a majority of the Board. The members of the Board
shall serve without compensation and shall make an annual report of their
transactions to Council. The Board may, pursuant to appropriations by
Council, employ secretarial assistants, pay their salaries and wages, and
incur other necessary expenses.
§ 62-3. Secretary to Board. [Added 4-5-1971]
Council shall act as Secretary to the Board of Historical Architectural
Review.
Chapter 80
MAYOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council compensation — See Ch. 23, Art. I.
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:41

ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 12-7-1964 by Ord. No. 495 (Ch. 220 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 80-1. Compensation.
The compensation of the Mayor shall be payable monthly from the general
fund. No compensation shall be paid in any month to the Mayor if he has
failed to attend at least one regular meeting of Council during the month.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:43
Chapter 88
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 235,
Art. I.
§ 80-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 80-1
1:44
ARTICLE I
Manager
[Adopted as Ch. 222 of the 1979 Codified Ordinances]
§ 88-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough.
§ 88-2. Appointment and removal. [Amended 12-24-1963 by Ord.
No. 465]
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all the members of Council
and he shall serve at the pleasure of Council and he may be removed at
any time by a majority vote of all its members. At least 30 days before such
removal becomes effective, Council shall furnish the Manager with a written
statement setting forth its intention to remove him and the reasons therefor.
§ 88-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience
in, or his knowledge of, accepted practices with respect to the duties of
his office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the
Borough or of the state at the time of his appointment, but as soon as
possible thereafter he shall become, and during his tenure shall remain, a
resident of the Borough.
§ 88-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by Council, in
the sum of $5,000, conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties.
The premium shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 88-5. Compensation. [Amended 6-19-1967 by Ord. No. 574]
The salary of the Manager shall be fixed by Council as now provided by law.
§ 88-6. Powers and duties. [Amended 4-5-1971 by Ord. No. 673]
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough,
and he shall be responsible to Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and
duties shall relate to the general management of all Borough business
not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon other Borough
officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the
Manager shall include the following:
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-6
1:45
(1) He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as Council determines, a budget for
the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager or an officer designated by him
shall obtain from the head of each department, agency, board or
officer estimates of revenues and expenditures and other
supporting data as he requests. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to
Council.
(2) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by Council.
(3) He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of
the municipal departments as Council may from time to time direct.
(4) He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the
right to take part in the discussion, and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of Council or its committees.
(5) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
(6) He shall keep Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs, submit periodic reports on the condition of Borough
finances and such other reports as Council requests, and make
such recommendations to Council as he deems necessary.
(7) He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(8) He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(9) He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Borough.
(10)He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some
other Borough officer by statute.
(11)He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and
that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all the Borough's claims.
(12)He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough, and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code
and this Code, all supplies and equipment for the various agencies,
boards, departments and other offices of the Borough. He shall
keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or
§ 88-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 88-6
1:46
§ 88-7. Delegation of Mayor's powers and duties to Manager.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Manager, subject to
recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative and
nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 88-8. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall
designate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of Council.
when directed by Council, make a full written report thereof. He
shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of
Council, governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
(13) All complaints from the public regarding services or personnel of
the Borough shall be referred to the office of the Manager. He and
the Personnel Committee of Council shall investigate and dispose of
such complaints, and they shall report thereon to Council.
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:47

ARTICLE II
Independent Auditor
[Adopted 3-4-1974 by Ord. No. 718 (Ch. 226 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 88-9. Office of elected Auditor abolished.
The office of elected Auditor of the Borough is hereby abolished in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code. After the resignation
of the elected Auditor, pursuant to written notice tendered to Council by
such Auditor, this article shall take effect immediately.
§ 88-10. Independent Auditor appointed.
An independent firm of certified public accountants registered in the
commonwealth shall be appointed Independent Auditor of the Borough
to make an independent examination of the accounting records of the
Borough for each fiscal year and to perform all duties and exercise all
powers incident to the office of Independent Auditor as conferred upon such
Independent Auditor by law.
§ 88-11. Compensation.
The compensation of the appointed certified public accounting firm shall be
as established by Council by resolution.
§ 88-12. Annual appointment.
Council shall annually, after the year 1974, provide by resolution for the
appointment of an independent auditor in accordance with the Borough
Code.
§ 88-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-12
1:49

ARTICLE III
Building Code Official8
[Adopted 7-7-1975 by Ord. No. 748 (Ch. 1428 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 88-13. Establishment of office; appointment; term.
The office of Building Code Official is hereby created, and the person in
charge thereof shall be known as the "Building Code Official." The Building
Code Official shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of Council.
Council shall designate an acting Building Code Official to serve during the
temporary absence or disability of the Building Code Official.
§ 88-14. General duty.
It shall be the duty of the Building Code Official to enforce all laws and
ordinances relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal and
demolition of buildings and structures within the Borough.
§ 88-15. Right of entry.
The Building Code Official, in the discharge of his official duties and upon
proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure
or premises in the Borough at any reasonable hour after the property owner
has been given at least 24 hours' notice in writing, which notice states the
purpose of such entry, except that, where a building permit has been issued
by the Borough for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, repair or
alteration of any building or property as required by law, the Building Code
Official shall then have the right of entry at any reasonable hour without
prior notice. However, any property owner shall have the right to refuse
entry or access to the Building Code Official into any building or structure,
under which circumstances it shall be necessary for such Building Code
Official to secure legal process, in accordance with law, to effect the entry
or access.
§ 88-16. Liability.
The Building Code Official or any other official of the Borough acting in
good faith in the discharge of his duties, under the provisions of the Building
Code and within the scope of his official duties as an authorized official
of the Borough, shall not become personally liable to any person, absent
a showing of malice on the part of such official, for any act, omission
or occurrence resulting from the discharge by such official of the duties
prescribed under this article. The Borough shall defend any such official
in any suit, proceeding, case or action brought against such official as a
result of any act, occurrence or omission resulting from the exercise of such
official's duties under the Building Code.
8. Editor's Note: The terms "Building Official" and "Building Inspector" were revised to
"Building Code Official" throughout the Code at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-17
1:51
§ 88-17. Title of official.9
Wherever the term "Building Code Official" is used in this Code of
ordinances or other ordinances of the Borough, it means the regularly
and properly appointed Building Inspector of the Borough, who shall be
the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration
and enforcement of the applicable ordinances of the Borough or his duly
authorized representative. The terms "Building Official" and "Building
Inspector" may be used interchangeably with "Building Code Official" in the
enforcement of the ordinances of the Borough.
9. Editor's Note: The terms "Building Official" and "Building Inspector" were revised to
"Building Code Official" throughout the Code at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 88-17 BELLEFONTE CODE § 88-17
1:52
ARTICLE IV
Solicitor
[Adopted 4-19-1976 by Ord. No. 767 (Ch. 224 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 88-18. Election; compensation. [Added 6-6-1994 by Ord. No.
1089]
A Solicitor for the handling of the legal affairs of the Borough shall be
elected annually for a term, effective December 31, 1994, and annually
thereafter, at an hourly rate to be established by Council from time to time,
exclusive of legal costs, photostatic copies, charges or expenses arising out
of the performance of the duties of the Solicitor and costs of litigation.
§ 88-19. Duties.
The duties of the Solicitor shall be to advise the Borough and its various
departments and shall include the preparation of all ordinances and legal
documents, together with fees and charges for litigation.
§ 88-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-19
1:53
Chapter 97
PENSIONS
§ 88-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 88-19
1:54
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted as Ch. 292 of the 1979 Codified Ordinances]10
§ 97-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund, to be maintained and
provided for as set forth in the Amendatory Act of Assembly of July 10, 1957,
P.L. 676, as amended.11
§ 97-2. Eligibility for retirement and participation in fund.
[Amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 1127]
Upon the completion of service as a police officer of the Borough, after a
total service of not less than an aggregate of 25 years in the Borough and
on attainment of the age of 50 years, a police officer of the Borough shall
be eligible for retirement and to participate in the Police Pension Fund, but
subject to service, from time to time, as a Police Reserve, as provided for
in the Act of Assembly referred to in § 97-1. The retirement age may be
extended beyond 55 years, subject to the mutual agreement of the officer
and the Borough.
§ 97-3. Sources of revenue for Police Pension Fund. [Amended
12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 1127]
The Police Pension Fund shall consist of the following:
A. In accordance with the separate pension agreement negotiated on
December 19, 1996, prior to settlement of the arbitrated contract for
1997, the police officers, effective January 1, 1997, will contribute 3.9%
of their gross wages on all pay as defined in § 97-6.
B. As per the agreement dated December 19, 1996, the Borough will pay
into the Fund annually an amount of $11,200 toward lowering the
retirement age to 50 years with 25 years of service.
C. Any money or property, real, personal or mixed, which the Borough
may, by gift, grant, devise or bequest, receive for the benefit of the
Fund.
D. Any and all contributions that may be lawfully made by the Borough to
such Fund in accordance with the Act of Assembly referred to in § 97-1.
E. Receipts from investments of such Fund or any part thereof.
10.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1117, adopted 4-21-1997, adopted a new Police Pension Plan
in and for the Borough. Ordinance No. 1149, adopted 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 1161, adopted
2-28-2002; Ord. No. 1174, adopted 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 1202, adopted 6-5-2006; and Ord.
No. 080513-01, adopted 8-5-2013, amended such Plan. Copies of these ordinances and of
the Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the Borough Secretary.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:55
§ 97-4. Levy of tax to meet Borough appropriations.
There shall be levied, if need be, to meet the actuarial requirements of
the Police Pension Fund, a tax from time to time to meet the Borough
appropriations, but at no time exceeding 1/2 mill, which tax shall be kept
in a separate fund and used only for the purposes herein specified in
accordance with the Amendatory Act of Assembly of July 10, 1947, P.L.
1621, § 41, as amended.
§ 97-5. Fund to be managed by trustees.
The Police Pension Fund shall be managed by three trustees, who shall be
the Mayor, the President of Council and the Borough Manager. The duties of
the trustees shall be to receive and disburse all sums of money applicable to
the purposes herein set forth and in accordance with the requirements and
restrictions of the Act of Assembly referred to in § 97-1, two of such trustees
to constitute a majority to carry out any necessary transactions.
§ 97-6. Monthly pension benefits. [Amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No.
1127; 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 1169]
The Police Pension Fund shall meet all actuarial requirements for the
purpose of paying pensions to police officers fulfilling the requirements
hereof, which monthly pension benefits shall be 1/2 the monthly average
salary (as defined and set forth in Paylock vs. the Borough of West Mifflin,
No. 81 W.D., Appeal Docket, 1989) of each such police officer during the
last 36 months of employment, but computed and paid for from such Fund
and the sources of such Fund. However, compensation for other benefits
not associated with hours worked will not be included in the pension
calculation, nor will a pension deduction be made from these other
payments. These other pay benefits that are excluded from the pension
calculation are: retirement bonuses; sell-back of sick leave; uniform
maintenance fees; and any other sell-back of benefits at retirement or
termination that are not associated with actual hours worked.
§ 97-7. Refund of contributions. [Amended 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
941]
Upon termination of employment by a police officer prior to retirement,
any contribution made by him shall be returned to him with interest. The
interest rate to be paid on such contribution shall be established from time
to time by the trustees of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 97-8. Authority of Borough Manager.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to execute all forms and
documents required to establish the contracts and obligations necessary to
F. Any sum or sums paid to the Borough and inuring to the Fund from any
official or department of the commonwealth under any present or
future law pertinent thereto.
§ 97-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 97-8
1:56
fulfill the required benefits under the law and this article and to advise the
trustees of the payment of premiums and deposits as they may become due
and payable from such Police Pension Fund.
§ 97-9. Ownership of contracts and deposits.
The Borough shall be the sole owner of all contracts and/or deposits
referred to in this article except such values as may be vested in police
officers by act of assembly in accordance with the laws relating to the use of
certain funds secured by the Borough from the commonwealth for welfare
benefit purposes.
§ 97-10. Vesting provisions. [Amended 3-16-1992 by Ord. No. 1061]
Any police officer who, after having completed 12 years of total service,
for any reason leaves the employment of the Borough prior to retirement
age and service requirements shall be entitled to vest his or her retirement
benefits by filing with the Borough, within 90 days, a written notice of his
or her intention to vest.
§ 97-11. Benefits for widows and orphans. [Amended 3-16-1992 by
Ord. No. 1061]
Widows' and orphans' benefits are hereby made available under the terms
of the Police Pension Fund, all in accordance with the agreement of
November 17, 1986, between the Bellefonte Borough police officers and
Council. Widows and/or orphans qualifying for pensions of deceased officers
must meet the criteria outlined in the agreement of November 17, 1986.
Pension benefits will be paid in accordance with that agreement to
qualifying widows and/or orphans.
§ 97-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-11
1:57

ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
[Adopted 4-6-2009 by Ord. No. 040609-01]
§ 97-12. Election to change member benefits.
Bellefonte Borough ("the Borough"), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System ("the System"), hereby elects
to change its member benefits in that system as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, as amended, and does hereby
agree to be bound by all the requirements and provisions of said article and
the law, as the case may be, and to assume all obligations, financial and
otherwise, placed upon member municipalities by said amendment, as the
case may be. All references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated
between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board ("the Board") and
the Borough under the provisions of Article IV of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law.12
§ 97-13. Membership
Membership in the System shall be mandatory for all full-time municipal
employees of the Borough. Membership for part-time employees is optional.
The election by part-time employees to join the System must be made
within one year after the employee first enters the service of the Borough.
Membership for elected officials, employees hired on a temporary or
seasonal basis, and individuals paid only on a fee basis is prohibited.
Individual membership shall be effective as of the date the Borough entered
into the System or the date of hire, whichever is more recent.
§ 97-14. Credits for original members.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Borough from
original date of hire. Benefits provided to members in the Agreement dated
April 6, 2009 ("the Agreement") shall accrue based on all credited service
granted and earned in accordance with this section.
§ 97-15. Funding.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the Agreement between the Board and the Borough shall be made by the
Borough in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law
and Act 205 of 1984, the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.13
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 97-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-16
1:59
§ 97-16. Acceptance of agreement.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the System shall provide the
benefits set forth in the Agreement. The passage and adoption of this article
by the Borough is an official acceptance of said Agreement and the financial
obligations resulting from the administration of said benefit package. The
Borough hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or which
may be created due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in
the above-referenced Agreement.
§ 97-17. Authorization of pension plan.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Borough's municipal pension plan and it shall become effective and
specifically repeal Ordinance No. 1137 either immediately or on January 1,
2009, which is the effective date of the Agreement, whichever is later.
§ 97-18. File.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced Agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of the Borough in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
effective the first day of April 1964, with the revised plan structure reflected
in the Agreement effective the first day of January 2009.
§ 97-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 97-18
1:60
Chapter 103
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 97-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-18
1:61

ARTICLE I
Borough Planning Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 264, Secs. 264.01 to 264.04, of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances; amended in it entirety at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 103-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for the Borough of Bellefonte, Centre County, Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted (53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.).
§ 103-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, or until a successor is appointed
and qualified, except that the terms of office for three of the original
members shall be fixed at one year, two years and three years, respectively,
and the terms of office for two of the original members shall be fixed at
four years, to be established in a series of overlapping terms with one term
expiring each year, except for one year in which two terms shall expire.
§ 103-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.
§ 103-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:63

ARTICLE II
Nittany Valley Joint Planning Commission
[Adopted 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1166 (Ch. 264, Sec. 264.05, of the
1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 103-4. Creation, membership and terms.
Bellefonte Borough hereby joins with the municipalities of Benner
Township, Marion Township, Spring Township, and Walker Township to
create the Nittany Valley Joint Planning Commission as per the guidelines
set forth under Article XI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Fifteenth Edition of Act 247, as amended January 1, 2001. Each
participating municipality shall appoint two members. The term of each
member shall be two years.
§ 103-5. Purpose.
§ 103-6. Powers and duties.
The Nittany Valley Joint Planning Commission shall have the responsibility
to prepare a multimunicipal comprehensive plan for the five participating
municipalities of the Bellefonte area. To this end, the powers and duties of
the Commission are as follows:
A. The five municipalities of the Bellefonte area have come to recognize
that the issues associated with growth and development, such as, but
not limited to, traffic congestion, air and water pollution, and loss of
open space, are too large for any one municipality to deal with. They
further recognize that current growth and anticipated growth, if not
properly managed, will lead to the diminution of the region's quality of
life. They are concerned that current zoning requirements which call
for each and every municipality to provide for a full range of uses,
regardless of historic development patterns, is inefficient and
potentially destructive to the region's economic and social structure.
B. To this end, the five municipalities of the Bellefonte area hereby embark
on a course of action to implement multimunicipal planning. Bellefonte
Borough empowers the Nittany Valley Joint Planning Commission to
undertake the development of a multimunicipal comprehensive plan
that shall encompass the five municipalities of the Bellefonte area.
A. To prepare a multimunicipal comprehensive plan pursuant to Article XI
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
B. That, in the preparation of the multimunicipal comprehensive plan, the
members of the Commission shall represent the interest of their
respective municipalities and may cast one vote per municipality on all
matters that require action.
C. The recommendation of the Commission shall be advisory only.
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-6
1:65
§ 103-7. Withdrawal.
Any participating municipality may withdraw from the Nittany Valley Joint
Planning Commission after six months' formal notice. Formal notice must
be submitted in writing with the consent of the respective governing body
authorizing withdrawal from the joint planning commission. Upon receiving
notice that a municipality wishes to withdraw from the joint planning
commission, the governing bodies of the remaining municipalities shall
promptly schedule a meeting to consider whether the remaining
municipalities wish to continue with the joint planning commission.
Municipalities who choose to withdraw shall still be responsible for their
share of costs for the six-month formal notice period.
§ 103-8. Dispute resolution.
In instances where a dispute arises between two or more municipalities
as to the contents of the multimunicipal comprehensive plan or the
interpretation of this article, the joint planning commission may retain
the services of the Centre County Planning Commission or any other
organization that specializes in mediation. The parties involved in the
dispute shall be responsible for any costs incurred for mediation.
D. The municipalities may extend the power and duties of the Joint
Planning Commission by resolution of all participating municipalities.
E. The Commission shall be guided by the bylaws of the Nittany Valley
Joint Planning Commission attached to original Ordinance No. 1166,
adopted September 9, 2002.
§ 103-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 103-8
1:66
Chapter 108
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 97, Art. I.
§ 103-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-8
1:67

ARTICLE I
Establishment; Organization
[Adopted 12-24-1963 by Ord. No. 471 (Ch. 240, Secs. 240.01 to
240.03, of the 1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 108-1. Establishment; authority of Chief.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough. The Chief
of Police shall be the chief executive of the Department. He shall, under the
direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and have supervision
over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
§ 108-2. Subordinate classifications. [Amended 9-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 1103]
§ 108-3. Appointment of special policemen by Mayor.
Nothing in this article shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
A. Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
following classifications are hereby established:
(1) Sergeant.
(2) Corporal.
(3) Patrolman.
(4) Probationary patrolman.
B. The priority of authority among such subordinate classifications shall
be in the order above listed. The number of persons to serve in each of
such subordinate classifications on a full-time and/or part-time basis,
and the compensation of each, shall be as determined by Council from
time to time.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:69

ARTICLE II
Line Officers
[Adopted 1-9-1978 (Ch. 240, Sec. 240.04, of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 108-4. Defined.
A line officer is defined as any person holding the office of Chief, Captain,
Lieutenant or Sergeant in the Police Department of the Borough.
§ 108-5. Not included in collective bargaining.
Subject to the following provisions of this article, no line officer of the
Department shall be included for collective bargaining purposes in the
negotiation of wages, hours or other proper subjects of collective
bargaining between the police of the Borough and Council, as provided by
law.
§ 108-6. Benefits.
No line officer of the Department shall receive fewer or more restrictive
or lesser benefits than received and enjoyed by the other policemen of the
Borough who compose the collective bargaining unit of the Department,
except where such restrictions are fewer or lesser benefits which are the
result of prerogatives granted to police officers on account of seniority,
merit or other special circumstances. Such special circumstances shall
be spelled out in any agreement between the Borough and the collective
bargaining unit of the Department.
§ 108-7. Resignation from line officer position does not prevent
continuing employment.
In the event of the resignation of any line officer from his position, at the
option of Council, upon recommendation of the Mayor, and at the option of
the resigning line officer, such line officer may continue employment as a
patrolman or other designated police officer of the Borough.
§ 108-8. Effect on seniority rights.
This article shall not affect the seniority rights of any line officer of the
Department presently enjoyed by such line officer.
§ 108-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-8
1:71
Chapter 116
PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE
§ 116-1. Cooperative purchasing.
The Borough specifically adopts Section 2403 of the Administrative Code
of 1929,14 as amended by the Act of July 9, 1971, known as "Act 31,"
Cooperative Purchasing, and by this section requests authorization to
participate in purchase contracts of the Pennsylvania Department of
Property and Supplies and such other departments of the commonwealth
that permit political subdivisions to participate in or to purchase contracts
entered into by such departments. The Borough resolves that it shall be
bound by such terms and conditions as the appropriate department of the
commonwealth may require to purchase from such purchase contracts or
to participate in them and agrees to be responsible for payment directly to
the vendor under each purchase contract and understands that all prices
shall be F.O.B. destination. The Borough further, pursuant to such Act,
understands that it shall be exempt from statutory requirements governing
competitive bidding and the execution of contracts with respect to the
purchase of materials, supplies and equipment under Section 2403 of the
Act of April 9, 1929, as amended by the Act of July 9, 1971, Act 31.
Chapter 120
REAL ESTATE TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 508.
14.Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 633.
§ 108-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 116-1
1:72
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 1-21-1985 by Ord. No. 925 (Ch. 234 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 120-1. Fees.
Council shall pay the elected Tax Collector of the Borough, for the collection
of Borough real estate taxes, a flat fee of $2 for each real estate tax bill
collected for each taxable appearing on the tax duplicate or supplement
provided to him or her for the collection of real estate taxes in the Borough.
The term "taxable" includes individuals listed as joint tenants, tenants by
the entireties or tenants in common. Such taxables shall be treated as one
taxable for the purpose of this article.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1
1:73
Chapter 125
REFUSE COLLECTION DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 482.
§ 125-1. Establishment; function.
There is hereby established in and for the Borough a Refuse Collection
Department, whose function it shall be to collect, convey and dispose of all
garbage, ashes, refuse and rubbish, as defined in Chapter 482, Article II,
accumulated in the Borough, beginning November 1, 1957.
Chapter 133
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade trees — See Ch. 520, Art. I.
§ 133-1. Establishment; composition; duties and powers.
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby established in and for the Borough. The
Commission shall be constituted as provided by law and shall perform all
the duties and may exercise all the powers conferred by law upon borough
shade tree commissions.15
Chapter 159
WARDS
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
CENSUS — The federal census made decennially or such federal census as
is required by act or statute of the Congress of the United States.
GOVERNING BODY — Council.
WARD or DISTRICT — A subdivision of the Borough for the election of the
members of Council.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 47724.
§ 120-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 159-2
1:74
§ 159-2. Official ward boundaries.16
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 180
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mines, collieries and quarries — See Ch. 360.
Outdoor fuel-burning appliances — See Ch.
384.
Solid waste — See Ch. 482.
§ 180-1. Short title.
The short title of this chapter shall be "The Borough of Bellefonte Air
Pollution Control Ordinance of 1970."
§ 180-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
ACTUAL OPERATING CAPACITY — The total weight of all materials
processed in a source operation, including solid fuels, but excluding liquids
and gases used solely as fuels, and excluding air introduced for purposes of
combustion.
AIR CONTAMINANT — Any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious
liquid or gaseous matter, or any other materials in the open air, but
excluding uncombined water.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the open air of one or more air
contaminants or combinations thereof in such place, manner or
A. The ward lines and boundaries are hereby reordained and shall be
identified and numbered as follows, in accordance with the diagram
contained in Exhibit "A" of this chapter:17
(1) North Ward, No. 1.
(2) South Ward, No. 2.
(3) West Ward, No. 3.
B. The proper officers of Council shall do all acts necessary and proper to
implement this chapter.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
17.Editor's Note: The Borough of Bellefonte Voting Wards Map (Exhibit "A") is included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 159-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:75
concentration that they are or may tend to be inimical to the health, safety
or welfare of the public or in excess of the limitations established in this
chapter.
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICE — Any chemical, article, machine,
equipment or other contrivance, the use of which may eliminate, reduce or
control the emission of air contaminants in the open air.
AIR BASIN — The boundaries of areas within the Borough as specified by
the Board.
AMBIENT AIR — The air surrounding residents of the Borough as distinct
from air contaminants emitted from a specific source.
AMBIENT AIR QUALITY or AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS — Refers
to those terms as used in the Federal Air Quality Act of 1967 and in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Ambient Air Quality Standards
promulgated pursuant thereto.
ASH — Includes cinders, fly ash or any other solid materials remaining after
combustion, and may include unburned combustibles.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — An individual, firm or corporation
designated by a person, who shall be given authority to act in all matters
pertaining to the Air Pollution Control Board. Such authorization must be
transmitted in writing to the Board.
BOARD — The Air Pollution Control Board and its duly authorized agents.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The members of the Centre County Board of Health.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Bellefonte.
BREECHING — A passageway leading from a furnace to its chimney or
stack.
CHIMNEY or STACK — Any conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of any
kind whatsoever arranged to conduct flue gases to the open air. It does not
include breeching.
CINDERS — Particles not ordinarily considered as fly ash or dust because
of their greater size. These particles consist essentially of fused ash and/or
other solid matter.
CONDENSED FUMES — Minute solid particles generated by the
condensation of vapors from solid matter after volatilization from the
molten state, or generated by sublimation, distillation, calcination or
chemical reaction when these processes create airborne particles.
COUNTY — The County of Centre, Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC HEATING PLANT — A plant generating heat for a single-family
residence or for multiple-dwelling units in which such plant serves fewer
than three apartments. Under this designation are hot water heaters, stoves
and space heaters used in connection with the foregoing establishments
or to heat temporary buildings, such as those used by railroad and
construction industries. Similar equipment used in multiple-dwelling units
§ 180-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-2
1:76
other than herein described or in permanent buildings of commercial or
industrial establishments is not included under this designation.
DOMESTIC REFUSE-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any refuse-burning
equipment or incinerator used for a single-family residence or for multipledwelling
units in which such equipment or incinerator serves fewer than
three apartments.
DUST — Solid particulate matter released into the air, or carried in the air
by natural forces, or by any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment
or device, or from construction or demolition work, or by mechanical or
industrial processes, or emitted from any source other than a flue.
DUST-COLLECTING EQUIPMENT — Any device for separating dust from
the air or gas medium in which it is carried.
EQUIVALENT OPACITY — The opacity which obscures vision to a degree
equal to or greater than smoke of an equivalent Ringelmann number.
FLUE — Any duct, passage, stack, chimney or conduit through which flue
gases are emitted into the open air.
FLUE GASES — All gases which leave the combustion chamber by way of
the flue, including gaseous products of combustion, water vapor, excess
oxygen and nitrogen.
FLY ASH — Solid particulate matter capable of being gasborne or airborne
and consisting essentially of fused ash and/or partially burned material.
FUEL — Any form of combustible matter, whether solid, liquid, vapor or gas,
or combination thereof, intended for or used as a source of heat.
FUEL DEALER — Any person who sells or delivers solid fuel or fuel oil
directly to the consumer.
FUEL-BURNING OR COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler,
apparatus, stack, and all appurtenances thereto, used in the process of
burning fuel for the primary purpose of producing heat or power by indirect
heat transfer.
FUGITIVE DUST — Solid airborne particulate matter emitted from any
source other than a flue.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — A combustion device specifically designed for the
destruction, by burning, of solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous combustible
wastes.
INDEX — The summation of the products of the sampling time periods
multiplied by the concentration measured in those respective periods over
the total time interval specified. Indexes are expressed in "parts per millionhours,"
which is abbreviated "ppm-hours," or in RUD hours per 1,000 linear
feet.
§ 180-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:77
MULTIPLE-CHAMBER INCINERATOR — Any article, machine, equipment,
contrivance, structure or part of a structure used to dispose of combustible
refuse by burning, consisting of three or more refractory-lined combustion
furnaces in series, physically separated by refractory walls, interconnected
by gas passage ports or ducts and employing adequate design parameters
necessary for maximum combustion of the material to be burned.
ODOR — That property of an air contaminant that affects the sense of smell.
OPEN AIR — All spaces outside of buildings, chimneys, stacks or exterior
ducts.
OPEN FIRE — Any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the open air without passage through a stack or chimney.
OWNER — The person who has title to the premises, with or without
possession of the premises, or has possession, charge, care or control of the
premises, either as agent of the owner or as administrator, administratrix,
executor, executrix or guardian of the estate of the owner, or is the lessee of
the premises.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Material, other than uncombined water, which
exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard atmospheric
conditions.
PARTS PER MILLION-HOURS — The average hourly concentration of the
indicated pollutant times the number of hours constituting the indicated
period.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, corporation, institution, agency, authority, department,
bureau or instrumentality of federal, state or local government, or other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POTENTIAL EMISSION — The quantity of air contaminants which may be
emitted into the atmosphere from an air contamination source when such
source is operated at its maximum rated capacity. The potential emission
may be determined by sampling in a flue prior to the inlet of the air
pollution control device, if any, or by estimating the weight of emission by
performing a material balance (difference between process input weight
and output weight) for the process or operation, or by estimating the weight
of emission using estimating techniques approved by the Air Pollution
Control Board.
PREMISES — Any real property.
PROCESS WEIGHT — The total weight of all materials introduced into a
source operation, including solid fuels, but excluding liquids and gases used
solely as fuels, and excluding air introduced for purposes of combustion.
PROCESS WEIGHT RATE — A rate established as follows:
For continuous or long-run steady-state source operations, the total
process weight for the entire period of continuous operation or for a
typical portion thereof divided by the number of hours of such period or
portion thereof;
A.
§ 180-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-2
1:78
PROCESSES OR PROCESS EQUIPMENT — Any equipment, device or
contrivance for changing any materials whatever or for storage or handling
of any materials, and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, stacks,
etc., the use of which may cause any discharge of an air contaminant into
the outdoor open air, but not including that equipment specifically defined
as fuel-burning equipment or refuse-burning equipment.
RECONSTRUCTION — Any material change or alteration of any existing
fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or device from that physical
or operating condition for which approval was last obtained or the addition,
removal or replacement of any appurtenances or devices which materially
affect the method or efficiency of preventing the discharge of air
contaminants into the open air.
REDUCTION — A heated process, such as rendering, cooking, drying,
dehydrating, digesting, evaporating and protein concentrating.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
REFUSE-BURNING EQUIPMENT — A device specifically designated for the
combustion of waste material.
RINGELMANN CHART — A chart recommended by the United States
Bureau of Mines for grading the appearance, density or shade of smoke or
other air contaminants.
RUBBISH — Solids, including, but not limited to, rags, old clothes, leather,
rubber, carpets, wood, plastic, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, tree
leaves, yard trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and
other similar materials.
SMOKE — Small gasborne particles resulting from incomplete combustion,
consisting predominantly, but not exclusively, of carbon and other
combustible material.
SOILING INDEX — A measurement based on the reflectance properties of
deposited solid or liquid particles on a filter media.
SOLID FUEL — Any material in its solid state capable of being consumed by
a combustion process.
SOOT — Congealed particles consisting mainly of carbonaceous material.
SOURCE OPERATION — The last operation preceding the emission of air
contaminants when this operation:
For cyclical or batch unit operations or unit processes, the total process
weight for a period that covers a complete operation or an integral
number of cycles divided by the hours of actual process operation
during such a period.
B.
Where the nature of any process or operation or the design of any
equipment is such as to permit more than one interpretation of this
definition, the interpretation that results in the minimum value of
allowable emission shall apply.
C.
§ 180-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-2
1:79
STACK or CHIMNEY — Any conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of any
kind arranged to conduct flue gases to the atmosphere. It does not include
breeching.
STANDARD ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS — A gas temperature of 60° F.
and a gas pressure of 29.92 inches of mercury absolute.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, demolition or the prosecution of any
business, trade or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products,
cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
VAPOR — The gaseous form of a substance normally in the liquid or solid
state.
VARIANCE — Any exception to this chapter approved for a limited period of
time by the Air Pollution Control Board.
§ 180-3. Air Pollution Control Board; membership; terms;
compensation.
§ 180-4. Powers and duties of Board.
The Air Pollution Control Board shall have the following powers and duties:
Results in the separation of the air contaminants from the process
materials or in the conversion of the process materials into air
contaminants, as in the case of fuel combustion; and
A.
B. Is not an air pollution abatement operation.
A. There is hereby established an Air Pollution Control Board, to consist of
five members, all of whom shall be appointed by Council.
B. The term of the appointed members shall be for a period of three years.
However, of those initially appointed, one member shall be appointed
for a term of one year, two members for a term of two years, and two
members for a term of three years. Thereafter, appointments or
reappointments shall be for the full term of three years. Not more than
one member shall be an industry representative. The members shall
receive no compensation for their services as members of the Board.
The Board shall elect Council to act as Secretary of the Board. A
majority of all members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.
C. Council may, at its discretion, act as the interim Air Pollution Control
Board from the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance No. 663,
adopted December 7, 1970) until such time as Council appoints the
individual Air Pollution Control Board members.
A. It shall elect its own Chairman.
§ 180-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-4
1:80
B. It shall meet at the call of the Chairman or the written request of two
members or at the request of Council. The Board shall conduct not less
than four meetings a year.
C. It shall recommend to Council proposed changes in the rules and
regulations when new technical advances are developed which improve
this chapter.
D. It shall inform Council of enforcement problems that have been brought
to its attention.
E. It shall coordinate activities and recommend solutions to problems
brought to its attention by citizen groups or any member of the Board.
F. It shall conduct studies to improve present technology.
G. All hearings conducted by the Board shall be open to the public, and the
meetings shall be publicized beforehand. Any person may appear and
testify at a hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized
representative or attorney.
H. The Board shall conduct hearings where petitions are received for a
variance from this chapter. A fee determined by the Borough Council by
resolution, in cash or certified check, payable to the Treasurer of the
Borough, shall accompany the petition for a variance. After a petition is
filed with the Board, the Chairman may grant a stay of all proceedings
pursuant to this chapter pending the decision of the Board.18
I. All hearings must be conducted in the presence of a quorum. The
Chairman may appoint any member to conduct the hearing, and the
Chairman or member conducting the hearing shall have authority to
administer oaths and to do all things necessary and proper in the
conduct of a hearing.
J. At a Board hearing, the parties involved and the Chairman may appear
with counsel, file written arguments, offer testimony, cross-examine the
witnesses, or take any combination of such actions.
K. All testimony taken before the Board shall be under oath and may be
recorded stenographically, except that the Board may require
submission of exhibits. The transcripts of the record shall be made
available to any person upon payment of the fair charges therefor.
L. Any member conducting the hearing may issue subpoenas for the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the submission of any
relevant books and records.
M. The Board may grant or modify or deny petitions for a variance or may
revoke a variance already granted. The concurrence of any three
members of the Board shall be necessary for the decision described
above.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-4
1:81
§ 180-5. Variances.
N. The Board shall hold a hearing within 30 days after the filing of a
petition for a variance and shall make the decision within 30 days after
the conclusion of the hearing and shall notify all parties of record and
their counsel of its decision. The Chairman shall issue appropriate
orders requiring compliance with the decision of the Board. Any
decision of the Board rendered pursuant to this chapter shall be final
and any appeal therefrom shall be made to the Court of Common Pleas
of Centre County. Such appeal to the Court of Common Pleas shall be
made within 30 days after service of a decision of the Board. Such
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas may be made by any person
suffering legal wrong or adversely affected or aggrieved by the
decision.
O. Any party or the Chairman may petition the Board to modify or cancel
variances.
A. Any person may submit a petition to the Air Pollution Control Board for
a variance from the provisions of this chapter governing the quality,
nature, duration or extent of discharges of air contaminants. The
petition shall be filed with the Chairman, who shall act for the Board in
receiving such petition. The petition shall be accompanied by the fee
provided in Subsection D hereof and shall include the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the petitioner or other
person authorized to receive service of notices;
(2) The type of business or activity involved in the application and the
street address at which it is conducted;
(3) A brief description of the article, machine, equipment or other
contrivance or process involved in the application and the
emissions occurring therefrom;
(4) The signature of the petitioner or of some person on his behalf,
including, where the person signing is not the petitioner, the
authority of such person to sign;
(5) The section, rule or order from which a variance is sought;
(6) The facts showing why compliance with this chapter or an order
cannot be attained;
(7) The period of time and the reasons for which the variance is
sought;
(8) A description of damage or harm that would result to the petitioner
from compliance with this chapter or an order;
§ 180-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-5
1:82
(9) The requirements that the petitioner can meet and the date when
the petitioner can comply with all requirements, including the
abatement of emissions that will result;
(10) The advantages and disadvantages to the residents of the Borough
that would result from requiring compliance or that would result
from granting a variance;
(11) A statement as to whether or not any case involving the same
equipment or process is pending in any court, civil or criminal;
(12) A statement as to whether or not the subject equipment or process
is covered by a permit to install and operate issued by the Borough
and the number of such permit; and
(13) Such other information and data required by the Board in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Board may grant such variance if it finds that:
(1) The emission occurring or proposed to occur does not constitute a
hazard to public health or safety; and
(2) To require compliance with the provisions of this chapter from
which the variance is sought would not be in the public interest.
C. In determining whether a variance should be granted, certain factors
shall be taken into consideration by the Board. These factors include,
but are not limited to:
(1) Action taken by the applicant to control the emission of air
contaminants;
(2) The efficiency of any control equipment relative to that which
would be required to meet the standards set forth in this chapter;
(3) Any interim control measure;
(4) The effect of the emission on ambient air quality;
(5) The degree of control relative to similar facilities; and
(6) The age and degree of obsolescence of the facility in question.
D. A variance may be granted for a period of time not to exceed one year
and under such terms and conditions as are specified by the Board. The
variance may be renewed by the Board upon application made at least
60 days prior to the expiration of the term. A renewal application shall
be considered in the same manner as the initial petition for the
variance, and the petition for renewal of the variance shall be
accompanied by a fee determined by the Borough Council by resolution,
in cash or certified check, payable to the Treasurer of the Borough.19
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-5
1:83
§ 180-6. Visual air contaminants.
E. A variance may require a gradual decrease of emissions during the
variance period and periodic reports of the improvement program and
of compliance with the terms and conditions attached to the variance.
Such variance may be revoked or modified for failure to comply with the
terms and conditions thereof or for failure to make a periodic report if
such is required. Reports on the progress of the program shall be
required within such period as may be specified by the Board.
F. Nothing in this section, and no variance or renewal granted pursuant
hereto, shall be construed to prevent or limit the application of the
emergency provisions and procedures of this chapter.
A. General.
(1) The Ringelmann Chart, hereby made a part of this chapter by
reference, shall be used for grading the appearance, density or
shade of smoke. Devices approved by the Air Pollution Control
Board may be used to evaluate the appearance, density or shade of
smoke and may be substituted for the Ringelmann Chart.
(2) Where the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for
failure of an emission to meet the requirements of Subsection B
hereof, such subsection shall not apply.
B. Limitations.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be omitted into the open
air from any fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or
device, incinerator, internal combustion engine, premises, chimney
or stack air contaminants, the appearance, density or shade of
which exceeds No. 1 of the Ringelmann Chart or an equivalent
opacity. Except that:
(a) For fuel-burning and combustion equipment:
[1] Air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade which exceeds No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Chart, or an equivalent opacity, but is less than No. 3 of
such chart, or an equivalent opacity, for a period not to
exceed four minutes in any sixty-minute period.
[2] Air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade which exceeds No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Chart, or an equivalent opacity, but is less than No. 2 of
such chart, or an equivalent opacity, for a period not to
exceed two additional minutes in any sixty-minute period.
[3] The above exceptions shall not be permitted more than
three times in any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 180-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-6
1:84
§ 180-7. Particulate matter.
(b) For coke plants: When charging or pushing a battery of coke
ovens, air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade which exceeds No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart,
or an equivalent opacity, for a period not to exceed eight
minutes in any sixty-minute period.
(c) For heating and reheating furnaces:
[1] Air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade in excess of No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Chart, or of an equivalent opacity, for a period not to
exceed six minutes in any sixty-minute period.
[2] The above exception shall not be permitted more than
three times in any twenty-four-hour period.
(d) For air furnaces:
[1] Air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade in excess of No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Chart, or of an equivalent opacity, for a period not to
exceed six minutes in any sixty-minute period.
[2] The above exception shall not be permitted more than
three times in any twenty-four-hour period.
(2) Persons responsible for equipment covered by the exceptions set
forth in Subsection B(1)(a), (c) and (d) hereof shall maintain
records of the time when all such exceptions occur and the
duration thereof. Such records shall be submitted to the Board
upon request.
A. In general.
(1) The amount of particulate matter that may be emitted from any
fuel-burning, combustion or process equipment or device,
incinerator, internal combustion engine, premises, chimney or
stack is set forth in this section, provided that:
(a) If two or more existing fuel-burning units are connected to a
single flue, their total capacity rating shall be used to compute
the amount of particulate matter that may be emitted.
(b) The amount of particulate matter which may be emitted from
equipment or processes having an intermediate capacity rating
other than those shown in Subsection B hereof shall be
determined by linear interpolation.
(c) Process weight per hour is the total weight per hour of all
materials introduced into any specific process which may
cause any discharge of particulate matter. Solid fuels charged
§ 180-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:85
will be considered as part of the process weight, but liquid
and gaseous fuels and combustion air will not. For a cyclical or
batch operation, the process weight per hour will be derived
by dividing the total process weight by the number of hours
in one complete operation from the beginning of any process
to the completion thereof, excluding any time during which
the equipment is idle. For a continuous operation, the process
weight per hour will be derived by dividing the process weight
for a typical period of time by such time period.
(d) The process weight per hour referred to in this section shall be
based upon the actual operating capacity of the equipment,
and if such operating capacity should be increased by process
or equipment changes, the new actual operating capacity shall
be used in determining allowable emissions.
(e) If more than one piece of process equipment is connected to a
single chimney or stack, the total weight for all such processes
or pieces of process equipment shall be used in determining
the total process weight and the allowable rate of emission.
(2) In any air basin, when either a single source or multiple sources
cause the concentrations in the ambient air to exceed the
standards set forth by the Commonwealth Department of
Environmental Protection Air Pollution Commission, the Air
Pollution Control Board shall determine the source and its effect
upon the ambient air quality of the air basin, as well as the
effectiveness of the control methods employed at each contributing
source. Based upon this study, if the Board determines that the
source that causes the air quality standards to be exceeded is:
(a) Located within the Borough, the Board shall order the
institution of additional control measures as required at each
contributing source to meet the ambient air quality
requirements set forth in such standards; or
(b) Located outside the Borough, the Board shall notify the County
Board of Health, which shall request the cooperation of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to take
the necessary action to meet the ambient air quality
requirements set forth in such standards.
B. Limitations.
(1) Existing fuel-burning and combustion equipment. No person shall
cause, suffer or allow the emission of particulate matter from
existing fuel-burning or combustion equipment as measured in the
flue in excess of the following weights:
(a) Not more than 0.60 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of less than 10,000,000
BTU per hour;
§ 180-7 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-7
1:86
(b) Not more than 0.46 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 50,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(c) Not more than 0.40 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 100,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(d) Not more than 0.30 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 500,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(e) Not more than 0.26 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 1,000,000,000 BTU per
hour; and
(f) Not more than 0.20 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating in excess of 5,000,000,000
BTU per hour.
(2) New fuel-burning or combination equipment. No person shall
cause, suffer or allow the emission of particulate matter from new
fuel-burning or combustion equipment as measured in the flue in
excess of the following weights:
(a) Not more than 0.60 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of less than 10,000,000
BTU per hour;
(b) Not more than 0.46 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 50,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(c) Not more than 0.35 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 100,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(d) Not more than 0.26 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 500,000,000 BTU per
hour;
(e) Not more than 0.20 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 1,000,000,000 BTU per
hour; and
(f) Not more than 0.12 pounds for each 1,000,000 BTU input from
equipment having a capacity rating of 5,000,000,000 BTU per
hour.
(3) Incinerators. No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted
into the open air from any incinerator or to pass a convenient
measuring point near the stack outlet fly ash in the gases to exceed
0.125 pounds per 100 pounds per hour of rated capacity except
§ 180-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-7
1:87
that, for incinerators rated at four tons per hour or greater, the
emissions shall not exceed those shown in the following table:
Tons per Hour Pounds per Hour
4 10.0
8 15.0
12 20.0
18 27.0
24 33.0
32 40.0
40 48.0
(4) Process or process equipment. Except as provided in Subsection C
hereof, no person shall cause, suffer or allow the emission of
particulate matter in any one hour from any process or process
equipment in excess of the amounts shown in the following table:
Process Weight
Rate
(pounds per hour)
Process Weight
Rate
(tons per hour)
Rate of Emission
(pounds per hour)
100 0.05 0.6
200 0.10 0.9
400 0.20 1.4
600 0.30 1.8
800 0.40 2.2
1,000 0.50 2.6
1,500 0.75 3.4
2,000 1.00 4.1
2,500 1.25 4.8
3,000 1.50 5.4
3,500 1.75 6.0
4,000 2.00 6.5
5,000 2.50 7.6
6,000 3.00 8.6
7,000 3.50 9.5
8,000 4.00 10.4
9,000 4.50 11.2
10,000 5.00 12.0
12,000 6.00 13.6
16,000 8.00 16.5
§ 180-7 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-7
1:88
§ 180-8. Sulfur compounds.
Process Weight
Rate
(pounds per hour)
Process Weight
Rate
(tons per hour)
Rate of Emission
(pounds per hour)
18,000 9.00 17.9
20,000 10.00 19.2
30,000 15.00 25.2
40,000 20.00 30.5
50,000 25.00 35.4
60,000 30.00 40.0
70,000 35.00 41.3
80,000 40.00 42.5
90,000 45.00 43.6
100,000 50.00 44.6
120,000 60.00 46.3
140,000 70.00 47.0
160,000 80.00 49.0
200,000 100.00 51.2
1,000,000 500.00 69.0
2,000,000 1,000.00 77.6
6,000,000 3,000.00 92.7
C. Blast furnaces. Subsection B(4) hereof shall not apply when, during
irregular movements of the furnace burden, it becomes necessary to
open the automatic relief valve at the top of the furnace for safe
operation, provided that all such furnaces shall be equipped with
devices which present a graphic record of the time and duration of all
such irregular movements of the burden and of the time and duration of
all openings of the automatic relief valves. Such information shall be
submitted to the Board upon request.
A. The amounts of sulfur compounds which can be emitted into the open
air from any fuel-burning or combustion equipment or process or
process equipment are set forth in this section and in § 180-9.
B. In any air basin, when either a single source or multiple sources cause
the concentrations in the ambient air to exceed the standards set forth
by the Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection Air
Pollution Commission, the Air Pollution Control Board shall determine
the source or sources and their effect upon the ambient air quality of
the air basin as well as the effectiveness of the control methods
employed at each contributing source. Based upon this study, if the
§ 180-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-8
1:89
§ 180-9. Miscellaneous air contaminants.
Board determines that the source which causes the air quality
standards to be exceeded is:
(1) Located within the Borough, the Air Pollution Control Board shall
order the institution of additional control measures as required at
each contributing source to meet the ambient air quality
requirements set forth in such standards; or
(2) Located outside the Borough, the Board shall notify the County
Board of Health, which shall request the cooperation of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to take the
necessary action to meet the ambient air quality requirements set
forth in such standards.
C. All fuel-burning or combustion installations are limited to an emission
of not greater than 2.5 pounds of sulfur dioxide per 1,000,000 BTU of
heat input to the equipment.
D. No person shall cause, suffer or allow the emission into the ambient air
of process or process equipment gases containing more than 1,250
parts per 1,000,000 by volume of sulfur dioxide from any existing
source or 500 parts per million by volume of sulfur dioxide from any
new source; except that, in the case of existing sulfuric acid plants, the
limitation shall be 2,000 parts per 1,000,000 by volume of sulfur
dioxide.
A. Coke plants.
(1) When charging or pushing a battery of coke ovens, air
contaminants may be emitted of an appearance, density or shade
which exceeds No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart or an equivalent
opacity for a period not to exceed eight minutes in any sixty-minute
period.
(2) The water utilized for the quenching of coke, prior to use as a
quenching agent, shall be of a quality as may be discharged into the
nearest stream or river in accordance with the acts of the
commonwealth.
(3) During charging and pushing operations, all reasonable
precautions shall be taken to eliminate the emission of air
contaminants into the open air. Such precautions shall include, but
are not limited to, the prompt replacement of the involved closures
immediately following the conclusion of the operation, alignment of
all closures to prevent leakage, and sealing of all openings.
(4) All quenching towers shall be equipped with interior baffles.
B. Hydrogen sulfide. The water-quenching of slag at all slag handling
locations or processing operations is prohibited unless the water-
§ 180-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-9
1:90
§ 180-10. Incinerators.
quenching of slag is performed under conditions which prevent the
discharge of all hydrogen sulfide or other air contaminants into the
open air.
C. Windborne pollutants. No person shall cause, suffer or allow the
handling, transporting or disposition of any substance or material
which is likely to be scattered by the wind or is susceptible to being
windborne. No person shall operate, maintain or cause to be operated
or maintained any premises, open area, right-of-way, storage pile of
materials, vehicle, construction, alteration, demolition or wrecking
operation or any other enterprise that involves any material or
substance likely to be scattered by the wind or susceptible to being
windborne without taking precautions or measures to control
atmosphere pollution. No person shall maintain, conduct or cause to be
maintained or conducted any parking lot or automobile and/or truck
sales lot or cause or permit the use of any roadway under his control
unless such lot or roadway is maintained in such manner as to minimize
air pollution.
A. In general.
(1) This section shall apply to any incinerator used to dispose of refuse
or other wastes by burning and to the processing of salvageable
material by burning. As used in this section, the word "refuse"
includes, but is not limited to, garbage, rubbish, trade wastes,
leaves, salvageable material, agricultural wastes and other wastes.
(2) The burning capacity of an incinerator shall be the manufacturer's
or designer's guaranteed maximum rate or such other rate as may
be determined by the Air Pollution Control Board in accordance
with good engineering practice. In case of conflict, the Board's
determination shall govern.
(3) No residential or commercial single-chamber incinerator shall be
used for the burning of refuse for a period in excess of 18 months
after the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance No. 663, adopted
December 7, 1970), provided that this section shall not exempt any
person from being held in violation of any provision of this chapter
during this eighteen-month period. Notwithstanding the preceding
sentence, the Board may approve any other type of existing
incinerator if it is found that the emissions are not greater than
those allowed in this chapter.
(4) All new incinerators shall be multiple-chamber incinerators,
provided that the Board may approve any other type of incinerator
if it finds that the emissions do not exceed those allowed in this
chapter. All new incinerators shall contain appropriate smoke
density meters and carbon dioxide recorder instrumentation.
§ 180-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-10
1:91
§ 180-11. Control of odors from processing of animal, vegetable or
mineral matter.
(5) No person shall operate or cause or permit the operation of any
incinerator at any time other than between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. This restriction shall not apply to incinerators having
a refuse-burning capacity of five tons per hour or more.
B. Limitations.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted into the open
air from any incinerator air contaminants, the appearance, density
or shade of which exceeds No. 1 of the Ringelmann Chart or an
equivalent opacity.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer or allow to be emitted into the
atmosphere from any incinerator or to pass a convenient
measuring point near the stack outlet fly ash in the gases to exceed
0.125 pounds per 100 pounds per hour of rated capacity, except
that, for incinerators rated at four tons per hour or greater, the
emission shall not exceed those shown in the following table:
Tons per Hour Pounds per Hour
4 10.0
8 15.0
12 20.0
18 27.0
24 33.0
32 40.0
40 48.0
A. No person shall operate or use any device, machine, equipment or other
contrivance for the reduction of animal matter unless all gases, vapors
and gas-entrained effluents from such facility are incinerated at a
temperature of 1,600° F. for a period of not less than 0.5 second, or
processed in such a manner as determined by the Air Pollution Control
Board to be equally or more effective for the purpose of air pollution
control.
B. Effective devices and measures shall be installed and operated in a
manner such that no vent, exhaust pipe, blowoff pipe or opening of any
kind shall discharge into the open air or atmosphere any odorous
matter, air contaminants, dusts or any combination thereof which
creates odors or other nuisances.
C. Odor-producing materials shall be confined and handled in a manner
such that odors produced within or outside the plant from such
materials are controlled. Accumulation of odor-producing materials
resulting from spillage or other means is prohibited.
§ 180-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-11
1:92
§ 180-12. Transportation.
D. Odor-bearing air contaminants arising from materials in process shall
be confined at the point of origin so as to prevent liberation of odorous
matter into the workroom, and the confined air contaminants shall be
treated before discharge into the atmosphere as required in Subsection
B hereof.
E. Whenever air contaminants escape from a building used for processing,
handling or storage of animal matter in such a manner and amount as to
cause a nuisance or to violate this section, the Board shall order that
such building be tightly closed and ventilated in such a way that all air
contaminants are treated by incinerator or other means effective for
their removal or destruction before discharge into the open air.
A. In general.
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to trucks, buses,
automobiles, locomotives, boats and other vehicles.
(2) The Air Pollution Control Board shall report to Council periodically
relative to the problem of air pollution from all highway motor
vehicles and the current technological progress and scientific
research dealing with effective means of reducing or controlling
such pollution.
(3) This section shall not apply when the presence of uncombined
water is the only reason for the failure of an emission to meet the
requirements of this section.
B. Limitations. No person shall cause, suffer or allow visible emissions
from motor vehicles or from internal combustion engines of:
(1) Portable or stationary equipment for longer than 10 consecutive
seconds;
(2) A motor vehicle while the vehicle is stationary for longer than 10
seconds; or
(3) A motor vehicle after the vehicle has moved more than 100 yards
from a place where the vehicle was stationary.
C. Exceptions. The following exceptions to the provisions of this section
shall be permitted:
(1) Immediately after starting the engine of a diesel locomotive, boat
or other vehicle, air contaminants may be emitted of an
appearance, density or shade in excess of No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Chart, or of an equivalent opacity, but less than No. 3 of such chart,
or an equivalent opacity, for a period or periods aggregating not
more than four minutes during the first fifteen-minute period.
§ 180-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-12
1:93
§ 180-13. Open fires.
§ 180-14. Nuisances.
§ 180-15. Scheduled maintenance or breakdown of equipment.
(2) Immediately after starting the steam generator on a diesel
locomotive, air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade in excess of No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart, or of
an equivalent opacity, but less than of No. 3 of such chart, or an
equivalent opacity, for a period aggregating not more than two
minutes, but not thereafter.
(3) After a diesel locomotive, boat or other vehicle is ready for service
or in service, air contaminants may be emitted of an appearance,
density or shade in excess of No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart, or of
an equivalent opacity, but less than No. 3 of such chart, or an
equivalent opacity, for not to exceed one minute at each startup.
A. Open fires are hereby prohibited in the Borough except for recreational
purposes or where approval is granted by the Air Pollution Control
Board.
B. In the case of an open fire connected with refuse from a coal mine, coal
preparation plant or other coal mining or coal processing operation, in
the event that the owner fails to do so, the Board shall request the
assistance of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Bureau of Mines and Quarries, in extinguishing such
open fire.
A. No person shall cause, suffer or allow air contaminants to escape into
the open air in such amounts as to be objectionable or offensive to the
public or cause annoyance, discomfort or injury or be a health hazard.
B. Any violation of any specific section of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance.
A. In the case of a shutdown of air pollution control equipment for
necessary scheduled maintenance, the intent to shut down such
equipment shall be reported to the Air Pollution Control Board at least
24 hours prior to the planned shutdown. Such prior notice shall include,
but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Identification of the specific facility to be taken out of service as
well as its location and permit number;
(2) The expected length of time that the air pollution control
equipment will be out of service;
(3) The nature and quantity of emissions of air contaminants likely to
occur during the shutdown period;
§ 180-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-15
1:94
§ 180-16. Compliance testing.
(4) Measures such as the use of off-shift labor and equipment that will
be taken to minimize the length of the shutdown period; and
(5) The reasons that it would be impossible or impractical to shut down
the source operation during the maintenance period.
B. In the event that any air pollution control equipment or related facility
breaks down in such a manner as to cause the emission of air
contaminants in violation of this chapter, the person responsible for
such equipment shall immediately notify the Board of such failure or
breakdown and provide a statement giving all pertinent facts, including
the estimated duration of the breakdown. The Board shall be notified
when the condition causing the failure or breakdown has been
corrected and the equipment is again in operation.
C. Failure to report a shutdown for scheduled maintenance or a
breakdown, as required in Subsections A and B hereof, shall constitute
a violation of this section. Immunity from prosecution for scheduled
maintenance or breakdown shall be at the discretion of the Board.
A. If there is reasonable cause to believe that any equipment or process is
in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Air Pollution Control
Board may conduct such tests or may order the owner or lessee of the
equipment or process or his agent to conduct and complete, within a
specified period of time, such tests as the Board deems necessary or
desirable to determine whether or not the equipment or process is in
violation, and to submit the test results to the Board within 10 days
after the tests have been completed.
B. The responsibility for providing adequate openings, scaffolds and other
conditions pertinent to equipment and stack tests shall rest upon the
owner of the premises.
C. The owner or his authorized representative shall notify the Board of the
time and place of a test at least five days before the commencement of a
test. Reasonable facilities shall be made available for representatives of
the Board to witness the tests at the time they are made.
D. All tests shall be made and the results calculated in accordance with
approved test procedures. Approved test procedures are shown in
Appendix I following this chapter. All tests shall be made under the
direction of persons qualified by training and/or experience in the field
of air pollution control. If the Board is not satisfied with these tests, it
may request that new tests be made under the direction of one or more
of the following qualified professionals and that the results thereof be
certified by him:
(1) A registered professional engineer;
§ 180-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-16
1:95
§ 180-17. Information required.
Any person who operates or intends to operate an actual or potential
source of air pollution, as determined by this chapter, shall furnish pertinent
available information on the actual or potential extent and nature of
emissions from such sources into the open air of the Borough. Any
modification proposed to be made to such source shall be reported to the
Air Pollution Control Board prior to implementation.
§ 180-18. Permits and fees.
(2) A professional chemist accredited by the American Institute of
Chemists; or
(3) An industrial hygienist certified by the American Board of
Industrial Hygiene.
A. In general.
(1) This section shall apply to the issuance of permits and the charging
of fees for:
(a) All types of fuel-burning and combustion equipment or process
and process equipment except domestic installations;
(b) The sale, delivery or distribution of solid fuel; and
(c) Open burning.
(2) Installation permits, operating permits, periodic inspection
certificates, open burning permits and solid fuel dealers' licenses
shall be displayed in a conspicuous location and suitably protected
against damage.
(3) When it becomes necessary for maintenance purposes to perform
work or replace parts on any equipment which does not change the
capacity of such equipment or adversely affect the emission of air
contaminants therefrom, such work may be performed without
obtaining an installation permit.
(4) It shall be the duty of the owner of any fuel-burning and combustion
equipment or process or process equipment coming under the
jurisdiction of this section to report to the Air Pollution Control
Board within 30 days the permanent discontinuance or
dismantlement of such equipment.
(5) The approval of plans and specifications or the issuance of an
installation or operating permit or inspection certificate by the
Board shall not be held to exempt the owner of the premises from
prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-18
1:96
(6) Plans and specifications are not required for domestic heating
plants or domestic refuse-burning equipment. However, plans and
specifications are required for domestic incinerators.
B. Installation permits.
(1) No person shall construct, install, alter or operate any fuel-burning
or combustion equipment rated at 150,000 BTU per hour or more
input capacity, or any process or process equipment, or any
equipment pertaining thereto, for use within the Borough until he
or his authorized representative has:
(a) Filed, in duplicate, an application for installation and operating
permits on forms supplied by the Board;
(b) Submitted supporting plans and specifications for the fuelburning
and combustion equipment or processes or process
equipment, stack, structure, building or portion of a building
used functionally therewith, which plans and specifications
submitted as part of an application shall conform to the
following requirements:
[1] Plans shall be of professional quality and shall clearly
show, in adequate detail, the proposed arrangement,
location and size of all fuel-burning and combustion
equipment or processes or process equipment or devices,
including fresh air supply ducts, piping, valves, breeching,
stacks and chimneys, and shall show plan and elevation
cross sections of the fuel-burning and combustion
equipment or processes or process equipment and
construction thereof.
[2] Separate specifications shall be filed with each set of
plans.
[3] Specifications shall be in sufficient detail to clearly reveal,
when read in conjunction with the plans, the proposed
means for the control of the emission of air contaminants
to the open air and the extent of such control anticipated
in the design of the control equipment, together with such
conforming and supporting data as the Board may require.
The specifications shall include a statement showing the
calculated heating, power, process or other loads on and
the capacity of the equipment and the type and quality of
fuel used, if any.
(c) Provided such other pertinent data and information as may be
requested by the Board.
(2) The Board shall approve or reject the application within 10 days
after it has been filed and after the fee as provided in Subsection
B(5) hereof has been paid.
§ 180-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-18
1:97
(a) Before an installation permit is granted, the Board shall
require the person to make reasonable provision for facilities
necessary for sampling and testing purposes in order to secure
information that will disclose the nature and degree of air
contaminants that may be emitted from the fuel-burning and
combustion equipment or processes or process equipment or
device. If construction, installation or alteration is not started
within one year from the date of the installation permit and
diligently pursued thereafter, the permit shall become void and
all fees forfeited, unless an extension of time is secured, in
writing, from the Board.
(b) The application may be rejected by the Board if:
[1] The proposed construction, installation or alteration or the
expected emission of air contaminants does not meet the
provisions of this chapter; or
[2] The Board determines that any additional emissions into
the ambient air of the air basin would cause those air
quality standards adopted by the Commonwealth
Department of Environmental Protection Air Pollution
Commission to be exceeded.
(3) If any installation, or part thereof, of any fuel-burning, combustion
and refuse-burning equipment, or process equipment pertaining
thereto, does not conform to the installation permit issued, the
Board is hereby authorized to stop all work on the installation in
question and to seal the installation in question. Further use of
such fuel-burning or combustion equipment shall not proceed until
the Board is assured that the violation in question is corrected, and
that the work will proceed in accordance with the installation
permit. Such work shall not proceed until authority to do so is
secured in writing from the Board. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day that work of such construction,
installation or alteration continues in violation of the provisions of
this section.
(4) Upon failure of the owner or his authorized representative to make
such application and to obtain the required permits as provided in
Subsection B(1) hereof, it shall be the duty of the Board to seal such
equipment forthwith and to stop all work on the installation until
the requirements of this chapter have been met.
(5) Fees, payable in advance, for the issuance of installation permits
for all incinerators and domestic fuel-burning equipment, for the
examination of plans and specifications for fuel-burning and
combustion equipment or processes or process equipment and
appurtenances thereto (other than domestic), for the issuance of
installation and operating permits, for the examination of
applications as may be necessary, and for the issuance of an
§ 180-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-18
1:98
operating permit shall be as established by the Borough Council by
resolution, based on the following characteristics:20
(a) Domestic. All domestic incinerators and domestic fuel-burning
equipment rated at 150,000 BTU per hour input or more.
(b) Nondomestic. All other incinerators and fuel-burning
equipment, other than domestic, having the following rated
input capacities:
[1] One hundred fifty thousand BTU per hour up to and
including 2,000,000 BTU per hour.
[2] Two million and one BTU per hour up to and including
10,000,000 BTU per hour.
[3] Over 10,000,000 BTU per hour.
(c) Process weight.
[1] Less than 100 pounds per hour.
[2] One hundred tons per hour.
[3] One hundred tons per hour up to and including 200 tons
per hour.
[4] Over 200 tons per hour.
C. Operating permits.
(1) After completion of such construction, installation or alteration, the
Board shall be notified.
(2) If upon inspection it is found that the construction, installation or
alteration is in conformity with the application, plans and
specifications, and the tests, if required, indicate that the
construction, installation or alteration complies with all the
provisions of this chapter, the Board shall issue an operating permit
forthwith.
(3) If upon inspection it is found that the construction, installation or
alteration is not in conformity with the application, plans and
specifications, or if tests, as required, indicate that the
construction, installation or alteration does not comply with all the
provisions of this chapter, the Board shall seal the equipment
forthwith. The seal shall remain intact and the equipment shall not
be placed in service until all provisions of the approved application
have been met.
D. Periodic inspection certificates.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-18
1:99
(1) All fuel-burning and combustion equipment or processes or process
equipment except domestic shall be inspected periodically by the
Board.
(a) In the event that the equipment is found to be in an approved
condition, the Board shall issue a periodic inspection
certificate granting permission to continue operation of the
equipment.
(b) If for any reason the condition is such that the equipment
cannot be approved, the person responsible for the premises
shall be so notified, in writing, together with the reasons for
disapproval and the date by which the condition must be
corrected. If the condition is not corrected on or before such
date, the Board may seal the equipment until the condition
which was the cause of the disapproval has been corrected.
(2) At the time of each inspection, the person responsible for the
premises shall inform the Board, on forms supplied by it, of the
average amount of fuel consumed and the operating days for each
month of the previous year for each piece of fuel-burning
equipment.
E. Solid fuel permits. This subsection shall apply to all persons who sell,
deliver or distribute solid fuel for use in the Borough.
(1) No person shall sell, deliver or distribute solid fuel for use in the
Borough until he has obtained a solid fuel dealer's license.
Applications for the license required hereunder shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Board. The Board shall act upon the
application within 30 days after it has been filed and after the
proper fee, as provided for in Subsection B(5) hereof, has been
paid. Upon approval by the Board, the license shall be issued
forthwith. The person holding such license shall be responsible for
any fuel transported in any vehicle in violation of this chapter.
(2) All solid fuels sold, delivered or distributed for use in the Borough
shall be in conformity with the directives issued by the Board.
(3) The person holding a dealer's license shall display it upon his
vehicle or vehicles used in the transportation, delivery or
distribution of solid fuels, in a manner and form prescribed by the
Board.
(4) The Board, upon proper identification, may detain and inspect any
vehicle used on a public highway for the sale, delivery or
distribution of solid fuel, which vehicle is at a stop, and may
examine the fuel and ascertain its destination and other pertinent
information by examination of the weigh slips or otherwise.
(5) Fees for a solid fuel dealer's license shall be as established by the
Borough Council by resolution and required for the following:21
§ 180-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-18
1:100
§ 180-19. Rights to information.
Any record or other information furnished to the Air Pollution Control Board
concerning one or more air contaminant sources shall be only for the
confidential use of the Board in the administration of this chapter, unless
the person furnishing such information expressly agrees to their publication
or availability to the general public. Nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the use of such records or information by the Board in any
recognized court of law in the enforcement of this chapter or in compiling
or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the general condition of
the ambient atmosphere, provided that such analyses or summaries do
not identify, directly or indirectly, any person or reveal any information
otherwise confidential under this section.
§ 180-20. Inspections; right of entry.
(a) Fuel peddler, meaning any person who lawfully stores,
distributes, advertises, sells, offers for sale or delivers solid
fuel in quantities of less than 1,000 pounds in bag, basket or
bushel measures, and who operates only one vehicle per year;
(b) All other persons operating one or more vehicles per year; and
(c) Each additional vehicle per year.
F. Open burning permits.
(1) It is the policy of the Board not to issue open burning permits
unless the applicant can furnish documented evidence that
alternate methods of disposal are unavailable or impractical. Such
alternate methods may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Incineration in an approved permanent, temporary or portable
incinerator;
(b) Sanitary landfill; or
(c) Burial on site.
(2) When it has been shown that alternate methods of disposal are
unavailable or impractical, an open burning permit may be issued
by the Board in accordance with Board directives. Fees for such
open burning permits shall be per day per fire as established by
Borough Council by resolution.22
(3) Requests for open burning permits for periods in excess of 30 days
will not be considered by the Board.
A. In the performance of its duties, the Air Pollution Control Board may
enter any premises by contacting the person in charge or his
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-20
1:101
§ 180-21. Monitoring equipment.
The Air Pollution Control Board shall have the authority to install or order
any person or owner to install monitoring equipment or devices at the
expense of such person or owner on any premises in order to determine the
quantity and quality of air contaminants emitted into the open air.
§ 180-22. Notice or order.
designated representative where the Board has reason to believe that
air contaminants have been or are being emitted, or equipment,
operations or processes exist or are being constructed that the Board
has reason to believe are or will be an air contaminant source, or
for which the required permits have not been obtained. The Board
may inspect the premises and all devices, contrivances, processes or
operations thereon and the records, charts, readings and data
associated with such processes or operations thereon and the records,
charts, readings and data associated with such processes or operations
relevant to the emission of air contaminants.
B. No person shall refuse entry or access to the Board, nor shall any
person obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Board in its official duty.
A. Issuance of notice or order.
(1) Whenever a notice or order is given under any provision of this
chapter, the Air Pollution Control Board shall give such notice or
order in the manner provided in this section.
(2) The notice or order shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(c) Specify a reasonable time for performance of any act it
requires; and
(d) Inform the person responsible for compliance of his right to
appeal for a hearing as provided in this chapter.
(3) The notice or order shall be served upon the person responsible:
(a) By handing him a copy personally;
(b) By handing a copy to persons designated in Rule 1009 (b) (2) of
the Rules of Civil Procedure promulgated by the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania; or, if service cannot be accomplished in
this manner;
(c) By sending a copy to his last known address, by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, accompanied by a request for a
§ 180-20 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-22
1:102
§ 180-23. Equitable remedies.
§ 180-24. Existing rights and remedies preserved.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as impairing any right or remedy
now or hereafter existing in equity or under common or statutory law to
abate private or public nuisances. No court having jurisdiction to abate
any private or public nuisance shall be deprived of such jurisdiction for the
reason that such nuisance constitutes air pollution.
§ 180-25. Violations and penalties.
return receipt; or, if service cannot be accomplished in this
manner;
(d) By posting a copy in a conspicuous place in or about the
premises.
B. Emergency orders. Whenever the Board determines that an emergency
exists that necessitates immediate action to protect the health, safety or
welfare of the public, it shall, without prior notice, issue a written order
reciting the existence of the emergency and requiring whatever action
it deems advisable to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this chapter, the emergency order shall be effective upon
service and shall be complied with immediately.
C. Hearing. Any person or owner who is aggrieved by a notice or order
from the Board may request and shall be granted a hearing. The person
requesting a hearing shall, within 10 days from the date the notice was
served, file in the office of the Chairman a petition for a hearing on
forms provided by the Board. A time and place for the hearing shall be
set, and the petitioner shall be given written notice thereof. This
provision shall not apply to § 180-5 and Subsection B hereof.
A. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter, the Air
Pollution Control Board may request Council to petition the Centre
County Court of Common Pleas for an injunction to restrain a violation
of any provision of this chapter.
B. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this chapter shall be deemed
concurrent, and the existence or exercise of any remedy shall not
prevent the Board from exercising any other remedy hereunder at law
or in equity.
A. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation of the Commonwealth relating to air
pollution, or interferes with the Air Pollution Control Board in the
discharge of its official duties, shall be punished as provided in Chapter
1, General provisions, Article III, of this Code. All prosecutions shall be
brought in the name of the Borough.
§ 180-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-25
1:103
Chapter 185
ALARMS
B. Whenever any Act of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth
provides a penalty for a violation of any rule or regulation promulgated
under the Act of August 24, 1951 (the Local Health Administration
Law), P.L. 1304, as amended,23 other than as provided in this section,
such Act shall immediately become effective with respect to this
chapter.
23.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 12001 et seq.
§ 180-25 BELLEFONTE CODE § 180-25
1:104
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 1029 (Ch. 1066 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether
an independent contractor or not, who or which provides service and/or
alarm systems to any owner within the Borough.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any machine, apparatus, device, system or monitor
which, when activated, emits an audible signal beyond the confines of
the building or part thereof in which it is located or generates a signal
which is monitored by any Borough authority or the Fire Department or
an emergency department, causing an officer of the Borough, the Fire
Department and/or an emergency department to respond to such signal by
going to its location.
BOROUGH OFFICERS — Includes volunteer firemen, professional and
volunteer emergency personnel, police officers, Borough officials and any
other official or employee of the Borough of Bellefonte in pursuit of his or
her official duties.
CALENDAR ONE-HALF YEAR — Those periods of the year from January 1
to June 30, inclusive, and from July 1 to December 31, inclusive.
FALSE ALARM — The transmission or emission of a signal from an alarm
system which is ultimately received by the authorities of the Borough and/
or any fire or emergency service based in the Borough. Such an alarm is a
false alarm if, as a result of the reception of any transmission or emission
of the aforesaid signal, Borough officers or personnel are dispatched to the
location of the alarm systems and the officers and personnel, when arriving
at the alarm location, discover that such alarm has been set off needlessly.
OWNER — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity using,
owning, leasing and/or maintaining any fire, burglar, intrusion or
emergency alarm at, upon, within or without any building or structure or
part thereof in the Borough, whether such building or part thereof is owned
or leased by such owner.
§ 185-2. Service fees. [Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1178]
A. A service fee in an amount set by Borough Council resolution per false
alarm is hereby established and shall be charged to any owner or the
agent of any owner of an alarm system located in the Borough whose
alarm system generates a false alarm, as defined in § 185-1, more than
twice during any calendar half year. Each false alarm after the second
during such calendar half year shall incur a charge set by Borough
Council resolution.24
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:105
§ 185-3. Appeals.
Any owner or agent aggrieved by the imposition of any service fee by the
Borough Manager may file a written appeal to Council no later than 10 days
after the imposition of such fee. Council shall hear any such appeal at its
next regular public meeting under and pursuant to the terms of the Local
Agency Law.25 The decision of Council in all such cases shall be reduced to
writing and tendered to all interested parties by ordinary mail. The decision
of Council shall be final.
§ 185-4. Failure to pay fees.
No person against whom a service charge is imposed shall fail to make
payment of such charge within 30 days of the imposition of such charge.
§ 185-5. Responsibilities of Borough Manager.
The Borough Manager is hereby directed to maintain a record of all false
alarms occurring in the Borough from alarm systems located in the
Borough, together with the names and addresses of the persons responsible
for such false alarms. Such information may be used by the Borough when
it considers granting any license which may be required in the future, if the
Borough passes legislation requiring the licensing of alarm systems and/
or agents installing, selling, leasing or maintaining alarm systems in the
Borough.
§ 185-6. Violations and penalties.
B. Service fees may be imposed only if a Borough officer is actually
dispatched to the location of the alarm system. The records of the
Borough Dispatcher shall be prima facie evidence of the actual dispatch
of Borough officers.
C. The Borough Manager shall impose and collect all service fees due
hereunder against the person responsible for the false alarm.
A. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $50 together with costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, shall be imprisoned not more than three
days.
B. In addition to the penalties prescribed above, the Borough may collect
all unpaid service fees, including a collection fee established by
Borough Council, reasonable attorney's fees and costs in the same
manner as municipal claims are now collected, including the filing of a
lien for the collection of the same.26
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 185-6
1:106
Chapter 193
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noisy animals — See § 372-11.
§ 185-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:107

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 608 of the 1979 Codified Ordinances]
§ 193-1. Keeping of farm animals. [Amended 8-4-1980 by Ord. No.
846; 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152012-001; 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
08012016-01; 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 060418-01]
No person shall keep any bovine, horse, pig, hog, swine, mule, sheep,
turkey, roosters, guinea fowl, or other farm animal or maintain any pigpen,
hogpen, stable, kennel or other similar structure or building for the care
and housing of such animals in the Borough. This section shall not apply
to a farm, as defined in§ 575-150 of Chapter 575, Zoning, or to any validly
existing nonconforming use, or to any veterinary or animal hospital or
similar operation legally existing and presently operating in the Borough.
Beekeeping is a permitted activity in the Borough for the production of
honey and/or beeswax. The keeping of backyard chickens is permitted in
accordance with Article II of this chapter.
§ 193-2. Dogs at large. [Amended 10-19-1998 by Ord. No. 1135]
No owner of any dog, whether or not such dog is licensed, shall allow or
permit such dog to run at large at any time, either upon any of the streets,
alleys or public grounds in the Borough or upon the property of another,
unless such dog is accompanied by and under the immediate control of the
owner, custodian or keeper. "Under the immediate control" means that dogs
shall be under leash and not interfering with or creating an obstacle for
pedestrians using public streets and sidewalks.
§ 193-3. Seizure of dogs at large.
It shall be the duty of every police officer of the Borough to seize and
detain any dog, whether licensed or not, found running at large contrary to
§ 193-2. If any such dog bears a current license tag, it shall be detained and
properly kept and fed, and immediate notice, either in person or by certified
mail, shall be given to the person in whose name the license was procured,
or his agent, to claim such dog within 10 days. If such dog is claimed
within such period of time, the owner or his agent shall pay all reasonable
expenses incurred by reason of its detention, whereupon such dog shall be
turned over to such owner or his agent. If any dog found running at large
does not bear the current license tag, it shall be the duty of every police
officer of the Borough to seize such dog and, upon satisfactory evidence
that such dog has not been licensed as required by law, to kill such dog in a
humane manner, after trying to find the owner thereof.
§ 193-4. Dog feces. [Amended 4-1-1985 by Ord. No. 929]
A. No person owning or having possession, care, custody or control of any
dog within the Borough shall knowingly or unknowingly allow or permit
any such dog to commit any nuisance and, more particularly and
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-4
1:109
§ 193-5. Cats at large; noise by cats. [Amended 7-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 1152]
without limiting the generality thereof, allow any dog to excrete any
feces upon any public property, including any sidewalk, street, road,
lane or other public thoroughfare of the Borough, any public building
or any public park or playground, or in or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of such property. Negligence of
the owner or possessor of any such dog excreting feces upon any
public property of the Borough or upon any private property within the
Borough shall not constitute a defense to a violation of this section.
B. Any person owning, possessing or having the care, custody or control of
a dog shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog and
dispose of the same by any sanitary method. Disposal shall not be made
on any public property of the Borough nor on any private property
without the permission of the owner of such property. Disposal of any
such feces in any public receptacle for trash or refuse upon the public
property of the Borough is hereby expressly prohibited, unless such
feces is enclosed in a sealed plastic bag. Further, any person owning,
possessing or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall have a
positive duty to take any reasonable and proper action to prevent any
such dog from committing a nuisance in, on or upon any public property
of the Borough or upon any private property without the permission of
the owner of such property. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation
of this section.
C. If the owner, possessor or person having the care, custody or control of
any dog, which dog excretes feces on public property of the Borough or
on any private property without permission of the owner, immediately
removes and disposes of all feces so deposited by such dog in
accordance with Subsection B hereof, such owner, possessor or person
shall have an absolute defense to any violation charged under this
section.
A. No person shall knowingly keep or harbor any cat which habitually
cries or howls.
B. No person shall allow a cat to habitually roam unwelcome onto
someone else's property. Any cat which scratches, digs or defecates
upon any lawn, tree, shrub, plant, building or any other public or
private property other than the property of the owner or person in
charge or control of such animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
C. Upon the first and second offenses, the cat owner or keeper shall be
given written warning notices by personal service or certified mail,
return receipt requested. It shall be a condition precedent to any
enforcement proceeding to show that two written warnings were issued
to the cat owner or keeper within the previous twelve-month period.
§ 193-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 193-6
1:110
§ 193-6. Enforcement; violations and penalty. [Amended 7-24-2000
by Ord. No. 1152]
A. The ordinance enforcement officer or any police officer or animal
control officer empowered to enforce the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Borough shall
hereby be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, be subject to a
civil fine as set forth in the schedule below, plus all costs of prosecution,
including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
municipality. For purposes of clarification, a first citation for a violation
of § 193-5 will not be issued until after the cat owner has received two
written warnings within the previous twelve-month period.
C. Range of fines.
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third and subsequent offenses: $600.
§ 193-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-6
1:111

ARTICLE II
Chickens
[Adopted 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 060418-01]
§ 193-7. Keeping of chickens.
The keeping of chicken hens is permitted at owner-occupied one-family
dwellings provided all of the following conditions are met:
§ 193-8. Chickens at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any chickens to allow the
same to run at large upon any of the common thoroughfares, sidewalks,
passageways, play areas, parks, streets, alleys, or public highways or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public or private
property without an approved coop and run in the Borough. Any chicken not
contained within an approved coop or run shall be deemed "at large."
A. No more than four chicken hens shall be kept per one-family dwelling.
B. No person shall keep a rooster in the Borough.
C. All chicken hens shall be housed in a roofed coop that is secure and
enclosed in a way that contains the chickens. Coops may be mobile as
long as their placement is in accordance with all designated setbacks.
D. The coop shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an adjacent
lot.
E. The minimum coop size shall be three square feet per chicken. The
maximum overall coop size shall not exceed 20 square feet.
F. An outside run is permitted when attached to the coop.
G. If an outside run is provided, it shall be no bigger than 10 square feet
per chicken and shall be enclosed in a way that contains the chickens.
Runs may be mobile as long as their placement is in accordance with all
designated setbacks.
H. The outside run shall not be within 30 feet of any main building on an
adjacent lot.
I. All coops and runs are subject to setbacks for accessory structures.
J. All coops and runs shall be screened from the view at ground level from
adjacent lots by using fencing, landscaping, or a combination thereof.
K. A zoning permit shall be required for keeping chicken hens, coops, and
outside runs. The fee shall be established by resolution of Borough
Council and updated from time to time. The permit shall be for a threeyear
period and renewable, provided that three or more violations have
not occurred during the permit period.
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-9
1:113
§ 193-9. Sanitary requirements.
All owner or owners of chickens within the limits of the municipality are
hereby required to house the same at all times under sanitary conditions
so that the keeping of chickens shall not become either a public or private
nuisance. The following provisions apply:
§ 193-10. Composting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spread or cause to be spread or
deposited upon any ground or premises within the Borough any chicken
manure. However, chicken manure may be composted on the property
where the chickens are housed and the composted material then applied to
gardens, yards, or other yards with written permission.
§ 193-11. Slaughtering prohibited.
No person shall slaughter any chicken in the Borough.
§ 193-12. Proper storage of feed.
All feed, water and other items associated with the keeping of chickens
shall be protected in a way that prevents infestation by rats, mice, or
other rodents or vectors. Failure to keep all feed, water and other items
associated with the keeping of chickens in a clean and sanitary condition
constitutes a violation of this article.
§ 193-13. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or owners of any chicken or chickens kept within the limits of
this municipality violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 per day nor more than $600 per day and costs of
prosecution at the discretion of said Magistrate and, in default of payment
A. All chicken feces accumulated on private property shall be removed by
using the approved sanitary method of double-bagging and placement
in the trash for collection, unless composted as provided for in § 193-10
below.
B. Chicken feces on private property shall not be allowed to accumulate to
the degree that they become a public health nuisance or hazard. In
cases where chicken feces do accumulate on private property, the
Nuisance Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee may conduct
an investigation, after which the accumulation may be declared a public
health hazard or nuisance and the owner shall be ordered to remove
and dispose of the accumulated feces in an approved manner. The order
to remove such accumulated feces shall be given personally to the
owner or shall be sent by registered mail, and the owner shall be given
a period of 48 hours from the date and time of receipt of the order to
clean the property and remove the accumulated feces.
§ 193-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 193-13
1:114
of such fine and costs, shall be committed to the county jail for not more
than five days. In addition, three or more violations shall be grounds for
terminating the zoning permit and the keeping of chickens. Failure to pay
fines and/or costs of prosecution will result in termination of the zoning
permit for keeping chickens. For each day a violation exists, a new citation
or fine may be issued. This penalty for violation of provisions on chickens
shall take precedence over § 193-6, Enforcement; violations and penalty.
§ 193-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-13
1:115
Chapter 210
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 210-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general welfare of the
community by regulating the demolition of structures on property not
reviewed by the Historical Architectural Review Board.
§ 210-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Bellefonte.
COUNCIL — The governing body of Bellefonte Borough.
DEMOLITION — The act of dismantling, destroying, weakening or removing
a structure to a point that it can no longer stand without support, is left in
ruin, or is taken down to the ground by the use of heavy equipment.
§ 210-3. Permit required; exception.
§ 210-4. Permit application; fee; issuance or denial; appeal.
[Amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1178]
A. After the effective date of this chapter, no person shall cause a structure
to be demolished without first obtaining a permit therefor.
B. If a structure is less than 150 square feet in floor area, a waiver of this
procedure can be obtained through the Building Code Official.
A. Applications for demolition shall be obtained from the Borough offices
and shall be on a form prescribed by Council. Changes may be made
from time to time in both form and content of such applications.
B. Upon receipt of the completed application, fees, as established by
resolution of Borough Council, shall apply.27
C. The Borough Manager shall place the application on the Council
agenda for review and comment. If Council deems it to be necessary, it
may require the Borough Engineer to review the application.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 210-4
1:116
Chapter 235
CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 210. Safety and Property Maintenance Code — See
Ch. 425.
D. If review by the Borough Engineer is required by Council, an engineer
review fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time of review. The
amount of the fee will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
E. Within 45 days of receipt of the application, Council shall make a
decision to grant or deny the permit for demolition, and notice thereof
shall be given to the applicant.
F. If Council approves the application for a demolition permit, the Building
Code Official may issue the permit after all related fees have been paid.
If the application is denied, Council or its agent shall give written notice
to the applicant within five days after the decision. Any party aggrieved
by Council's decision may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Centre County.
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:117

ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Codes
[Adopted 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 1187 (Ch. 1476 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 235-1. Adoption by reference.
The Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401 to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of the
Borough of Bellefonte.
§ 235-2. Administration and enforcement.
§ 235-3. Board of Appeals.
A Centre County Board of Appeals shall be established by the Centre
County Commissioners in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein.
§ 235-4. Severability of Building Code.
A. The Borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
B. Administration and enforcement of the code within the Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the
governing body of the Borough from time to time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
Municipal Building Code Official to act on behalf of the Borough.
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this act through an
intermunicipal agreement.
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this act on behalf of the
Borough.
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous-use structures.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-4
1:119
§ 235-5. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Uniform Construction Code
shall be established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
A. All Building Code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code, shall
continue in full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to
equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended
from time to time.
B. All Building Code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 235-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 235-5
1:120
Chapter 238
CONVERSION OR REPARATIVE THERAPY
§ 238-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONVERSION THERAPY or REPARATIVE THERAPY — Any treatment that
aims to convert one's sexual orientation or gender expression, including
efforts to change behaviors or gender expression or to eliminate or reduce
sexual or romantic attraction or appeal towards individuals of the same
sex. The term does not include treatment or therapies designed to provide
acceptance, support and understanding for the facilitation of an individual's
coping, social support and identity exploration and development, including
sexual orientation-neutral interventions to prevent or address unlawful
conduct or unsafe sexual practices without seeking to change sexual
orientation or gender identity or to provide assistance to those individuals
undergoing gender transition.
MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDER — An individual who is licensed, registered
or certified under Pennsylvania law to provide mental health services,
including, but not limited to, a medical, doctorial or osteopathic physician,
including one who specializes in psychiatry; nurse, psychologist, social
worker, marriage and family therapy or professional counselor or any other
person who provides counseling, mental health or behavioral health
services as a part of the person's professional training or practice under
Pennsylvania law or rule or any student, intern, volunteer or any other
person assisting or acting under the direction or guidance of any of these
professionals, as well as any unlicensed individual or those licensed in other
jurisdictions.
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age.
§ 238-2. Prohibited acts.
Sexual orientation, gender identity or expression conversion or reparative
therapy is prohibited. No mental health professional, licensed or unlicensed
as described in § 238-1 above, shall engage in the Borough of Bellefonte in
sexual orientation or gender conversion or reparative therapy involving a
minor.
§ 238-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
before a District Judge of appropriate jurisdiction, be liable to pay costs of
prosecution and a fine of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000. Each
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 244
§ 235-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:121
CURFEW
§ 244-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 244-2. Purpose and findings.
This chapter is an updating of the Borough Curfew Ordinance of July 26,
1943, prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community standards,
regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night, effectively
enforced, taught in the homes, internalized and adhered to for generations,
all for the good of minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility and
for the public good, safety and welfare.
A. Council finds that the curfew meets a very real local need, has been
over the years a significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency
and should be updated and amplified in the light of the Borough's local
situation and facts, including the following: The Borough is the oldest
community in Centre County, with clearly defined boundaries. It has
near its Police Station a central business district. It is a residential
community. After 9:00 p.m. in this quiet community, as its people say,
the sidewalks are rolled up. This community sense of the proper time
for cessation of outdoor activities by minors on the streets is reflected
in the curfew hours declared by this chapter. Consideration is also given
to the danger hours for nocturnal crime and for accumulation of minors
with potential risks incident to immaturity.
B. Council finds that the Borough is not overcrowded. Population density,
as reflected in the Borough Comprehensive Plan, varies by
neighborhoods. The total area is given in acres. Streets occupy acres,
acres are devoted to public and semipublic uses, residential land use
predominates and single-family dwellings occupy the largest portion of
the residential area. Adequate indoor living space permits minors in the
Borough to occupy their time healthfully. Public parks and the public
swimming pool maintained by the Borough cease operation at 9:00
p.m., prevailing time. Commercial recreational facilities are almost
nonexistent, and there is little or nothing for minors to do outdoors but
roam the streets after the curfew hours which this chapter declares.
C. The Borough is a stable family community. Parental responsibility for
the whereabouts of children is the norm. Legal sanctions to enforce
such responsibility have had a demonstrated effectiveness over the
years, inasmuch as parental control increases the likelihood of a
reduction in the incidence of juvenile delinquency. Therefore, there is a
continuing need for the nocturnal curfew for minors which has achieved
and will continue to achieve under local conditions the purposes
hereinbefore stated.
§ 238-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 244-3
1:122
§ 244-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to, but not including
the day of, the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear that 17 or less
years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of
age." As another example, 11 or less years of age means "under 12 years of
age."
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years or, in equivalent phrasing
often herein employed, any person 17 years of age or under.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
PREVAILING TIME — The prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern
standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, generally observed at that
hour by the public in the Borough; prima facie, the time then observed in
the Borough administrative offices and Police Station.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or
going home.
STREET — A way or place of any nature open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk
thereof, for pedestrian travel. The word "street" includes the legal right-ofway,
including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the
sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds
found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" applies
irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether alley, avenue,
court, road or otherwise.
§ 244-4. Curfew hours.
No person 17 or less years of age (under 18) shall be or remain in or upon
any street in the Borough at night during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and
beginning:
A. As a natural or adoptive parent;
B. As a legal guardian;
C. As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
D. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
A. At 9:00 p.m., for minors 11 or less years of age;
B. At 9:30 p.m., for minors 12 and 13 years of age; and
C. At 10:00 p.m., for minors 14 or more years of age.
§ 244-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-5
1:123
§ 244-5. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a Borough street during the
nocturnal hours for which § 244-4 is intended to provide the maximum limits
of regulation and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and their
fellow citizens, shall not, however, be considered in violation of § 244-4:
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor;
B. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take such parent's place in accompanying such minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area;
C. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by first delivering to Police Communications
Center personnel at the Municipal Building on West Lamb Street,
where and by whom high priority messages to the Mayor are regularly
received, a written communication, signed by such minor and
countersigned, if practical, by a parent of such minor, with his or her
home address and telephone number, addressed to the Mayor,
specifying when, where and in what manner such minor will be on the
streets at night, during hours otherwise prohibited by this chapter, in
the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication.
D. In a case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor's parent has
communicated to Borough Police Station personnel the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose, including points of origin and
destination. A copy of such communication, or of the police record
thereof, duly certified by the Chief of Police to be correct, with an
appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and
address of such parent and minor, shall be admissible evidence.
E. When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor
resides or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not
communicating an objection to the police officer;
F. When returning home by a direct route from and within 30 minutes of
the termination of a school activity or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association, of which prior notice, indicating the place and
probable time of termination, has been given in writing to, and duly
filed for immediate reference by, the Chief of Police or the officer
assigned by him on duty at the Police Station, thus encouraging, here as
in other exceptional situations, conduct on the part of minors involved
in such activities and striking a fair balance for any somewhat
conflicting interests.
G. When authorized by special permit from the Mayor, carried on the
person of the minor thus authorized, as follows: When normal or
§ 244-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 244-5
1:124
§ 244-6. Parental responsibility.
No parent having legal custody of a minor shall knowingly permit or, by
inefficient control, allow such minor to be or remain upon any Borough
street under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise
beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge
which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
necessary nighttime activities of a minor may be inadequately provided
for by other provisions of this chapter, then recourse may be had to the
Mayor, either for a regulation as provided in Subsection H hereof or
for a special permit, as the circumstances warrant. Upon the Mayor's
finding of necessity for the use of the streets to the extent warranted
by a written application, signed by a minor and by a parent of such
minor, if feasible, stating the name, age and address of such minor; the
name, address and telephone number of a parent thereof; the height,
weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other physical characteristics of
such minor; the necessity which requires such minor to remain upon
the streets during the curfew hours otherwise applicable; and the street
or route and the beginning and end of the period of time involved, by
date and hour, the Mayor may grant a permit in writing for the use
by such minor of such hours as in the Mayor's opinion may reasonably
be necessary. In an emergency, this may be handled by telephone
or other effective communication, with a corresponding record being
made contemporaneously, either to the Mayor or, if unavailable, to
the police officer authorized by the Mayor to act on his behalf in an
emergency at the Police Station.
H. When authorized by regulation issued by Council and approved by the
Mayor, in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled,
for nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on
an individual special permit basis. Such regulation by the Mayor
permitting use of the streets shall be issued sufficiently in advance, if
possible, to permit appropriate publicity through news media and
through other agencies, such as the schools, and shall define the
activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of time
involved, which is not to extend more than 30 minutes beyond the time
for termination of such activity, and the reason for finding that such
regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the public
interest and the purposes of this chapter.
I. When the minor carries a certified card of employment, renewable each
calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or reissued
not more than 45 days previously, signed by the Chief of Police and
briefly identifying the minor, the address of his home and his place of
employment and his hours of employment.
J. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. From excess of caution, this clearly
exempts bona fide interstate movement through the Borough. This also
exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in the Borough.
§ 244-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:125
whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to
continue to keep neglectful and/or careless parents up to a reasonable
community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It
shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to
the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 244-7. Police procedures.
A. A policeman of the Borough, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this chapter,
normally shall take the minor to the Borough Police Station, where a
parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon
they shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit ascertainment,
under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize
responsibility in the officer there and then on duty for accurate,
effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and recording. In the
absence of convincing evidence, such as a birth certificate, a policeman
on the street shall, in the first instance, use his best judgment in
determining age.
B. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, inter alia, that the policeman may deliver to a parent
thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances; for example, a minor
of tender age near home whose identity and address may readily be
ascertained or are known.
C. In any event, such policeman shall, within 24 hours, file a written report
with the Chief of Police, or shall participate, to the extent of the
information for which he is responsible, in the preparation, by himself
and the officer involved in such case, and in the filing of such report,
within 24 hours.
D. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the
minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor
shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be
located or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be
released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that, in
accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative,
neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the
responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival
of a parent.
E. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of Police shall, by
certified mail, send to a parent written notice of such violation, with a
warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
this chapter, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
§ 244-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 244-8
1:126
§ 244-8. Interpretation.
From excess of caution, the Mayor is hereby authorized to give advisory
opinions, in writing or immediately reduced to writing, which shall be
binding and shall be adhered to by the police until this chapter is amended
in such respect, interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any provision of this
chapter. Normally, such advisory opinions shall be in response to good
faith, signed letters addressed to him at the Municipal Building, questioning
as ambiguous or as having a potentially chilling effect on constitutional
rights specifically invoked, or as otherwise invalid, in all three categories
with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This administrative
remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question
in any of the three categories. Council does not intend a result that is
absurd, impossible of execution or unreasonable. It is intended that this
chapter be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application
would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and
shall be given. Council does not intend to violate the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Constitution of the United States of
America.
§ 244-9. Continuing evaluation.
A. Council will continue its evaluation and updating of this chapter.
Accordingly, there shall be compiled and informally reported to Council,
through effective channels, such as the normal monthly distribution by
the Borough Manager and the Borough Secretary, to each Councilman,
the Mayor and the Borough Solicitor, of noteworthy material, all
exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable necessity, the notices of
school and other activities, the Mayor's special permits and the Mayor's
regulations hereinbefore authorized, and the Mayor's advisory
opinions, for consideration by the appropriate committee and by
Council in further updating and continuing the evaluation of this
chapter.
B. For the same reasons, as well as for the implementation beyond these
legal aspects of the basic purposes hereof, the Mayor and relevant
committees of Council, through their respective chairmen in
coordinated efforts, shall work with existing volunteer groups and may
organize additional volunteer groups and shall stimulate volunteer
leadership in programs of research and of action dealing constructively
on neighborhood and local bases with juvenile delinquency and the
prevention, control or containment thereof, in all its ramifications, and
with practical steps toward the good life, and a better life, for minors 17
or less years of age, and with the working of this chapter, communitywise
and in individual cases, as one much needed legal tool toward that
end as well as for continuing present protection of minors and of other
persons, and of property and other interests, important to the welfare
of the people of the Borough.
§ 244-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:127
§ 244-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-19-1979 by Ord. No.
818]
Chapter 249
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 249-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. If, after a warning notice to a parent pursuant to § 244-7 of a first
violation of a minor, a parent violates § 244-6 (in connection with a
second violation by such minor), this shall be treated as a first offense
by the parent. For such first parental offense, the parent shall be fined
$25 and for each subsequent parental offense the fine shall be
increased by an additional $25, e.g., $50 for the second, $75 for the
third, $100 for the fourth, $125 for the fifth and so on, to a maximum of
$300, as permitted by law. Each offense after a fine of $300 is reached
shall be punishable by a fine of $300. The Magisterial District Judge,
upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence such parent to pay the fine
and the costs of prosecution. In addition thereto, or in lieu thereof, the
Magisterial District Judge may order such parent to be imprisoned in
the County Jail for not more than 10 days for any offense or violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or for any subsequent offense or
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In addition thereto, any minor who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter more than three times shall be reported by the Mayor to a
society or organization whose purpose it is to take charge of
incorrigibles and delinquents, and proceedings shall be taken under the
Juvenile Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 6301, before the Juvenile Court for the
treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor.28
C. In the alternative, or at any time in addition to the penalties
hereinbefore provided for, the Mayor may proceed directly to the
proper juvenile authority under the provisions of Subsection B hereof in
any case where the imposing of a fine or imprisonment upon a parent
will not be effective or where for any other reason the provisions of this
chapter cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under
this section.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 249-1
1:128
LIQUOR — Includes any spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which is
spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all drinks
or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures and reused, recovered or
redistilled denatured alcohol usable for beverage purposes, which contain
more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume.
MALT OR BREWED BEVERAGES — Any beer, lager beer, ale, porter or
similar fermented malt beverage containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by
volume.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any behavior or conduct that is injurious to health
or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use
of the public ways of the Borough, which conduct or behavior accordingly
is liable to annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities being on or traveling
along the public ways of the Borough and in whose presence such conduct
or behavior occurs, or such conduct or behavior that at common law would
be considered a breach of the peace or tend to provoke a breach of the
peace. For purposes of this definition, conduct or behavior shall also include
rude or obscene gestures, comments or observations on persons passing by
or other verbal utterances of a similar nature.
§ 249-2. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public ways and
grounds and in vehicles.
A. No person shall consume liquor or malt or brewed beverages upon any
public way or ground or upon any parking lot of the Borough.
B. No person shall consume liquor or malt or brewed beverages in or
about an automobile, vehicle or other conveyance upon any public way
or ground or upon any parking lot of the Borough, whether or not such
automobile, vehicle or other conveyance is moving, standing or parked.
C. The possession of any opened container of an alcoholic beverage,
liquor, malt or brewed beverage upon any public way or ground or upon
any parking lot of the Borough or in or about any automobile, vehicle or
other conveyance upon any public way or ground or upon any parking
lot of the Borough, whether or not such automobile, vehicle or other
conveyance is moving, standing or parked, shall be a conclusive
presumption that the possessor of such opened container was
consuming its contents upon such public way, ground or parking lot of
the Borough or within any automobile as aforesaid, and therefore shall
constitute a violation of this section. An "opened container," for the
purposes of this section, is defined as an original container
manufactured to hold the liquor, malt or brewed beverage which is
outside of its original wrapper or has had its seal broken or does not
contain an official seal of the government of the United States and/or of
the commonwealth intact upon such container. [Added 3-3-1986 by
Ord. No. 952]
D. The possession of a container other than the original container
manufactured to hold alcoholic beverages, liquor, malt or brewed
§ 249-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:129
§ 249-3. Profanity; obscene gestures; prosecution.
No person shall use contumelious, debauched, indecent, rude or unseemly
language or make a rude, obscene or profane gesture or a contumelious,
debauched, indecent, rude or unseemly observation to or about a passerby
upon a public way or ground in the Borough. Behavior or conduct
amounting to a public nuisance is prohibited and shall also constitute a
violation of this section. Such conduct or behavior shall, upon and after
complaint is made by a passerby or inhabitant of the Borough, be
prosecuted forthwith before the Magisterial District Judge having
jurisdiction over the Borough, and evidence of such conduct or behavior
given by such complainant shall constitute a prima facie violation of this
section. Prosecution of such violation by the police officers of the Borough
shall be made only after complaint by an inhabitant of the Borough or a
user of the public ways and grounds of the Borough, and such complainant
shall appear at the time of trial for such violation and give testimony relative
thereto.
Chapter 263
EMERGENCY WORK
beverages, which is found to contain an alcoholic beverage, is a
violation of this section if the possessor of such a container is found
to have such container in his or her possession upon any public way
or ground or upon any parking lot of the Borough or in or about an
automobile, vehicle or other conveyance that is upon any public way or
ground or upon any parking lot of the Borough, whether or not such
automobile, vehicle or other conveyance is moving, standing or parked.
[Added 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 952]
§ 249-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 249-3
1:130
ARTICLE I
Recovery of Costs
[Adopted 11-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1038 (Ch. 1420, Sec. 1420.05, of
the 1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 263-1. Authorization to recover costs.
The Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized to recover against the owner
of property upon which emergency work is performed by the Borough,
its agents, servants, contractors or employees, or against the owner of
property who has disregarded an unsafe notice for the repair or demolition
of property subject to such unsafe notice or the filling of any excavation
which constitutes a danger to the citizens and residents of the Borough.
The Borough Solicitor is authorized to charge the full cost of the work so
performed in accordance with the Borough Building Code, together with
all costs of collection, including attorney's fees, in the amount of 10% and
interest upon the sum due the Borough of 6% per annum, commencing from
the time of the final completion of the work performed by the Borough. Such
amounts may be collected by a civil action brought in the Court of Common
Pleas of Centre County, Magisterial District Court, or by municipal claim.
No such suit or claim shall be filed until written notice in accordance with
law is provided the property owner.
§ 263-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-1
1:131
Chapter 290
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 290-1. Escrow of insurance funds.29
When a loss agreed to between a named insured and an insurance company,
association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits
of liability on all fire policies covering the damaged building or other
structure, the insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer
from the insurance proceeds to the Borough Manager the aggregate sum
of $2,000 for each $15,000 and each fraction of that amount of a claim.
Alternatively, if at the time a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insurance company, association or exchange has been
submitted the named insured has also submitted a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure, the insurance company, association or exchange shall
transfer from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the damaged building or other
structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the Borough shall
be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. The named insured may
submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing
or securing the damaged building or structure after the transfer, and the
Borough Manager shall return the amount of the fund in excess of the
estimate to the named insured if the Borough has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the damaged building or other structure.
§ 290-2. Transfer of funds following repairs, removal or securing of
damaged property.
Upon receipt of the proceeds by the Borough as authorized by this chapter,
the Borough Manager shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be used
solely as security against the total cost of removing, repairing or securing
incurred by the Borough. When transferring funds as required in § 290-1
hereof, an insurance company, association or exchange shall provide the
Borough with the name and address of the named insured, whereupon
the Borough shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds
have been received by the Borough and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this chapter shall be followed. The fund shall be returned
to the named insured when repairs, removal or securing of the damaged
building or other structure has been completed and the required proof
received by the Borough Manager, if the Borough has not incurred any costs
for repair, removal or securing. If the Borough has incurred costs for repair,
removal or securing of the damaged building or other structure, the costs
shall be paid from the fund, and if excess funds remain, the Borough shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 290-3
1:132
§ 290-3. Not a limit on Borough.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
to recover any deficiency. Further, nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to prohibit the Borough and the named insured from entering into an
agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some
other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 290-4. Proof of discharge of obligation.
Proof of payment by the insurance company, association or exchange of
proceeds under a policy in accordance with this chapter is conclusive
evidence of the discharge of its obligation to the insured under the policy to
the extent of the payment and of compliance by the company, association or
exchange with this chapter.
§ 290-5. Effect on Borough officials.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make the Borough or any
Borough official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an
obligation to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or
expenses other than as provided for by law.
Chapter 294
FIRE LIMITS
§ 294-1. Description of limits.
The fire limits of the Borough are hereby established as follows: Beginning
at the northwest corner of Penn and Howard Streets; thence in a westerly
direction along the north side of Howard Street and a prolongation thereof
to Spring Creek; thence northerly along Spring Creek to the southwest
corner of Lamb and Water Streets; thence westerly along the south side
of Lamb Street to the southeast corner of Lamb and Thomas Streets;
thence southerly along the east side of Thomas Street to the intersection
of North Thomas Street and the south side of West High Street; thence
westerly along the south side of High Street to the southeast corner of High
and South Thomas Streets; thence southerly along South Thomas Street
to Spring Creek; thence easterly along Spring Creek to the north end of
the Penn-Central Railroad trestle; thence southerly along the Penn-Central
Railroad right-of-way to the south side intersection of Water and Willowbank
Streets; thence in a northeasterly direction along the north side of Stony
Batter to the northeast corner of Spring and Logan Streets; thence easterly
along the north side of Logan Street to the northwest corner of Logan and
Penn Streets; thence northerly along the west side of Penn Street to the
northwest corner of Penn and Howard Streets, the place of beginning.
Chapter 302
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-1
1:133
FIRES, CONDUCT AT
§ 302-1. Interference with Fire Department at scene of fire.
No person shall interfere, hamper or obstruct, in any manner, the functions
of the Fire Department while such Department, including its officers and
other personnel, its apparatus and equipment, are on duty or being used at
the scene of a fire.
Chapter 307
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 235,
Art. I.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 490.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
500.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 294-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 302-1
1:134
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 307-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Bellefonte does hereby
order as follows.
§ 307-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-1
1:135

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 307-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 307-3. Applicability.
§ 307-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 307-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Bellefonte unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Bellefonte or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-5
1:137
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 307-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-5
1:138
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 307-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 307-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Bellefonte.
§ 307-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations.
B. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
C. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Assistant Borough
Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);30 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);31 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);32 and the United States
30.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 307-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-8
1:139
§ 307-9. Application procedures and requirements.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Bellefonte. Such application shall contain the following:
§ 307-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-9
1:140
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
§ 307-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-9
1:141
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any floodway area (see § 307-17A) when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of flood proofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 307-24F, Storage, and § 307-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 307-24F and 307-25 which are
§ 307-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-9
1:142
§ 307-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 307-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 307-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 307-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 307-25
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 307-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-13
1:143
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 307-14. Start of construction.
§ 307-15. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first, alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
§ 307-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-15
1:144
§ 307-16. Appeals.
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this State;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Borough of Bellefonte, of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.33
33.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 307-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-16
1:145

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 307-17. Identification.
§ 307-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Bellefonte, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated January
16, 2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all
digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Bellefonte and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 307-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-18
1:147
§ 307-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 307-22B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 307-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Bellefonte and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 307-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
D. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 307-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-21
1:148
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 307-22. General.
§ 307-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the
applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 307-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-23
1:149
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 307-18C of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance
with § 307-18C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
§ 307-23 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-23
1:150
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor (including basements) are
prohibited.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all chapter requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
§ 307-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-23
1:151
§ 307-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
§ 307-23 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-24
1:152
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines and electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 307-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the Regulatory Flood Elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
§ 307-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-24
1:153
§ 307-25. Development which may endanger human life.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform construction code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,34
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
34.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 307-24 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-25
1:154
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the
production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances,
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 307-22, 307-23 and 307-24.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 307-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-25
1:155
§ 307-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 307-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Subsection A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 307-22, 307-23
and 307-24, including:
(1) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any floodway area/district, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall:
(1) Be placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
§ 307-25 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-27
1:156
§ 307-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
E. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
F. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
§ 307-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-28
1:157

ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 307-29. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,35 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Borough of Bellefonte:
§ 307-30. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other access ways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
35.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 307-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-30
1:159
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 307-30 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-30
1:160
§ 307-31. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Bellefonte the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
Article III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within five working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Bellefonte
Planning Commission and Borough of Bellefonte engineer for review
and comment.
§ 307-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-31
1:161
§ 307-32. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of
Bellefonte shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect
the application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Bellefonte decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Bellefonte approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Bellefonte shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Bellefonte.
F. If the Borough of Bellefonte does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Bellefonte and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Bellefonte shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 307-31 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-32
1:162
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the Borough of Bellefonte and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
§ 307-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-32
1:163

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 307-33. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 307-34 shall apply.
§ 307-34. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
D. Within any floodway area/district (see § 307-18A), no new construction
or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 307-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-34
1:165

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 307-35. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Bellefonte may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 307-36. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Bellefonte in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 307-16 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any floodway area/district that would cause any increase
in the BFE.
B. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (Article VI) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 307-25).
C. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
D. In granting any variance, the Borough of Bellefonte shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary
in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve
the objectives of this chapter.
E. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Bellefonte shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
F. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Bellefonte shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
§ 307-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-36
1:167
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
G. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Bellefonte. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
H. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 307-36 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-36
1:168
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 307-37. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 307-38. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood.")
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 307-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-38
1:169
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 307-38 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-38
1:170
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — An umbrella term that includes all of
the areas within which the community has selected to enforce floodplain
regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study,
but may include additional areas identified by the community. See §§ 307-17
and 307-18 for the specifics on what areas the community has included in
the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after January 6, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after February
2, 1977, and before January 6, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect at
the time the permit was issued, provided that the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
§ 307-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-38
1:171
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February
2, 1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February 2,
1977, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck,
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 307-38 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-38
1:172
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to ensure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
§ 307-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-38
1:173
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 307-38 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-38
1:174
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 307-39. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on January 6, 2015, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Bellefonte, Centre
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 307-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-39
1:175
Chapter 313
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Signs zoning regulations — See Ch. 575, Art.
XXI.
§ 307-39 BELLEFONTE CODE § 307-39
1:176
ARTICLE I
Garage Sale Signs
[Adopted 8-4-1989 by Ord. No. 1019 (Ch. 1462 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 313-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Any porch, garage, auction, remnant, rummage, yard or
similar sale of a temporary or random nature, whether or not the proceeds
are used for public, private or charitable purposes, and whether or not such
sale takes place by means of an auction, cooperative or group sale or private
individual sale.
GARAGE SALE SIGN — Any sign advertising the public sale of household
goods or chattels, including, but not limited to, vehicles, clothing,
appliances, furniture, fixtures, commercial items, trade goods, antiques,
collectibles or other tangible personal property for sale to the public by
auction, private sale or otherwise, where such tangible personal property
is located at one specific address within any commercial, industrial or
residential zone of the Borough, and offered for sale by the owner or
representative of the owner thereof, which tangible personal property is not
offered by the owner thereof in the usual or regular course of the business
of the owner thereof.
SIGN — Any structure, device, light or natural object, including the ground
itself, or any part thereof, or any device attached thereto, or painted or
represented thereon, which is used to identify, advertise or attract attention
to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm,
group, commodity, profession, enterprise, industry or business, or which
displays or includes any letter, number, word, model, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, device or representation used as an announcement, direction or
advertisement and which is intended to be seen from off the premises.
"Sign" includes signs which are displayed inside of windows and glass doors
and are intended to be seen from off the premises.
§ 313-2. Compliance required.
No person shall display or exhibit a sign which advertises or represents
any garage sale, except in accordance with this article. In the event of a
violation of this article, such person shall be subject to the penalty provided
for in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 313-3. Posting on property of another.
Any person conducting a garage sale in any zoning district of the Borough,
including the Historic District, intending to utilize a sign to advertise or give
notice of such sale, on or off of the premises where the sale is to occur, shall
advertise or give notice of such sale by means of a sign posted on private
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-3
1:177
property, with the permission of the property owner upon which premises
any such sign is erected, constructed or maintained. At the request of
the Building Code Official, the Manager or any police officer in uniform,
the owner or user of any such sign posted on premises other than those
premises owned by, belonging to or leased by him or her, shall present, after
such request, a copy of the written permission of the owner of the premises
upon which any such sign is located.
§ 313-4. Removal from property of another.
No person who constructs, erects or maintains a garage sale sign upon
the land of another shall fail to completely remove such sign and all parts
thereof from the property of the other upon notice from such property
owner to remove such sign, or shall fail to remove such sign within 24 hours
after the termination of the garage sale for which the sign was erected,
whichever first occurs. Failure to remove a garage sale sign after notice
from the property owner to the person erecting such sign shall be construed
to be a private nuisance and abatable.
§ 313-5. Signs on public property.
After the effective date of this article (Ordinance No. 1019, adopted August
4, 1989), no person shall construct, erect or maintain any garage sale sign
upon any public property, including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, parks,
streets, roads, highways or any other public area within the confines of the
Borough. No person shall construct, erect or maintain a garage sale sign
upon any utility pole, public building, lamppost, fence, traffic sign, traffic
signal or any other public structure within the confines of the Borough.
§ 313-6. Evidence of responsibility.
For the purposes of this article, it shall be considered prima facie evidence
that the person owning, leasing or occupying the premises and sponsoring
the garage sale for which the subject sign is an advertisement shall be
considered the person constructing, erecting and maintaining such sign
which is the subject of any alleged violation of this article.
§ 313-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 313-6
1:178
Chapter 330
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Architectural Review Board — See
Ch. 62.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 235,
Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 330-1. Creation of district; authority and purposes.
In accordance with the provisions of an act entitled: "An Act authorizing
counties, cities, boroughs, incorporated towns and townships to create
historic districts within their geographic boundaries; providing for the
appointment of Boards of Historical Architectural Review; empowering
governing bodies of political subdivisions to protect the distinctive historical
character of these districts; and regulating the erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of buildings within the historic
districts," adopted by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth and
approved by the Governor of the Commonwealth on June 13, 1961,36 and
to protect a portion of the Borough which recalls the rich architectural and
cultural heritage of the Borough and the state, to awaken in our people an
interest in our historic past and to promote the general welfare, education
and culture of the Borough, there is hereby created in the Borough a
historic district to be known as the "Bellefonte Borough Historic District."
§ 330-2. District boundaries.
A. The limits of the Bellefonte Borough Historic District are defined on the
map attached to original Ordinance No. 660, adopted November 2,
1970, and such map and all notations, references and other data shown
thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if the
same were fully described herein.37
B. Where an uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the Historic District
as shown on the aforesaid map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center lines of streets, streams and railroads and lot or property
lines as they exist on a recorded deed or plan of record in the
County Recorder's office at the time of the adoption of this chapter
(Ordinance No. 660, adopted November 2, 1970), unless such
district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the
Historic District Map.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq., the Municipal Historic Districts Law.
37.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 313-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:179
§ 330-3. Certification by Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission required.
Immediately upon the adoption of this chapter (Ordinance No. 660, adopted
November 2, 1970), the Borough Secretary shall forward a copy thereof
to the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. This chapter shall
not take effect until such Commission has certified, by resolution, to the
historical significance of the Bellefonte Borough Historic District and until
it has been duly advertised, as required by law.
§ 330-4. Building permits; certificates of appropriateness required.
[Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord. No. 992; 10-3-2016 by Ord. No.
10032016-02]
The Building Code Official shall not issue a permit for any erection,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of a building
or structure, or for the erection or construction of a fence, nor shall any
person, corporation, or organization undertake modification or alteration of
any structure or fence, or erect a structure or fence in the Historic District,
until the Bellefonte Historical Architectural Review Board has reviewed the
proposed alteration, modification, or construction project and Council has
issued a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 330-5. Project consideration procedure. [Amended 7-18-1988 by
Ord. No. 992; 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 10032016-02]
(2) Where the district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines and where it does not scale more
than 10 feet therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
(3) In unsubdivided land or where the district boundary divides a lot,
the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by a
dimension, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the map.
(4) In any event, in the case of any uncertainty, the power to interpret
the intent of the map as to the location of the district boundaries
shall be vested solely in the Board of Historical Architectural
Review, subject only to an appeal from the decision of such board
as is now provided by law.
A. For any property located in the Historic District, the property owner or
legal representative shall make application to the Bellefonte Historical
Architectural Review Board prior to making application to the Building
Code Official or Zoning Officer for any project that proposes to erect,
reconstruct, alter, restore, demolish or raze a building or structure, or
for the erection or construction of a fence.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for work to be done
in the Historic District, as set forth in § 330-4, the Bellefonte Historical
§ 330-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 330-5
1:180
§ 330-6. Board meeting; attendance. [Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord.
No. 992; 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 10032016-02]
Upon receipt by the Board of Historical Architectural Review of a notice
that an application for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
demolition or razing of a building or structure, or for the erection or
construction of a fence, in the Historic District has been filed, the Board
shall schedule a meeting to consider the advice and counsel which the
Board shall give to Council. The person applying for the permit shall be
advised of the time and place of the meeting and invited to appear to explain
his reasons therefor. The Board may invite such other persons as it desires
to attend such meeting.
§ 330-7. Issuance of certificates of appropriateness; considerations.
[Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord. No. 992]
In determining the advice and counsel to be presented to Council
concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing a
permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition
or razing of all or a part of any building within the Historic District,
the Board of Historical Architectural Review shall consider the following
matters:
§ 330-8. Refusal of certificates; changes in plans and specifications.
If the Board of Historical Architectural Review, on the basis of the
information received at the meeting and from its general background and
knowledge, decides to advise against the granting of a certificate of
appropriateness, it shall indicate to the applicant for a building permit the
changes in plans and specifications, if any, which, in the opinion of the
Board, would protect the distinctive historical character of the Historic
District. The Board shall withhold its report to Council for a period of five
days following its decision to allow the applicant to decide whether or not to
make the suggested changes in his plans and specifications. If the applicant
Architectural Review Board shall act in accordance with the procedures
set forth by this document or rules and procedures adopted by the
board.
A. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district;
B. The appropriateness of exterior architectural or landscaping features
which can be seen from a public street or way only; and
C. The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building, structure or fence and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings, structures or fences in the district, and to the
properties immediately adjacent to the property for which a certificate
is sought.
§ 330-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-8
1:181
determines that he will make the suggested changes, he shall so advise the
Board, which shall advise Council accordingly.
§ 330-9. Written report to Council. [Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord. No.
992]
The Board of Historical Architectural Review, after the hearing provided
for in § 330-6, and after the making of any changes in the plans and
specifications as provided in § 330-8, shall submit to Council, in writing,
its advice concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing a permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building or structure,
or for the erection or construction of a fence, within the Historic District.
The written report shall set forth the following matters:
§ 330-10. Decision of Council. [Amended 7-18-1988 by Ord. No.
992; 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 10032016-02]
A. The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done;
B. The exterior change to be made or the exterior character of the
structure to be erected;
C. A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics;
D. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district;
E. The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building, structure or fence and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings, structures or fences in the district or on adjacent
properties, and to the district as a whole;
F. The opinion of the Board (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy the
historic aspect and nature of the district; and
G. The specific counsel of the Board as to the issuance by Council or its
refusal to issue a certificate of appropriateness.
A. Upon receipt of the written counsel of the Board of Historical
Architectural Review, as provided in § 330-9, Council shall consider, at a
regular or special meeting, the question of issuing to the property
owner a certificate of appropriateness authorizing a permit for the work
covered by the application. The applicant shall be advised by the
Borough Secretary of the time and place of the meeting at which his
application will be considered and shall have the right to attend and be
heard as to his reasons for filing the same. In determining whether or
not to certify to the appropriateness of the proposed erection,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of all or
part of any building or structure, or the erection or construction of a
§ 330-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 330-10
1:182
§ 330-11. Disapproval of application; appeal.
Upon receipt of the written disapproval of Council, the Building Code
Official shall disapprove the application for a building permit and so advise
the applicant. The applicant may appeal from the disapproval as provided
by law and the Building Code of the Borough.
§ 330-12. Enforcement; authority of Building Code Official.
[Amended 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 10032016-02]
§ 330-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Added 10-3-2016
by Ord. No. 10032016-02]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$300 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions
hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 355
fence, within the Historic District, Council shall be guided by the report
of the Board. If Council approves the application, it shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness authorizing the start of work after all
other permits that are required by this chapter or any other ordinance
or regulation have been legally obtained. If Council disapproves, it shall
do so in writing, and copies shall be given to the applicant and to
the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. The disapproval
shall indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet
the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character of the
district.
B. Once issued, the property owner has one year to initiate the project or
the certificate of appropriateness shall be considered abandoned. Once
the project has been started, the property owner has one year to
complete the project. If the project has not been completed within the
allotted time, the Borough may contract to have the project completed
at the property owner's expense. If the property owner cannot pay the
costs associated with project completion, then the Borough may lien the
property until such time that the liens can be satisfied.
A. The Building Code Official shall have the power to institute any
proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter in the same manner as his enforcement of the Building Code as
presently enacted or as the same may from time to time be amended.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code of fail to obey a
lawful order of the Code Official.
§ 330-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-13
1:183
MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 355-1. Curb market established; location; days and hours.
A curb market is hereby established in the Borough to be held on the streets
of Bellefonte where designated by Council. The market shall be held on
Wednesdays and Saturdays between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 355-2. Designation of Market Manager/Clerk; duties.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee is hereby designated to serve as
Market Manager/Clerk. He shall have general supervision of the market
including to designate space and assign stalls to all vendors; to collect the
stall or space fee on each market day from each vendor; to turn over to the
Borough all such fees collected; to see that the market area is cleaned after
each market; and to do all other things necessary to ensure that this chapter
is properly enforced and that the market is held in an orderly and lawful
manner.
§ 355-3. Prohibited acts; stall or space fee; additional spaces.
A. No person shall occupy any stall or space at the curb market, with or
without a vehicle, without having paid to the Market Manager/Clerk the
daily fee established by Council resolution for each market day or
portion thereof.
B. All spaces will be rented on a first-come, first-choice basis, beginning at
5:00 a.m. on each market day.
C. No person shall occupy more than one rental space (approximately 20
feet to 24 feet, depending on vehicle size) at the market by use of a
trailer in combination with a truck, tractor or car. Spaces will be limited
to either a vehicle, 20 feet; dual-wheel truck, 24 feet; single vehicle-size
trailer, 20 feet; or tables, 20 feet.
D. No person shall occupy more than one rented space to sell, display or
offer for sale any goods or produce at the curb market at any time, day
or place other than those established in this chapter for the holding of
the market, or fail to remove from the portion of the market place
occupied by him or her, before vacating the same, any unsold goods or
produce or any refuse or debris resulting from such occupancy.
E. In the event that additional spaces are needed, the Market Manager/
Clerk may assign additional spaces to the market.
§ 330-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 355-4
1:184
§ 355-4. Location of transactions and displays.
All sales, displays of goods and business transactions relating to, or as a
result of, the operation of the curb market shall be conducted from the
adjoining sidewalk by the seller from a table or stand supplied by the
seller adjacent to such seller's vehicle or other means of transportation. The
seller shall be permitted to occupy the sidewalk adjacent to the curb, but
must maintain a reasonable walkway for pedestrian use on the remaining
sidewalk in front of the seller's stand. The Market Manager/Clerk or his
designee shall determine what is "reasonable."
§ 355-5. Goods permitted to be sold.
Sellers shall be permitted to sell only goods which fit into the following
three categories: produce, flowers and homemade baked goods.
§ 355-6. Set-up hours.
No person shall be permitted to arrive, store goods or set up at the market
prior to 5:00 a.m. the day of the market.
§ 355-7. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, for penalties for violations of this
chapter.
Chapter 360
MINES, COLLIERIES AND QUARRIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Zoning regulations — See Ch. 575, § 575-52.
§ 360-1. Inspections.
The Inspector of Mines and Quarries is hereby charged with the duty
of entering, inspecting, examining and surveying any mine, colliery or
quarry within the Borough, either during the day or at night. He may be
accompanied by such other persons as may be necessary for the purpose of
making an examination or survey.
§ 360-2. Right of entry; reports.
The owner, operator or superintendent of any mine, colliery or quarry within
the Borough or of any mine, colliery or quarry which has or maintains
part of its workings within the Borough shall, at any and all reasonable
times, either during the day or at night, allow the inspection of any part
of the mine, colliery or quarry by the duly authorized Inspector of Mines
§ 355-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:185
and Quarries and such other persons as may be necessary for the purpose
of making such an examination or survey. It shall be the obligation of
the owner, operator or superintendent of such mine, colliery or quarry to
furnish the means necessary for such entry, inspection, examination, survey
and exit from the workings of such mine, colliery or quarry. The Inspector or
any employee or authorized person accompanying him upon any inspection
shall not make his inspection so as to impede or obstruct the workings of
such mine, colliery or quarry. A copy of any report made by such Inspector
shall be available to the owner, operator or superintendent of such mine,
colliery or quarry at his request upon payment of any fee to the Borough
required for the expense of copying such report.
§ 360-3. Furnishing of maps and plans.
It shall be the duty and obligation of any owner, operator, general manager,
superintendent or person in charge of the work of any corporation,
copartnership or association owning any mine, colliery or quarry which
is located within the confines of the Borough or which maintains any
workings, excavations or surface support within the confines of the
Borough, within 90 days from the passage of this chapter (Ordinance No.
677, adopted August 16, 1971), to make or cause to be made and furnished
to the Borough maps, plans and/or drawings of the workings, excavations
and surface support of their operations within the Borough. Such maps,
plans and drawings shall be drafted and submitted in accordance with the
rules and regulations to be established by Council for the regulation of mine
and quarry inspection and surface support. Such maps, plans and drawings
shall include and indicate the elevation of the bottom of every shaft, slope,
tunnel and gangway and of any other point in the mine or on the surface
where such elevation is deemed necessary by the rules and regulations
heretofore referred to. The map or plan shall show the number of the last
survey on the gangways or the most advanced workings.
§ 360-4. Extensions to be placed on maps.
Every owner, operator, superintendent, general manager or person in
charge of the work of any corporation, copartnership or association owning
any mine, colliery or quarry shall place or cause to be placed upon the
pertinent map required to be filed by § 360-3, at least once every 90 days,
all the extensions made in any mine or quarry within the Borough during
the preceding three months, except those made within 30 days immediately
preceding the time of placing such extensions upon such map or drawing.
§ 360-5. Removal of certain surface supports prohibited.
No person shall dig, mine, remove or carry away the rock, earth or other
minerals or materials forming the natural support of the surface beneath
the highways, streets and public places of the Borough to such an extent
and in such a manner as to remove the necessary support of the surface
without first having placed or constructed an artificial permanent support
sufficient to uphold and preserve the stability of the surfaces of such
§ 360-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 360-5
1:186
highways, streets and public places. Prior to the mining, digging, removing
or carrying away of any rock, earth or other minerals or materials forming
the natural support of the surface beneath any such highways, streets or
public places of the Borough, such person shall report such situation, in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Borough, to the Inspector
of Mines and Quarries, who shall make an inspection of the circumstances
and file a written report as to the propriety of the removal of such rock,
earth or other minerals or materials and the substitution therefor of an
artificial permanent support to uphold and preserve the stability of the
surfaces aforesaid. If the Inspector of Mines and Quarries disapproves the
digging, mining, removing or carrying away of the materials as aforesaid,
or fails to approve the substituted artificial permanent support, then the
Inspector shall file his written report, with copies to the mine owners, within
10 days of making his inspection, and any party aggrieved by his report
shall have the right, within 30 days of the filing of such report, to appeal
such action of the Inspector to Council, which shall review the findings of
the Inspector, together with the position of the mine owners or operators,
and render a decision within 10 days of the filing of any appeal to it. If the
decision of Council aggrieves any party, then either party may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Centre County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with
the rules and regulations established by the Borough as aforesaid.
Chapter 364
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 372.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 410.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 495.
§ 364-1. Purpose.
The general purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety,
comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of
the Borough of Bellefonte by requiring that new and existing mobile food
vendors provide residents and customers with a level of cleanliness, quality
and safety. It is also the intent of this regulation to establish reasonable
guidelines and restrictions for mobile food vendors and encourage the safe
and convenient use of the Borough's public right-of-way.
§ 364-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT — Any person or business who applies for a license under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 360-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-2
1:187
COMMISSARY — A facility to which a mobile food facility returns daily for
such things as vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging liquid or solid
wastes, refilling water tanks and ice bins, and where food is kept, handled,
prepared, packaged, or stored.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough
of Bellefonte or any sworn officer of the Borough of Bellefonte Police
Department.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — A person who sells, intends to sell or offers to
sell food products in or about the streets of the Borough from a mobile food
vendor facility.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR FACILITY — Either a street vending facility or a
sidewalk vending facility.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where meals are generally served and
eaten on premises; prepares and serves food and drink to customers in
return for money, either paid before the meal or after the meal is provided.
§ 364-3. License required.
§ 364-4. General provisions.
A. No person shall commence operation of a mobile food vendor facility in
the Borough of Bellefonte unless the required license has been obtained
for the facility and, if required by the state, its commissary from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. Mobile food
vendor facilities not requiring a license by the state must show proof of
application and inspection by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture as required by state law.
B. All licenses from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Agriculture shall be prominently displayed at all times during operation
of a mobile food vendor facility.
C. Upon request from the Enforcement Officer, a mobile food vendor
facility must show proof of general liability insurance in the amount of
$100,000 per individual and $300,000 per occurrence.
D. Any mobile food vendor operating without the required license(s) shall
be deemed in violation of this chapter, and the mobile food vendor shall
be subject to penalties and fines as provided within this chapter and
otherwise provided by law.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to deny, revoke or
suspend operations for any mobile food vendor found in noncompliance
with the established requirements.
A. No mobile food vendor facility shall hereafter sell or offer for sale any
products or services within 500 feet of the designated boundaries of
any Borough-organized, Borough-sponsored or Borough-sanctioned
event or activity to which vendor access is restricted or regulated,
§ 364-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 364-4
1:188
provided that this restriction shall not apply to a mobile food vendor
facility who receives a written permission from the event organizer
sponsoring the event to operate within the boundaries of any Boroughorganized,
Borough-sponsored or Borough-sanctioned event or activity.
B. No mobile food vendor facility on public property or within the public
right-of-way shall provide or allow any dining area, including but not
limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup
counters.
C. Consumers shall be provided with single-service, break-resistant
dinnerware, drinkware, and serving containers.
D. For mobile food vendor facilities on public property, including the
Borough's right-of-way, the Borough reserves the right to temporarily
move a mobile food vendor facility if the approved location needs to be
used for emergency purposes, snow removal, construction, or other
public benefit or if the location is required for a Borough-sponsored
event.
E. On school days from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., no mobile food vendor
facility may operate within 150 feet of the grounds of any building used
as a public kindergarten, elementary school or secondary school.
F. Borough trash receptacles may not be used by mobile food vendor
facilities. All mobile food vendors must provide a waste bin and a
recycle bin which shall be removed by the mobile food vendor at the
close of the mobile food vendor's business day and shall pick up and
remove all papers, wrappers, bottles or other refuse dropped by the
customers thereof within 30 feet of the vicinity of the mobile food
vendor facility. Under no circumstances shall a mobile food vendor use
containers or receptacles for the use of the general public.
G. No mobile food vendor facility shall make or cause to be made any
unreasonable or excessive noise.
H. A mobile food vendor facility may not operate within any Borough park
in the Borough limits, or on property owned by the Borough of
Bellefonte, unless approved as part of a special event or granted
written approval from the Borough to do so.
I. No mobile food vendor facility is permitted to park or stop to serve
customers within a 150-foot radius of any principal customer entrance
to any restaurant or food establishment serving food products within
the Borough.
J. No mobile food vendor facility may park in any parking areas in
districts zoned residential longer than two hours or the maximum
permitted period for parking in any one block, whichever is less.
§ 364-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-4
1:189
K. No operator of a mobile food vendor facility shall park, stand, or move a
vehicle and conduct business within areas of the Borough where the
mobile food vendor has not been authorized to operate.
L. Mobile food vendor facilities are permitted to park and serve customers
on private property within all zoning districts, except those denoted as
residential, only if given express written consent of the property owner
and such written consent is kept in the mobile food vendor facility at all
times when the mobile food vendor facility is operating on the property.
In all residential zoning districts, mobile food vendor facilities are
permitted to park and serve customers on private property only if given
express written consent of the property owner and such written consent
is kept in the mobile food vendor facility at all times when the mobile
food vendor facility is operating on the property.
M. No mobile food vendor shall hereafter sell or offer for sale any food or
nonfood products and services in a manner that would substantially
obstruct a public right-of-way, impair the movement of pedestrians or
vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety.
N. No mobile food vendor facility may park within 15 feet of a fire hydrant,
or in any no-parking or unloading zone.
O. Mobile food vendor facilities may not operate between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 6:30 a.m., and mobile food vendor facilities must be removed
from public property by 2:45 a.m. each day.
P. Mobile food vendor facilities parking in metered parking spaces will be
required to deposit coins to keep the meter in paid status and are
required to abide by the maximum time limit as required in the metered
parking area.
Q. All mobile food vendor facilities shall be attended by at least one
operator who is at least age 18 at all times.
R. Upon request by the Borough of Bellefonte, mobile food vendors must
submit proof of payment of Pennsylvania sales tax and all other taxes
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.38
S. All mobile food vendor facilities occupying a public space must be in
operation within 30 minutes of occupying the space.
T. No mobile food vendor facility shall use electric, water or wastewater
facilities of the Borough without the written consent of the Borough
Manager.
U. All signage not affixed to the mobile food vendor facility shall meet the
requirements of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.39
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 575, Zoning.
§ 364-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 364-4
1:190
§ 364-5. Enforcement.
§ 364-6. Denial or suspension of license.
V. No liquid waste or grease is to be disposed on the ground around
vegetation, in storm drains or onto the sidewalks, streets, or other
public spaces. Under no circumstances shall grease be released or
disposed of in the Borough's sanitary sewer system.
W. Unattended vehicles prohibited. No mobile food vendor facility shall be
left unattended and unsecured at any time food is kept in the mobile
food truck. Any mobile food vendor facility which is found to be
unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard, shall be ticketed
in accordance with existing Borough ordinances and may be
impounded.
X. A mobile food vendor facility operating outside of an approved route, at
an unauthorized location, or beyond the hours for which the operation
has been permitted shall be deemed operating in violation of this
chapter and may be subject to enforcement action.
A. Authority is hereby conferred upon the Enforcement Officer to
promulgate rules and regulations with respect to the specific matters
for which such authority is herein granted and to change and modify
any and all such rules and regulations from time to time in the manner
provided by law, subject to the approval of Borough Council, provided
that such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions herein and local, state and federal law. A copy of such rules
and regulations shall be available in the Borough office.
B. When it appears to the Enforcement Officer that the operation of the
mobile food vendor facility poses an immediate and imminent threat to
the public health and safety that will occur if the mobile food vendor
facility is not immediately closed, the Enforcement Officer shall have
the power to order the immediate closure of the mobile food vendor
facility until such time that the violations complained of have been
corrected or the Borough Council or other appropriate hearing board
overrules the determination of the Enforcement Officer.
C. Nothing set forth in this section may limit the pursuit of other
appropriate actions or proceedings at law or in equity available to the
Borough.
A. Operation may be denied or suspended by the Code Enforcement
Officer for any of the following reasons:
(1) The mobile food vendor or any of its principals fail to satisfy any
qualification of requirements imposed by this chapter, or other
local, state or federal laws or regulations; or
(2) The mobile food vendor or any of its principals have engaged in
operating without a valid license; or
§ 364-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-6
1:191
§ 364-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense and for every such violation, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 and the costs
of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
Chapter 367
NEWSPAPER RACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Historical Architectural Review Board — See
Ch. 62.
Historic District — See Ch. 330.
§ 367-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEWSPAPER RACK — A rack or holder for exhibition, display and sale
of newspapers or other periodicals without any vendor being present at
the time of sale, and which is operated by a lever or other mechanical
(3) The mobile food vendor facility is operated in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or safety hazard; or
(4) The mobile food vendor, its principals or agents repeatedly violate
any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of denial, revocation or suspension will be sent via first-class
mail to the name and address of the applicant for license with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture. If no
applicant for license with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture is on record, the notice shall be sent via firstclass
mail to the registrant of the vehicle license plate or handdelivered
to the vendor facility. Upon notice of denial, revocation, or
suspension, an aggrieved party may appeal to the Borough Manager by
submitting a written notice of appeal to the Code Enforcement Officer
within 10 days following the date of the adverse action.
C. The provisions of this section are not exclusive. This section shall not
preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this chapter or
state or federal laws and regulations. The Borough of Bellefonte may
impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards
related to the operation of a mobile food vendor facility.
§ 364-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 367-1
1:192
device activated by a deposit of a coin or token. This term shall also be
construed to cover a vending machine or newspaper rack which distributes
free newsletters, newspapers or other periodicals to the public.
§ 367-2. Location in Historic District; restrictions.
No person shall display, exhibit, offer for sale or sell any newspaper from
any newspaper rack on any street, sidewalk or other public place within the
Historic District of the Borough except in accordance with this chapter.
§ 367-3. Construction and material specifications; variances.
A newspaper rack shall be fabricated completely of metal and shall be not
more than 50 inches high, measured from the surface of the sidewalk or
pavement on which it is to be placed, not more than 21 inches wide and not
more than 18 inches deep. A variance may be given from this requirement
by the Board of Historical Architectural Review for a newspaper rack which
does not comply with such requirement. The Board may grant a variance
based on originality of design of the rack and its harmony with the
aesthetics of the Historic District, including considerations of traffic flow
and suitability to the location proposed for such rack. Such variance may be
granted upon application made by any newspaper or periodical publisher
seeking to locate a rack within the Historic District of the Borough.
Approval of such a variance shall be by a certificate of appropriateness to be
granted by the Board. Such a certificate shall then be approved by Council
in the same manner as a certificate of appropriateness is now granted by
the Board and Council. If a variance request is denied, such denial shall
be made to the applicant in writing, stating the reasons therefor, within 10
days of such denial.
§ 367-4. Color schemes; variances.
A. A newspaper rack shall conform to the color scheme prepared by the
Board of Historical Architectural Review. Such scheme shall be
available upon request to any person without charge, and copies of such
scheme shall be available from the Borough Manager at the Borough
Building. A variance from the color scheme may be allowed by the
Board, with the approval of Council, as provided in § 367-3, upon
application and good cause shown to the Board by any person requiring
or requesting such variance.
B. The Board shall, within 60 days of the passage of this chapter
(Ordinance No. 916, adopted December 3, 1984), prepare such color
scheme and present it to Council for its approval. Changes may be
made from time to time in such color scheme by the Board on its own
motion, provided that such changes are approved by Council in the
same manner as a certificate of appropriateness is now granted by
Council.
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-5
1:193
§ 367-5. Regulations.
From time to time, with the advice of all newspapers presently maintaining
newspaper racks within the Borough, the Board of Historical Architectural
Review may promulgate regulations relating to the size, location and color
of newspaper racks placed in the Historic District of the Borough, which
regulations are subject to the approval of Council after a public hearing.
Such regulations shall be written as an amendment to this chapter. Public
notice of such hearing shall be made in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.40
§ 367-6. Location on paved surfaces required.
All newspaper racks located on public property in the Historic District of the
Borough shall be placed on a paved surface constructed of asphalt, concrete
or cement. No person shall place a newspaper rack on a grass or earthen
surface.
§ 367-7. Location on narrow sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall place a newspaper rack on any sidewalk in the Borough that
has a width of less than 60 inches. Persons traveling on public sidewalks
must be able to pass abreast of each other.
§ 367-8. Specific locations; complaints; action by Council; appeals.
A. Newspaper racks shall be installed as close to the building line as
practical and located not more than six inches from the end of the
building in front of which the newspaper rack is to be placed. No person
shall place a newspaper rack on the street side of any sidewalk or other
thoroughfare in the Historic District of the Borough. A newspaper rack
shall be located not closer to any street intersection than 20 feet. No
newspaper rack shall be placed in any location where its use would
inhibit the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along the sidewalks
and other thoroughfares of the Borough. No newspaper rack shall be
placed in such a location as to encourage persons to double park their
motor vehicles to patronize such rack.
B. If members of the public file complaints relating to the location, size or
condition of newspaper racks placed within the Historic District of the
Borough, such complaints shall be reviewed by the Public Safety
Committee of Council. If the Public Safety Committee determines that a
hazard or obstruction exists, an order to show cause shall be issued by
Council to the owner of the newspaper rack, who shall appear at any
regular or special meeting of the Borough convened therefor, with or
without counsel, to show cause why such newspaper rack should not be
relocated within the Borough. An adverse decision by Council may be
appealed by such owner to the Court of Common Pleas of Centre
County, Pennsylvania, for a decision on the merits in the same manner
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 367-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 367-8
1:194
§ 367-9. Condition of racks; advertising; weighting; attachment to
structures and surfaces.
Newspaper racks shall be kept in a good, neat and orderly fashion, shall
be maintained in first class condition fully operable at all times and shall
contain no off-premises advertising. All newspaper racks shall be weighted
internally to avoid theft, and no rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
attached to any building, parking meter, sign, sign stand, tree or other
structure upon a sidewalk, street or other public thoroughfare in the
Borough. Upon application to the Borough Manager and upon posting a
bond not to exceed $500, a newspaper rack owner may attach his, her or
its newspaper rack permanently to a sidewalk of the Borough, provided
that such application is approved by Council and that it is accompanied
by a bond representing the cost of removing such rack and repairing or
replacing the paved surface upon which it is installed. If the newspaper rack
owner and the Borough cannot agree as to the amount of the bond, each
party shall obtain an estimate for such removal, repair and replacement
from a competent contractor doing business in the county, such amounts
shall be averaged and such average shall be the amount of the bond. A
surety company bond shall be required from any newspaper rack owner not
maintaining an office and principal place of business in the commonwealth.
Otherwise, a bond executed by the newspaper rack owner in due, proper
and legal form shall be acceptable.
§ 367-10. Placement of racks; notification of Borough; certificates
of appropriateness; responsible persons.
as appeals are presently taken to such Court under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Such appeal shall be
prosecuted in the same manner as therein provided.
A. Within 10 days of the installation or placing of a newspaper rack within
the Historic District of the Borough, the newspaper rack owner shall
notify the Borough Secretary of its location within the Historic District,
together with its identifying number, if any. The Secretary shall then
notify the Board of Historical Architectural Review of the location and
identifying number of such newspaper rack. The Board shall in due
course hold a hearing and issue a certificate of appropriateness for
such newspaper rack, if such rack conforms with this chapter and the
regulations promulgated by the Board. Such certificate shall then be
issued and approved by Council in due course in the same manner as a
certificate of appropriateness is presently issued by the Borough,
provided that such newspaper rack is in conformity with this chapter
and the regulations promulgated by the Board. No such certificate shall
be denied except for a clear violation of this chapter or of the
regulations implemented by the Board.
B. Newspaper rack owners shall, in their applications to the Board,
provide in writing the name, address and telephone number of the
owner, agent or representative responsible for the maintenance,
§ 367-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-10
1:195
§ 367-11. Interpretation.
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit any newspaper rack owner
from providing the Borough with a complete list of the locations of his,
her or its newspaper racks or from securing approval for more than one
newspaper rack and location within the Borough. Notice of a change of
location by a newspaper rack owner shall be provided the Borough in
accordance with this chapter.
Chapter 372
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Animal noises — See Ch. 193.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 410, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 372-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
NOISE — Any loud, confused or senseless sound that is noticeably
unpleasant or raucous.[Amended 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 726]
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. Soundamplifying
equipment shall not be construed as including standard or stock
automobile radios, tape recorders or similar devices when used and heard
only by the occupants of the vehicle in which they are installed or warning
devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning
devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK — Any motor vehicle or other vehicle having thereon or
attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.
§ 372-2. Loud noises prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall willfully make or cause to be made any loud, boisterous,
raucous or unseemly sound, noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any
other person; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall
restrict or limit the normal use to be made of parks, recreation places,
playing fields and playgrounds within the Borough.
upkeep and stocking of any newspaper rack located in the Historic
District of the Borough. If such newspaper rack is serially numbered,
such number shall likewise be provided in such application.
§ 367-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 372-3
1:196
§ 372-3. Noise for advertising purposes prohibited.
No person shall make, cause to be made or permit to be made any noise or
sound of any kind by crying, calling or shouting or by means of any whistle,
rattle, gong, horn, drum or similar mechanical device for the purpose of
advertising any goods, wares or merchandise or of attracting the attention
or inviting the patronage of any person to any business or commercial
enterprise in the Borough.
§ 372-4. Noise for commercial purposes prohibited.
No person shall, for commercial purposes or in connection with any
commercial enterprise or business, erect or locate any device or apparatus
in front of or on the exterior of any premises owned or occupied by him
which, by mechanical or electrical means, emits any loud sounds or noises
so as to annoy or disturb passersby on the street or the general public.
Such device or apparatus shall be deemed to annoy and/or disturb the
general public if it exceeds the decibel rating for the district involved as
contained in the regulations separately adopted by the Borough. However,
the provisions of this section shall not apply in time of emergency to any
announcement or broadcast of any current event of public interest.
§ 372-5. Operation of sound trucks for commercial purposes.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck for any
commercial purpose in the Borough with sound-amplifying equipment in
operation.
§ 372-6. Operation of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes;
statement required.
No person shall use or cause to be used any sound truck with its soundamplifying
equipment in operation for any noncommercial purpose in the
Borough unless or until he has filed with the Borough Secretary in duplicate
a statement containing the following information:
A. The name and residence of the person making the statement;
B. The address of the place of business of the person making the
statement;
C. The license number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
the person making the statement;
D. The name and address of the person owning the sound truck;
E. The name and address of every person who is to use such sound truck
within the Borough;
F. The purpose for which such sound truck is used;
G. A general statement as to the sections of the Borough in which the
sound truck is proposed to be used;
§ 372-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-6
1:197
§ 372-7. Standards for sound-amplifying equipment.
All sound-amplifying equipment shall conform to the standards set by the
regulations separately adopted by the Borough.41
§ 372-8. Amendment of statement.
Every person using or causing to be used any sound truck for any
noncommercial purpose shall amend the statement required by § 372-6
within 48 hours after any change in the information therein furnished.
§ 372-9. Certified copy of statement.
The Borough Secretary shall return to the person making the statement
required by § 372-6 one copy of such statement duly certified by the
Borough Secretary as a correct copy thereof. Such certified copy of the
statement shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound
truck at all times while the sound-amplifying equipment of such truck is in
operation within the Borough, and such copy shall be promptly displayed to
any official of the Borough upon request.
§ 372-10. Conformity with regulations.
Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the Borough, with sound-amplifying
equipment in operation, shall be in strict accordance with the rules and
regulations separately adopted by the Borough.42
§ 372-11. Noisy animals.
No person shall keep or permit to be kept, harbor or otherwise maintain a
noisy animal, i.e., an animal that disturbs the quiet of any public street or
other public place or of any neighborhood. For purposes of this section, a
noisy animal means one or more animals that make noises habitually so as
to annoy a person of ordinary sensibility.
§ 372-12. Noisy vehicles.
No person shall operate a land motor vehicle having two or four wheels or
treads, which vehicle is so loaded that its operation causes unwarranted
H. The proposed hours of operation of such sound truck;
I. The days upon which such sound truck is proposed to be operated
within the Borough; and
J. A general description, including wattage rating, of the soundamplifying
equipment to be used.
41.Editor's Note: Borough noise regulations are on file and available to the public in the
Borough offices.
42.Editor's Note: Borough noise regulations are on file and available to the public in the
Borough offices.
§ 372-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 372-12
1:198
noise or sound which exceeds the decibel level set by the regulations
separately adopted by the Borough or causes unnecessary noise or sound
because of any mechanical or other defect, which noise or sound exceeds
the decibel level set by the regulations separately adopted by the Borough
or is improperly equipped or unequipped with a muffler to deaden exhaust
noise or sound, which noise or sound exceeds the decibel level established
by the regulations separately adopted by the Borough.43 No person shall use
muffler cutouts on vehicles operated in the Borough.
§ 372-13. Peeling.
No person shall operate any land motor vehicle, as defined in § 372-12, in
such a manner as to squeal tires or make any other noise or sound of a
similar nature created by rapid acceleration or deceleration upon the public
ways of the Borough. In the interest of pedestrians and traffic safety, the
custom and practice of "peeling" or "laying of rubber," as such practices are
sometimes called, is expressly prohibited.
§ 372-14. Horns and sirens.
No person operating any vehicle, other than a police, fire, public service or
ambulance on official duty, shall sound any horn, bell, gong, siren or whistle
except for the ordinary horn installed on such vehicle by the manufacturer.
No operator of a motor vehicle, other than the above, shall sound any type
of horn unless the same is reasonably necessary to prevent accidents or
to comply with statutes or regulations governing the use and operation of
motor vehicles.
§ 372-15. Engines, compressors, etc.
No person shall operate or cause or allow to be operated upon the premises
owned or occupied by such person within the Borough any gasoline engine,
gas engine, steam engine, electrical motor or similar mechanical apparatus
with an exhaust or any compressor or any other machinery or mechanical
device of any kind making a noise or sound which exceeds the decibel level
established by the rules and regulations separately adopted by the Borough.
Any person operating any such engine, machine, mechanical device or
apparatus shall cause the exhaust therefrom to be so muffled, controlled or
insulated that it complies with decibel levels established by the regulations
separately adopted by the Borough.
§ 372-16. Measurements.
All measurements of noise shall be made in accordance with regulations
governing the enforcement of this chapter which shall be adopted by
Council within 180 days of the effective date of this amendment and which
shall be available at cost to any interested party.44
43.Editor's Note: Borough noise regulations are on file and available to the public in the
Borough offices.
§ 372-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-17
1:199
§ 372-17. Authority of Borough Officers to inspect, test and observe.
[Amended 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 726]
No person shall refuse to allow an inspection, test or observation of any
vehicle, equipment, apparatus or machinery by an authorized officer of the
Borough for the purpose of determining whether such vehicle, machinery,
apparatus or equipment is in violation of this chapter. Such refusal to submit
to such inspection, test or observation shall be admitted into evidence as a
factor to be considered in determining innocence or guilt of a party.
§ 372-18. Abatement of nuisances; costs.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance, and upon the conviction of any offender, the police officers of
the Borough, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Building Code Official
are hereby authorized to remove or abate any of the conditions made
unlawful herein or to require the removal and abatement of the same by the
offender. If such removal or abatement is done by any Borough employee,
the Borough shall collect the costs thereof together with a penalty of
10% of such costs in the manner provided by law for the collection of
municipal claims or by an action in assumpsit. The Borough may further
seek relief from any of the acts made unlawful herein by a bill of inequity or
such injunctive relief as may be granted by an equity court. The remedies
provided for herein shall be in addition to the penalty provided in Chapter
1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 377
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III. Market — See Ch. 355.
44.Editor's Note: Borough noise regulations are on file and available to the public in the
Borough offices.
§ 372-17 BELLEFONTE CODE § 372-18
1:200
ARTICLE I
General Health Nuisances
[Adopted 12-24-1963 by Ord. No. 477 (Ch. 1826 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 377-1. Abatement of nuisances.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property
owned or occupied by him within the Borough any condition productive of
a nuisance detrimental to the public health or which may be so declared by
Council. Upon receipt of notice from Council that such condition exists on
the property owned or occupied by him, it shall be the duty of such person
to abate the nuisance created thereby to the satisfaction of Council within
the time limit specified in such notice, in default of which Council may
cause the abatement thereof and the Borough may collect the cost of such
abatement, with an additional charge of 10%, from such person in default.
§ 377-2. Prohibited acts in places where food is sold.
No person engaging in the vending or selling within the Borough of any
article of food or substance or material intended to be used as food for
human beings, whether from a store, shop, stand or vehicle, shall have or
keep within the limits of such store, shop, stand or vehicle any meat, fish,
poultry, butter, eggs, fruit, vegetables, bread or bakery product or any other
article of food which is decayed, decomposed or spoiled, so as to render the
same unwholesome, offensive or otherwise unfit for human consumption.
No person shall expose or display any such article intended for human
consumption on the sidewalk or upon any stand, counter or table out of
doors unless all parts of the same are elevated at least 30 inches above the
surface of the sidewalk or ground. No person shall expose any unwrapped
or unpackaged meat, fish, poultry or baked goods unless the same are in
an enclosed case or container or covered so as to be protected against flies
and against contact by handling or otherwise by persons other than the food
handlers employed in such place.
§ 377-3. Sanitation in places where food is sold; inspection.
All stores, shops, stands and vehicles from which food is vended or sold shall
at all times be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from offensive
odors or any accumulation of decomposed animal or vegetable matter, and
shall at all times be open to the inspection of Council or of any authorized
agent of Council.
§ 377-4. Disposal of dead animals.
The carcass of any animal which has died within the Borough shall be
removed within 24 hours and properly disposed of by the owner of the
animal, if the owner is known, or by the owner of the property on which the
dead animal is found. If the ownership is unknown and the carcass is found
on a street, alley or other public place, it shall be removed by Council or by
§ 377-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-4
1:201
any authorized agent of Council at the expense of the Borough. The disposal
of all dead animals shall be under the direction of Council and in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the commonwealth.
§ 377-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 377-4
1:202
Chapter 384
OUTDOOR FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCES
§ 384-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCE — A device constructed to burn
oil, wood, coal or other fuels, manufactured for placement outdoors for the
heating of the living, work and/or recreation areas of a structure.
§ 384-2. Prohibition.
All future outdoor fuel-burning appliances are hereby prohibited within the
Borough.
§ 384-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300 and, in default of payment of said fine, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 405
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 377-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-3
1:203

ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 4-6-1992 by Ord. No. 1063 (Ch. 1060 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 405-1. Authority of Recreation Committee.
The Park and Recreation Committee of Council shall possess all the
authority vested in a borough recreation board, as provided by law, for the
purpose of supervising and maintaining the parks of the Borough and any
other park that may hereafter be acquired or established by the Borough as
an official park of the Borough.
§ 405-2. General regulations. [Amended 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 1075;
5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 1108; 7-21-1997 by Ord. No. 1122;
12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1175; 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
1060-072009-01; 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152912-001]
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the
management and protection of the parks of the Borough, and such
regulations shall apply to all parks belonging to, leased by or otherwise
acquired or used by the Borough as official parks of the Borough.
A. The parks shall be open to the public daily between sunrise and sunset
from May 15 through October 1 and will close on such date as is fixed
by the Park and Recreation Committee and approved by Council. Public
notice of the closing date of Governor's Park shall be given in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough at least 14 days prior
to such closing date, after the approval of Council has been given at a
regular meeting or a special meeting called for such purpose.
B. No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any tree, plant,
shrub, building or structure in a park or any property of the Borough or
of the Park and Recreation Committee located within a park.
C. No person shall remove any bench, seat or table from a park or change
the location thereof without permission from the Committee.
D. No person shall conduct himself within a park so as to disturb any other
person using the park for recreation or enjoyment of nature or disturb
or disrupt any event, activity, or special event approved by Borough
Council for which a permit has been granted. [Amended 12-15-2014
by Ord. No. 12152014-01]
E. No person shall hold any meeting or gathering assembled by
advertising or public notice or any gathering assembled and composed
of 25 or more persons within the limits of a park (the criterion of 25 or
more persons does not apply to Talleyrand Park; see § 405-5, Talleyrand
Park reservations) without having first made application for a permit
therefore to the Committee. Such permit shall indicate the spot in the
park for such gathering or meeting. No such meeting or gathering shall
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-2
1:205
be held at any other location within the park. The application for such
a permit shall be in the name of the person who shall be responsible
for seeing that all refuse left by the group shall be placed in the
proper containers before leaving the park. Such permit shall be issued
at a fee to be established by resolution of the Borough Council. The
purpose of such fees shall be to defray the expenses of issuing the
permit and supervising such activity. Permits shall be valid only for the
day for which they are issued. [Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No.
12152014-01]
F. No person shall set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any
article within the limits of a park without the consent of the Committee,
which shall have the authority to refuse such consent in any instance.
G. No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in a park except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
H. No person shall injure or deface a notice, rule or regulation posted at
any place within a park by the authority of the Committee or any other
authority of the Borough. No person shall post at any place within a
park any notice other than by the authority of such Board.
I. No person shall maintain any open fire within a park except in the
stoves and fireplaces maintained for that purpose and located by the
Committee. Stoves of the Coleman propane, heat tablet, charcoal or
similar type may be maintained and used by persons utilizing parks,
upon park premises, so long as they are maintained, used and operated
in a safe and careful manner by the operators thereof. The use of such
stoves may be further regulated by the Committee.
J. No person shall procure firewood from any part of a park without
permission of the Committee.
K. No person shall bathe or swim in any area of a park except at such place
set apart for that purpose and then only when there is a lifeguard in
attendance.
L. No person shall engage in hunting or fishing within a park or along the
waterfront sidewalk(s) located between High Street and Lamb Street.
[Amended 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 12152014-01; 8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 08012016-02]
M. The speed limit on all roads within park limits shall be 10 miles per
hour. No person shall exceed such limit.
N. No two-wheel vehicle, known as a motorbike or motorcycle, or a similar
mechanical contrivance containing two wheels and an internal
combustion engine, shall be permitted within the confines of a park
unless it is properly licensed and registered with the commonwealth
under the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania. Such two-wheel motor vehicles
shall have affixed thereto a valid Pennsylvania registration plate and
sticker.
§ 405-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 405-2
1:206
§ 405-3. Appointment of Superintendent of Parks.
Council may annually, by resolution, appoint a Superintendent of Parks
after consultation with the Park and Recreation Committee of Council.
Such resolution may specify the duties, obligations and privileges of such
Superintendent.
§ 405-4. Designation of official Borough parks.
O. Land motor vehicles of the two-wheel or four-wheel variety shall be
operated only on those roads, streets or alleys located in the confines of
the parks. No land motor vehicle shall be operated off such roads,
streets or alleys within a park without the express permission of the
Committee. Such permission shall be in writing to the operator of such
land motor vehicle. Official vehicles of the Borough or any contractor
working for the Borough or the Committee are exempt from the
requirements of this subsection.
P. No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage into a park, either for his
own use or for the use of any other person. No person shall consume
any alcoholic beverage upon the premises of a park or upon the ways,
roads or streets adjoining such park.
Q. (Reserved)45
R. (Reserved)46
S. No person shall ride or use a bicycle, pedalcycle, skateboard or roller
blades in Talleyrand Park or along the two sidewalks and/or wall along
the waterfront located from High Street to Lamb Street. [Amended
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 08012016-02]
T. No person or group of persons shall engage in a baseball or softball
game, or in a practice for the same, except on the playing fields
designated for such purposes.
U. All official Borough parks, and along the two sidewalks and/or wall
along the waterfront, shall be designated as tobacco- and nicotine-free
areas. This includes the use of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any
tobacco-containing substance or of an electronic cigarette. [Amended
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 12152014-01; 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
08012016-02]
A. The following parks are hereby established as official parks of the
Borough. Legal descriptions of such parks are attached to original
Ordinance No. 706, adopted August 8, 1973, and are hereby made a
part hereof as if fully set forth herein:
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection Q, regarding bringing dogs or other animals into an
official park, as amended, was repealed 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 08012016-02.
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, regarding feeding ducks in officially designated
parks, was repealed 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 08012016-02.
§ 405-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-4
1:207
§ 405-5. Talleyrand Park reservations. [Amended 12-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 1175; 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152912-001; 12-15-2014
by Ord. No. 12152014-01]
§ 405-6. Posting of no-smoking signs. [Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
1060-072009-01; amended 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 08012016-02]
Notice of smoking prohibitions contained in this article shall be
conspicuously posted by signs stating "Tobacco- and nicotine-free area/
Young Lungs at Play."
(1) Talleyrand Park.
(2) Governors Park.
(3) Masullo Park. [Amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No.
10152912-001]
(4) Parkview Heights Park.
(5) High Street, Railroad Park.
(6) Krauss Park. [Added 12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 12152014-01]
B. The official parks set forth in Subsection A hereof are hereby placed
under the authority and direction of the Park and Recreation
Committee of Council, its successors and assigns, and shall be subject
to the provisions of this article.
A. A permit shall be required for all reservations.
B. Reservations for the use of Talleyrand Park will be issued in writing by
the Borough Manager, authorizing groups and/or individuals to reserve
the park for special events in accordance with the rules and regulations
for use of a park as approved by Borough Council from time to time. The
reservation, on a form executed by the Borough Manager, shall entitle
the holder either to the exclusive use of the gazebo side of Spring Creek
or the park addition side of Spring Creek or the entire park during the
period of the reservation. In addition, bathroom facilities will be
available for the event, although not exclusively, as these facilities can
be used by the public whenever they are open. In the event of a conflict
in reservations, the first party in time to apply for a reservation shall
take precedence over any subsequent application for a reservation.
C. The fee for reservations for Talleyrand Park shall be established by
resolution of the Borough Council.
D. Any request for use of Talleyrand Park for more than one date must be
approved in advance by the Bellefonte Borough Council.
§ 405-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 405-7
1:208
§ 405-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-20-2009 by Ord. No.
1060-072009-01; amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152912-001]
See Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code for penalties for
violations of this article.
§ 405-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-7
1:209
Chapter 410
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Market — See Ch. 355.
Newspaper racks — See Ch. 367.
Noise — See Ch. 372.
Earned income tax — See Ch. 508, Art. I.
§ 405-7 BELLEFONTE CODE § 405-7
1:210
ARTICLE I
Solicitors, Peddlers and Transient Merchants
§ 410-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who engages in "peddling," as defined in the
definition in this section.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares, services
or merchandise for immediate delivery, which goods, wares, services or
merchandise the person selling or offering for sale carries with him in
traveling or has in his possession or control upon any of the streets or
sidewalks, from house to house, by visitation to private residences or by
entering in or upon private property within the Borough. However, the
words "soliciting" and "peddling" do not apply to:
SOLICITING — Subject to the exceptions provided for in the definition
of "peddling" in this section, "soliciting" means the seeking or taking of
contracts or orders for any goods, wares, services or merchandise for future
A. Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own products;
The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer for
the sale of bread and bakery products, meats and meat products or milk
or milk products;
B.
The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds wherefore are to be applied to any charitable,
philanthropic or religious purpose, provided such activity is first
registered with the Borough in accordance with § 410-2;
C.
D. Any honorably discharged veteran of the armed services;
The seeking or taking of orders for insurance by insurance agents or
brokers licensed under the insurance laws of the commonwealth;
E.
Persons, corporations, partnerships or associations, their agents or
employees, who have complied with the provisions of the Act of
Assembly of the commonwealth known as the Solicitation of Funds for
Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as supplemented and
amended, governing solicitations for charitable, benevolent, religious,
patriotic or other purposes.
F.
Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or merchants
for resale to an ultimate consumer.
G.
In addition, this chapter shall not apply to boys or girls under the age of
18 years who take orders for and deliver newspapers, greeting cards,
candy and the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or
similar organizations and take orders for and deliver cookies and the
like.
H.
§ 410-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-1
1:211
delivery or for subscriptions or contributions, upon any of the streets or
sidewalks or from house to house or by visitation to private residences or by
entering in or upon private property within the Borough. It further means
the seeking or taking of contracts or orders for home or other building
repair, improvement and alteration and also orders or contracts for any
mechanical, electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for house
or other building improvement or repair upon or from the places aforesaid
within the Borough.
SOLICITOR — Any person who engages in "soliciting," as defined in the
definition in this section.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person, whether principal or agent,
corporation, partnership or association, entering into, beginning or desiring
to begin a transient retail business in the Borough for the sale of any
goods, wares or merchandise, who hires, leases, occupies or uses any room,
apartment, store, shop, building, railway car or other place or structure
for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, who
does not remain at the same location for a period in excess of six weeks
and whose location is temporary. This definition does not include persons,
partnerships, corporations or associations exempted by the definition of
"peddling" in this section.
§ 410-2. Charitable, religious or nonprofit causes.
Solicitation of funds for charitable, religious or nonprofit causes shall be
permitted at any business establishment and upon any business properties,
such as shopping center parking lots, during normal business hours, but
those solicitors shall also register at the Borough Building and carry
identification cards.
§ 410-3. Religious proselytization.
A. It shall be lawful for the members of any duly constituted religious
organization or any group affiliated with or forming an integral part of
such organization to minister, proselytize or communicate its goals,
purposes or philosophies on a door-to-door basis, provided the group or
individual who actually makes such call or visit registers, without fee or
charge, with the Bellefonte Police Department on a form to be provided
by the Bellefonte Police Department and kept on permanent file at the
Bellefonte Police Department. The form of such registration
certification shall be as provided by Council. Such duly constituted
religious organization shall certify, by its agent, to the Bellefonte Police
Department that such organization or integral part thereof has received
from the government of the United States current tax-exempt status
and that no part of the net income received by such organization or
integral group inures to the benefit of any individual.
B. Upon written complaint of any citizen or resident of the Borough that
any member or group of any organized and duly constituted religious
organization has failed to leave the premises after being requested to
§ 410-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 410-3
1:212
§ 410-4. Peddler, solicitor or transient merchant application and
permit.
A peddler, solicitor or transient merchant application and permit is available
at the Police Department and may be updated from time to time. Conditions
may be placed on vendor activities. Licenses are valid for 30 days and may
be revoked at the discretion of the Bellefonte Chief of Police or his/her
designee.
§ 410-5. License required.
No person shall engage in soliciting, peddling or transient merchandising
in the Borough without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 410-6. License application.
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting, peddling or transient
merchandising in the Borough shall first make application to the Police
Department for a license, whereupon such person shall be required to
obtain a license and shall, in making such application, exhibit such license
which shall be valid. It shall be the obligation of every person desiring
to engage in soliciting, peddling or transient merchandising within the
Borough to maintain, at all times, about his person a valid Borough license.
Failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. The application shall
be upon a form prescribed by the Borough and provided by the Police
Department, which form shall contain the following information verified by
oath or affirmation:
do so or has behaved in any manner to give offense to such resident,
the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall file an action against such
person or group before a competent authority for violation of this
section.
C. The sale of religious articles, books, pamphlets, souvenirs, tracts or
other religious merchandise, not subject to the provisions of Subsection
C of the definition of "peddling" in § 410-1, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. The name of the business, meaning the firm, corporation or person
owning or operating such business within the Borough and the names
of all persons, whether resident or not, participating in and assisting in
the conducting of such business, together with the name of the
applicant;
B. The addresses of all persons, firms or corporations referred to above,
together with the address or location of any place of business or
location within the Borough from which such business will be
conducted, together with the permanent address of the applicant;
§ 410-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-6
1:213
§ 410-7. Information required for helpers; transferability of
licenses.
Where a person makes application for himself and/or one or more helpers,
all applicable personal information specified in § 410-6 shall be given for
each helper and verified or affirmed by oath or affirmation by each
individual for whom application is made, and the application shall be signed
personally by each individual. An individual license shall be required for
each such helper or assistant. No license under this article shall be
transferable from one person to another.
§ 410-8. License waiting period.
No license shall be issued under this article until a period of 72 hours has
elapsed from the time of application, such period of time to be used by the
Borough Police Department for proper investigation of each applicant.
§ 410-9. Income taxes.
Every solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerate or transient merchant or vendor
engaged in a business licensed under this article shall be responsible for the
payment of earned income taxes payable by himself or any employee thereof
as a result of wages earned within the Borough unless otherwise exempt by
law.
§ 410-10. License fees.
C. The age, weight, height, color and any other descriptive information
relative to each individual as referred to in this section;
D. A complete and accurate description of the nature and type of business
to be conducted, including, but not limited to, the procedures and
methods used in contacting and interesting potential customers and
also including the hours and days during which such business is to be
conducted;
E. A description of any vehicle used by any of the individuals referred to in
this section, including the make, license plate number, state of
licensing, name of the registered owner, and name and operator's
number of all operators;
F. A complete description of goods, wares, merchandise or articles to be
sold, including prices, deposits requested and copies of any contract, if
any, to be offered to the general public for such purchases;
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, other than a traffic offense, and, where the answer is in
the affirmative, the nature of the offense and the punishment imposed
upon such applicant. Upon request of the Police Department, the
applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and furnish a photograph.
H. Any other information required or desired by the Police Department.
§ 410-6 BELLEFONTE CODE § 410-10
1:214
§ 410-11. Effective period of licenses; renewals.
The license granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for 30 days
after the date of such license. Upon the expiration of any license, if the
person holding the same desires to continue or renew soliciting or peddling,
he shall file a new application for a license and pay a new license fee.
Such licenses may be issued, in advance, for consecutive thirty-day periods,
not exceeding three in number for any calendar year, upon payment, in
advance, of the license fee due hereunder.
§ 410-12. License to state products and services and be carried at
all times.
A license issued under this article shall state, inter alia, the products to be
sold or services to be rendered by the licensee. Every solicitor or peddler
shall at all times when engaged in soliciting or peddling in the Borough
carry such license upon his person and shall exhibit it upon request to all
police officers, Borough officials and residents. No solicitor or peddler shall
engage in selling any product or service not mentioned on such license.
§ 410-13. Hours and days of work permitted.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall engage
in soliciting or peddling on any day of the week before 9:00 a.m., prevailing
time, or after 7:00 p.m. or sunset at night, whichever comes first. No person
licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall engage in any
soliciting or peddling on Sundays, so as to provide the residents of the
Borough rest and respite from activities of this nature and the freedom to
enjoy their hearths and homes without interruption from the outside. No
person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall engage in
any soliciting or peddling on legal holidays.
§ 410-14. Extended parking; depositing refuse prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall park any
vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the Borough in order
to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares, services or merchandise,
or place or deposit any refuse on any street, highway or alley, or maintain
or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street
or alley in the Borough for longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom
to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
A. A license fee shall be paid to the Borough Police Department, for the
use of the Borough, upon the issuance of any license under this article.
A separate application shall be filed and a separate permit fee shall be
paid by each person who actually conducts the soliciting, hawking,
peddling or transient merchandising.
B. The fee to be paid for a license shall be as established by resolution of
the Borough Council.
§ 410-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-15
1:215
§ 410-15. Fixed locations prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall occupy
any fixed location upon any street, highway, alley or sidewalk of the Borough
for the purpose of soliciting or peddling, with or without a stand or counter.
§ 410-16. Records; supervision of licensees.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
article and shall supervise the activities of all licensees.
§ 410-17. License suspension or revocation.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked at
any time by the Chief of Police or his/her designee for any of the
following reasons:
(1) The application for a license contains false statements or
information.
(2) The applicant or licensee was convicted of a crime, other than a
traffic offense, after the issuance of such license.
(3) A consumer protection agency of the federal or state government
has notified the Borough of the receipt of a complaint arising out of
the activities of a licensee.
(4) A complaint about the activities of a licensee has been investigated
and it has been determined by the Police Department that a
violation has occurred.
(5) A complaint about soliciting or peddling at homes on a list of homes
not wishing to be solicited as allowed for in § 410-22 of this chapter.
B. All revocations/suspensions of licenses may be effective immediately
and are at the discretion of the Police Chief or his/her designee. The
appeal process must be initiated within seven days of receipt of the
revocation/suspension. The appeal process is as follows:
(1) A written letter by the licensee to the Borough Manager with an
explanation as to why the revocation/suspension is not justified and
why the license should be reinstated. The Borough Manager shall
have five days from the time of receipt to review and make a
decision.
(2) If the licensee is not satisfied with the decision by the Borough
Manager; then the appeal, in writing, shall go to a committee
appointed by the Council President at the Council's first meeting
where notice is received. The committee shall hear the appeal and
make a decision within 30 days from the date of the Council
meeting where notice was received.
§ 410-15 BELLEFONTE CODE § 410-17
1:216
§ 410-18. Hawking; use of sound devices prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall hawk
or cry his wares or services upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the
Borough or use any loudspeaker, bell, whistle or other device, by which the
public is annoyed, for announcing his presence.
(3) If the licensee is not satisfied with the committee decision, then a
written appeal can be submitted to the Council, where the Council
shall act on the appeal within 30 days after receipt of the appeal in
writing. Receipt of the appeal or written notice, for purposes of this
section, can only occur at a regularly scheduled Council meeting.
(4) All costs related to appeal hearings are the responsibility of the
licensee.
§ 410-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-18
1:217

ARTICLE II
Panhandling and Solicitation
§ 410-19. Panhandling.
A. Definition. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PANHANDLING — Any solicitation made in person, requesting an
immediate donation of money or other thing of value. Purchase of
an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is, in
substance, a donation, is a donation for the purposes of this section.
Except as specifically provided in this section, panhandling does not
include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that
one is seeking donations, without addressing any solicitation to any
specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person.
B. Place of panhandling; violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
panhandle, and no registration issued under this section shall be
deemed to allow panhandling, including passively standing or sitting
with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations, when the
person solicited is in any of the following places within the Borough:
(1) At any bus or train stop;
(2) In any public transportation vehicle or facility, excluding airports;
(3) In any vehicle on the street;
(4) In a public park, fairground, or sporting facility, including
entryways or exits thereto;
(5) Within 15 feet of the site of any automated teller machine (ATM);
(6) On private property, unless the panhandler has permission from the
owner or occupant;
(7) In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by the Borough,
including entryways or exits and pay stations connected therewith;
or
(8) On public property in the downtown core district.
C. Manner of panhandling; violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
panhandle in any of the following manners:
(1) By blocking the path of the person solicited;
(2) By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation
or following a refusal;
(3) By panhandling in a group of two or more persons; or
§ 410-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-19
1:219
§ 410-20. Solicitation and off-premises canvassing on public
property.
(4) By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a
reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would
perceive to be a threat.
D. False or misleading solicitation; violation.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or
misleading representation in the course of soliciting a donation.
False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(a) Stating that the donation is needed to meet a specific need,
when the solicitor already has sufficient funds to meet that
need and does not disclose that fact;
(b) Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does
not exist;
(c) Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded,
when such is not true;
(d) Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military
service, when the solicitor is neither a present nor former
member of the service indicated;
(e) Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when
the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated;
(f) Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or
(g) Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit a donation stating that
the funds are needed for a specific purpose and to then spend the
funds received for a different purpose.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
BUSINESS — Any commercial establishment, service or activity
operated for financial gain.
DOWNTOWN CORE DISTRICT — The zoning districts known as the
Waterfront and Central Business Districts of Bellefonte Borough.
OFF-PREMISES CANVASSING — Person-to-person distribution on
public property of written, printed, drawn or illustrated matter, in
whatever format, advertising or promoting a business or business
activity, including, without limitation, handbill, circular, dodger,
§ 410-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 410-20
1:220
§ 410-21. Sitting/lying on sidewalks in downtown core district
prohibited.
pamphlet, paper, booklet, sample or device. It does not include
newspapers or other printed matter contained in receptacles.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street, alley, highway, parking lot, sidewalk,
garage, park, plaza, building, ground, or other property owned or
controlled by the Borough, or any portion thereof.
SOLICITATION — Person-to-person communication which, directly or
indirectly, seeks a present donation of money or other thing of material
value.
B. Prohibitions.
(1) Off-premises canvassing. It is unlawful for any person to conduct
off-premises canvassing on public property in the downtown core
district unless:
(a) Operating within and pursuant to a current franchise,
concession contract, permit or agreement with the Borough for
the use of the public property in question;
(b) Operating a transportation service otherwise permitted by this
Code or state law; or
(c) Incidental to route, delivery, service, supply or repair persons
responding to service calls and operating from clearly
identifiable vehicles.
(2) Solicitation. It is unlawful to conduct solicitation, as defined herein,
for charitable purposes unless:
(a) The solicitation falls within a recognized, constitutionally
guaranteed exercise of religion, press or noncommercial
speech, where money is not solicited for a present donation or
exchange. Presence and conduct is subject to all other
regulations provided for in the Code of the Borough, such as,
without limitation, noise, camping, blocking passage, licensing
and permitting.
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK — An improved walkway intended primarily for pedestrians,
usually running parallel to one or both sides of the pavement of a street,
and public transit waiting areas located within the public right-of-way.
B. Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person, after having been notified by a
law enforcement officer of the prohibition in this section, to sit or lie
down upon a public sidewalk or upon a blanket, chair, stool or any other
object placed upon a public sidewalk in the downtown core district, as
defined in § 410-20A.
§ 410-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-21
1:221
§ 410-22. List of homes not wishing to be solicited.
C. Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to the prohibition in
this section if it is shown that:
(1) Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk is due to a medical
emergency;
(2) As a result of age, infirmity or disability a person utilizes a
wheelchair, walker, stroller or similar device to move about a public
sidewalk;
(3) The person is operating or patronizing a commercial establishment
conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use or
similar permit; or a person participating in or attending a parade,
festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar
event conducted on a public sidewalk pursuant to a street use or
other applicable permit;
(4) The person is sitting on a chair or bench located on the public
sidewalk which is supplied by a public or private agency or by the
abutting private property owner;
(5) The sitting or lying is while waiting in an orderly line for entry to
any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as
provision of meals, or outside a box office to purchase tickets to any
sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or
(6) The sitting or lying is an integral part of a planned, publicized
protest by 10 or more people accompanied by incidents of speech
such as signs and literature explaining the protest, for which
proper Borough permits have been obtained.
A. Any resident of the Borough of Bellefonte may register with the
Borough of Bellefonte Police Department by signing a registration list,
application or through any Borough-approved electronic means
indicating that such owner or resident of such home does not wish to be
solicited. The Borough of Bellefonte shall place the address only upon a
registration list for the same. Any person seeking a licensing permit
under the provisions of this chapter shall, in signing the application to
obtain the same, agree that he or she will not solicit addresses on the
list which indicates that such owner or resident of such home does not
wish to be solicited. Such a list shall be made available to the residents
of the Borough and shall be held by the Department of Police, and a
copy thereof, with addresses only, shall be given to each person
obtaining a license and identification card under the provisions of this
chapter.
B. In the event that such person soliciting within the boundaries of the
Borough shall fail to recognize the wishes of the homeowner or the
resident of such home as expressed in the notice, then any such attempt
to solicit such home shall result in a revocation of the solicitor's license
§ 410-21 BELLEFONTE CODE § 410-22
1:222
and identification card. The revocation/suspension will take effect
immediately upon all licensees under the same entity licensed for
soliciting or peddling in the Borough, if the Police Department finds
that a violation of this section has occurred.
§ 410-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-22
1:223
Chapter 425
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 235,
Art. I.
Outdoor fuel-burning appliance — See Ch.
384.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 455.
§ 425-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to adopt a modern property
maintenance code, which will prescribe effective standards and minimum
requirements for buildings and premises in the Borough of Bellefonte. This
code is designed to cover every facet of housing and property maintenance
in order to ensure that persons in or visiting the Borough are provided with
a safe and sanitary environment.47
§ 425-2. Adoption of Centre Region Building Safety and Property
Maintenance Code, 2017 Edition. [Added 6-5-2017 by Ord. No.
06052017-01]
It is hereby adopted by the municipality for the intent and purposes set
forth in § 425-1 that certain code known as the Centre Region Building
Safety and Property Maintenance Code, 2017 Edition, as promulgated by
the Centre Region Council of Governments, except such provisions which
may be in conflict with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or the regulations issued by an agency of the Commonwealth by virtue
of such laws and which provide a more stringent standard and which are
required to be observed by the municipality or the provisions of other
ordinances of this jurisdiction which are in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, regardless of the strictness of the provisions. The provisions
of the Centre Region Building Safety and Property Maintenance Code, 2017
Edition, as amended, are set forth in the copy presently on file in the
office of the Municipal Manager, and are hereby adopted as fully as if
set forth in length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the municipality, except as modified by this chapter and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
47.Editor's Note: The Bellefonte Property Maintenance and Safety Code is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 410-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 425-3
1:224
§ 425-3. Amendments to Building Safety and Property Maintenance
Code. [Added 6-5-2017 by Ord. No. 06052017-01; amended
11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 11182019-01]
The following articles and sections of the Centre Region Building Safety
and Property Maintenance Code, 2017 edition, as adopted, are amended,
deleted, or altered as follows:
A. Alter: Section 101.2 Scope. To read: The provisions of this code shall
apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all
existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards
for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation,
space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety,
safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary
maintenance; the responsibility of owners, owner's authorized agent,
operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and
premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
Exception: Owner-occupied single-family dwellings that do not require
a rental housing permit are exempted from all sections of this code
except Sections 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,
112, 302, 303, 304, 306, exterior provisions of 307.1, 312, 318, 604,
and Chapters 2, 9, 10, and 11 of this code.
B. Alter: Section 104.2.1 Rental Housing Inspection frequency. To read:
1. All rental properties shall be inspected at least once every 36
months. The next regular inspection will be scheduled 36 months
or sooner from the last regular inspection, not the last reinspection
date.
C. Add: Section 106.3.8 Storage violation. To read: In addition to the
imposition of the penalties herein described, the code official, municipal
enforcement official, or police officer is authorized to issue field fines
for violations of Section 318. A fine of $150 per occurrence shall be
issued for each occurrence observed. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense. Any
person, firm, or corporation violating one or more of these sections is
exempt from the notification requirements set forth in Section 107.
Failure to pay the fine, in full, to the Centre Region Council of
Governments (COG) or the issuing municipality within 10 days of
issuance will result in legal action in accordance with Section 106.3. All
violations of Section 318 can be appealed either to the Director of Code
Administration or Municipal Manager, if issued by the municipality,
within seven calendar days of issuance.
D. Add: Section 315 Vegetative growth: To read: No person, film or
corporation owning or occupying any property within the Borough of
Bellefonte shall permit any grass or weeds or any other vegetation
whatsoever to grow or remain upon such premises to exceed a height of
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-3
1:225
six inches or so as to cause unpleasant or noxious odors, conceal filthy
deposits or create or produce pollen.
Exception:
a) Vegetation which is edible and cultivated for that purpose shall be
permitted to exceed a height of six inches.
b) Vegetative growth commonly recognized as having an ornamental
purpose shall be permitted.
c) For the purposes of this section, trees, bushes and hedges shall
not be considered vegetation subject to the height limitation.
d) Noxious weeds prohibited by the Noxious Weed Control Law, 3
P.S. § 255.8, as amended, or as it may be amended in the future,
or by regulations of the Department of Agriculture, shall not be
permitted to grow within the Borough of Bellefonte either
generally or as exceptions to the height limitations set forth above.
E. Add: Section 315.1 Vegetative growth and right-of-way encroachment.
To read: No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any
property within the Borough of Bellefonte shall permit any weeds or
brushes to grow and remain upon that portion of the street or alley
immediately in front of or adjoining said premises between the property
line and the outer edge of any adjacent street or alley. It is the intent
and meaning of the section that a portion of the streets or alleys
between the property line and the outer edge of the roadway, commonly
known as the right-of-way, which space should only be occupied by
lawns, sidewalks and shade trees, shall be maintained not to exceed a
height of six inches by the owner, tenant, occupant or agent of the
property immediately abutting such space. Vegetative growth
commonly recognized as having an ornamental purpose shall be
permitted.
F. Add Section 315.2 Vegetative violations. To read: Grass, weeds, or other
vegetation so growing on any property in the Borough or on any public
right-of-way or public utility easement adjoining or adjacent to such
property is hereby declared to be a nuisance and abatable as such at
law or in equity
G. Add: Section 316 Unlicensed vehicles. To read: Except as provided for
in other regulations, no inoperative, unlicensed or uninspected motor
vehicle or trailer designed to be towed by a motor vehicle shall be
parked, kept or stored on any premises. No vehicle or trailer shall at
any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process
of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles or trailers is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type or trailer is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for
such purposes.
§ 425-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 425-3
1:226
H. Add Section 318 Storage violations. To read: It is a violation of this code
to allow the accumulation of material, debris, or rubbish, regardless of
combustibility, on or around the exterior of any building, dwelling, or
structure that is not specifically constructed for exterior use and which
in the opinion of the code official creates an attractive nuisance.
I. Add: Section 318.1 Abatement. To read: After 30 calendar days past the
initial notice of violation, the municipality may choose to abate the
attractive nuisance and charge the responsible party the actual cost of
abatement plus an additional 10% administrative fee.
J. The title of Table 404.5. is now: Table 404.5. Minimum Habitable Space
(square feet [square meters]) applies to all properties.
K. Table 404.5.1 is deleted.
L. Table 404.5.2 is deleted.
M. Alter: Section 805.8 Offenses. To read: For the purpose of this
suspension provision, offenses are violations of the Borough of
Bellefonte Zoning Ordinance.
N. Section 806 Rental Housing Permit Suspension for Nuisance and
Criminal Violations is modified as follows: All notations to Borough or
State College Borough shall be changed to Borough of Bellefonte.
O. Alter: Section 806.11.1 Refuse. To read: Refers to garbage, refuse, and
municipal solid waste regulations enforced by the Borough of
Bellefonte Ordinance Enforcement and Zoning Officers pursuant to
Chapter 482, Solid Waste, of the Borough of Bellefonte Code.
P. Alter: Section 806.11.2 Property maintenance (interior and exterior). To
read: Refers to regulations for the maintenance of residential property
as generally enforced by the Centre Region Code Administration,
pursuant to this code with the exception of Chapter 9 (Fire Code).
Q. Alter: Section 806.11.3 Sidewalk obstruction. To read: Refers to
regulations for clearing snow, ice, and other obstructions from
sidewalks pursuant to Chapter 495, Article II, Sidewalks, of the
Borough of Bellefonte Code.
R. Alter: Section 806.1.1.4 Noise. To read: Refers to the enforcement of
Chapter 372, Noise, of the Borough of Bellefonte Code.
S. Alter: Section 806.11.5 Vegetation. To read: Refers to enforcement of
grass and weeds pursuant to Section 315, Vegetative growth, of this
code.
T. Alter: Section 806.11.9 Dogs. To read: Refers to enforcement of dog
offenses pursuant to Chapter 193, Animals, of the Borough of Bellefonte
Code.
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-3
1:227
§ 425-4. Effective date. [Amended 11-18-2019 by Ord. No.
11182019-01]
The provisions of this chapter shall be in full force and effect on January 1,
2020.
Chapter 429
PROPERTY, TAMPERING WITH
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 429-1. Tampering with or injury to public property. [Amended
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 995]
No person shall destroy or injure in any way, or tamper with or deface,
any public facility or property of the Borough, or the sewer or water
system thereof, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornament, ornamental work, sign,
building, streetlight, fire hydrant, statuary, or water or gas stop box on or in
any of the streets, alleys, parks, cemeteries or other public grounds in the
Borough.
§ 429-2. Tampering with stakes and markers.
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with or pull, drive,
change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other evidence of
any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the Borough that is
made, placed or set, or caused to be done, by the authorities of the Borough
in any survey or in any street, alley or public ground in the Borough to
evidence the location, elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public
street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer or other public work, matter or
thing.
§ 429-3. Tampering with warning lamps, signs and barricades.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, remove, deface, obliterate
or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the authorities
of the Borough or by any person doing work by permission of the authorities
of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds or
bridges in the Borough as a warning of danger.
U. Alter: Section 806.11.10 Fire Code. To read: Refers to regulations for
the prevention of fires at rental properties as adopted in Chapter 9 (Fire
Code) of this code.
V. Section 807 is deleted
§ 425-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 429-4
1:228
§ 429-4. Taking material from public ways and grounds.
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough.
§ 429-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon, or to
incidental results of work thereon or therein, upon permit from or by
authority of the Borough or the commonwealth.
§ 429-6. Civil actions for damages not precluded.
The fact that a violator has been penalized, after hearing, as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, shall not preclude the Borough or
any other injured party from taking proper legal action to recover damages
resulting from any such violation.
§ 429-7. Reward program. [Added 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 995]
There is hereby offered a reward of $100 to any person who offers
information to the police forces of the Borough or other law enforcement
agency, which information leads to the detection, apprehension, arrest
and conviction of any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter. Such reward shall be payable upon the final conviction of such
person. Likewise, such reward shall be payable to any person who provides
information which leads to the detection, apprehension, arrest and
conviction of any person who violates any state or federal regulation,
ordinance, law or statute as a result of destroying, injuring, defacing,
obliterating, interfering with, tampering with or removing any public
property of the Borough.
Chapter 441
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Property maintenance and safety — See Ch.
425.
Realty transfer tax — See Ch. 508, Art. II.
§ 441-1. Purpose; establishment; supervision.
For the purpose of obtaining accurate information with reference to the
ownership of real estate in the Borough, a real estate registry is hereby
established to show the situation, dimensions and location of each property
§ 429-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-1
1:229
in the Borough and the name of the owner or owners thereof. Such real
estate registry shall be prepared and afterwards maintained by the Borough
Secretary under the direction of Council in the manner set forth in the
applicable provisions of the Borough Code.
§ 441-2. Access to public records.
For the purpose of establishing such registry, the person in charge of the
real estate registry of the Borough shall have access without charge to any
public records wherein the necessary information may be obtainable and
may also cause a search to be made in other places for any muniments or
evidences of title not reported to him as herein provided requisite for the
completion of such books, maps or plans.
§ 441-3. Keeping of records.
The registry books, maps and plans shall be carefully preserved and shall
be so kept by additions from time to time as to show the ownership of
every lot or piece of real estate or subdivision thereof within the limits of
the Borough, with the succeeding transmissions of title from the time of
commencement of such plans. However, nothing contained therein shall at
any time invalidate any municipal or tax claim by reason of the fact that the
same is not assessed or levied against the registered owner.
§ 441-4. Duties of owners of real estate.
It shall be the duty of all owners of real estate within the limits of the
Borough, within one month after the date of the enactment of this chapter
(Ordinance No. 651, adopted September 8, 1970), and of every subsequent
purchaser, devisee or other owner, within one month after acquiring title
in any manner to any real estate in the Borough, to furnish to the person
in charge of the real estate registry, at his office, descriptions of their
respective properties upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough and at the
same time to present their conveyances to be stamped as evidence of the
registry thereof.
§ 441-5. Maintenance of office.
The Borough Secretary shall maintain an office at the Borough Building for
the purpose of registering real estate within the Borough.
§ 441-6. Registry required before recording.
The County Sheriff shall present for registry the deeds of all properties
within the Borough sold by him at judicial sales and the County Recorder of
Deeds shall not admit for record any deed of any property in the Borough
bearing a date subsequent to the enactment of this chapter (Ordinance
No. 651, adopted September 8, 1970) unless the same has first been duly
stamped as herein provided.
Chapter 455
§ 441-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 441-6
1:230
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bellefonte Borough Authority — See Ch. 12,
Art. I.
Property maintenance and safety code — See
Ch. 425.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 490.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
500.
Discontinuance of service — See Ch. 524, Art.
I.
Water — See Ch. 544.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 441-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-6
1:231

ARTICLE I
Individual and Community Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 2-19-1968 by Ord. No. 592 (Ch. 1046 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 455-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Bellefonte
Ordinance Implementing the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."48
§ 455-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Bellefonte Borough Council are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Bellefonte,
Articles of Incorporation for said authority in the form required by said Act,
which Articles of Incorporation shall set forth among other things:
§ 455-3. Connection required where sewer available.
Every owner of property in the Borough whose property abuts upon any
public sanitary sewer constructed or to be constructed as a part of the
Borough's sewerage system shall connect, at his own cost, the house,
building and other structures on the property with the aforementioned
A. That the name of said authority is "Bellefonte Borough Authority."
B. That said authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.49
C. That no other authority organized under said Act or under the Act of
June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, is in existence in and for the incorporating
municipality other than the Bellefonte Borough Authority heretofore
organized pursuant to creation by Borough Council on August 15, 1938,
amended 3-16-1966 by an unnumbered resolution; 4-4-1966 by Ord. No.
540; and 7-17-1967 by Ord. No. 577. Ordinance No. 975, adopted
October 5, 1987, amended the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority.
D. That the names of the incorporating municipality under the Authority is
the Borough of Bellefonte situated in Centre County, Pennsylvania.
E. That there shall be seven members of the Board of the Authority. All
appointments are made by the Borough of Bellefonte's Borough
Council.
F. The Authority shall be responsible for developing a manual of rules and
regulations.
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 455-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:233
public sanitary sewer upon completion of its construction for the purpose of
disposing of all acceptable sanitary sewage emanating from such property.
§ 455-4. Use of available sewers required for sewage disposal.
No owner, lessee or occupier of any property in the Borough abutting
upon any public sanitary sewer upon completion of its construction shall
employ any means, either by septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, mine hole
or otherwise, for the disposal of acceptable sanitary sewage other than into
and through such public sanitary sewer.
§ 455-5. Sewage receptacles not to be connected to sewers.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall at the present time or at any time hereafter be
connected with a public sanitary sewer.
§ 455-6. Certain waste not to enter sanitary sewers.
No person whose property is connected to a public sanitary sewer shall
connect any roof drain thereto, or permit any roof drain to remain
connected thereto, or permit, allow or cause to enter into such public
sanitary sewer any stormwater, foundation drain water, spring water,
surface water or any sewage or industrial waste from any property other
than that for which a permit is issued.
§ 455-7. Noncompliance; remedy of Borough.
If an owner of any occupied house, building or structure in the Borough
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article after written
notice, the Borough may perform or cause to be performed such work
and labor and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as may be
necessary to comply with the provisions of this article, at the cost and
expense of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof and
all charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected
from such owner for the use of the Borough as debts are by law collectible,
or the Borough may, by its proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien
therefor against such premises as provided by law. Such remedies shall be
in addition to any penalty provided.
§ 455-8. Confidentiality of information.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections
shall be available to the public and governmental agencies without
restriction, unless the user specifically requests confidentiality and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. All
records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
§ 455-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-8
1:234
§ 455-9. Harmful contributions; suspension of service and permits.
§ 455-10. Show-cause hearings; orders of Council.
made available to officials of the EPA or the approval authority, upon
request.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this article, the NPDES permit, the state disposal system
permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the Borough, except that any
effluent data shall remain available without limitation. The Borough
may provide such information to the United States Environmental
Protection Agency without notice, provided that said agency maintains
such information in accordance with the procedures contained in 40
CFR, Subpart B, 2.201 et seq. Such information may be provided to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection without notice,
provided that said agency agrees in writing to abide by the procedures
contained in 40 CFR, Subpart B, 2.201 et seq.
A. The Borough may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the Borough, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
danger to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, may
cause interference with the POTW, or may cause the Borough to violate
any condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. If the person fails to voluntarily
comply with the suspension order, the Borough shall take such steps as
it deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
danger to any individual. The Borough may reinstate the wastewater
contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user, describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, shall be submitted to the Borough within 15 days of the
date of the occurrence.
§ 455-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-10
1:235
§ 455-11. Actions for legal and equitable relief.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial waste or other waste into the
Borough's wastewater disposal system contrary to any of the provisions of
this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
Borough, the Borough Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of Common Pleas of Centre County
and/or in any other forum having jurisdiction.
§ 455-12. Publication of names of significant violators.
The names of any users deemed to be significant violators of any of the
provisions of this article shall be listed in the largest daily newspaper in
A. The Borough may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause to Council why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to
show cause to Council why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
B. Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may
designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned
department to:
(1) Issue, in the name of Council, notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to
Council for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
D. After Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the
user responsible for the discharge, directing that the sewer service be
discontinued following a specified time period unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are
installed or unless existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as
are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
§ 455-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-12
1:236
circulation in the Borough. A significant violator is a user who or which is
responsible for one or more of the following:
§ 455-13. Falsifying information.
No person shall knowingly make any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or pursuant to
a wastewater contribution permit. No person shall falsify, tamper with or
knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this article.
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the daily TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2
for all pollutants except pH).
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer-term average) that the control authority determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
passthrough (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public).
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment, or that has resulted in
the PTOW's exercise of its emergency authority under § 455-9 to halt or
prevent such a discharge.
E. Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance.
F. Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with the
compliance schedules.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
H. Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program.
§ 455-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-14
1:237
§ 455-14. Conflict of laws.
In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this article and
a provision of any other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the
Borough, the provision of this article shall prevail.
§ 455-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-14
1:238
ARTICLE II
Joint Municipal Pretreatment
[Adopted 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 960 (Ch. 1045 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 455-15. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Joint Municipal Pretreatment Agreement
Ordinance."
§ 455-16. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in Act No.
177 of December 19, 1996, P.L. 1158, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., and the
Municipality Authorities Act, being the Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 455-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Bellefonte.
MUNICIPALITY — Any one of the Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker
or the Borough of Bellefonte, except as the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
TOWNSHIP — Any one of the Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 455-18. Conditions.
The conditions of the joint adoption of this article are as follows:
A. That this article shall become effective upon the adoption of the same
by all the Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker and the Borough of
Bellefonte;
B. That the Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority and the Bellefonte
Borough Authority accept the responsibility as the agencies within their
respective areas to provide for enforcement of this article and that the
cost of the enforcement be paid by such authorities; and
C. That the Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority and the Bellefonte
Borough Authority adopt a set of rules and regulations which shall
include the provisions of this article.
§ 455-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-19
1:239
§ 455-19. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of this article are:
§ 455-20. Manner of financing the agreement.
Each municipality agrees to pay the cost of enactment of this article.
The Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority is designated as the code
enforcement agency for the joint administration of this article in the
Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker. The sole purpose for the
enactment of the regulations contained in this article is for the benefit of
the users of the Authority's wastewater collection system. The Authority
accepts its designation as the code enforcement agency and agrees to be
responsible for the enforcement of this article. All salaries, fees, costs,
expenses or other resources expended in the enforcement of this article
shall be the responsibility of the Authority. The Spring-Benner-Walker Joint
Authority agrees to hold each and all municipalities herein harmless and
to indemnify them for any loss or expense arising from the enforcement or
failure to enforce this article.
§ 455-21. Organizational structure.
The Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority is hereby designated as the code
enforcement agency for the administration and enforcement of this article
in the Spring, Benner and Walker Townships. The Spring-Benner-Walker
Joint Authority shall be responsible for the assignment of duties to such
employees as it deems necessary to accomplish the objectives of this article
and to enforce its provisions.
§ 455-22. Property.
All property, whether real or personal, which is acquired or managed by the
Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority in the administration or enforcement
of this article shall become the property of such Authority. All expenses
and liabilities of whatever nature arising from the administration and
enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Authority.
A. To meet the requirements imposed by the federal government so that
the Spring-Benner-Walker Joint Authority's sewage collection system
can continue to flow into the Bellefonte Borough Authority's
wastewater treatment plant;
B. To provide uniform ordinances, rules, regulations and enforcement
procedures for the intermunicipal area affected;
C. To provide for enforcement of this article by the Spring-Benner-Walker
Joint Authority; and
D. To place the cost of the enforcement of this article upon the users of the
Authority's system for whose benefit it is enacted by providing that the
Authority shall be liable and responsible to act as the agent of the
municipalities to enforce this article.
§ 455-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-23
1:240
§ 455-23. Duration.
This article shall remain in effect so long as:
§ 455-24. Amendment.
This article may be amended by the adoption of identical amendments by all
the municipalities and concurrence by the Spring-Benner-Walker Authority
and the Bellefonte Water Authority.
§ 455-25. Review.
The Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker, and Bellefonte Borough shall
periodically (at least once every three years) review this article and jointly
draft and adopt amendments to this article when necessary or advisable
to ensure the effective administration and operation of the pretreatment
program. Whenever the Bellefonte Water Authority or the Spring-Benner-
Walker Joint Authority becomes aware of a problem with the pretreatment
program which can be mitigated by a change in this article, the authorities
may draft a joint amendment which the authorities agree to adopt into
their respective rules and regulations and submit the same to the townships
and borough to ordain, which amendments shall become effective upon the
ordaining of the same by all three townships and the borough.
§ 455-26. Industrial users in other jurisdictions.
If there is an industrial user discharging into the Authority's sewerage
system, but located outside the jurisdictional limits of the Authority, then
the Authority shall negotiate and enter into an agreement with the outside
jurisdiction. Such agreement shall be substantially equivalent to this article
and shall be jointly executed by the Authority, the municipalities and the
outside jurisdiction. If the outside jurisdiction refuses to negotiate and
execute an agreement, then the Authority shall enter into a contract with
the industrial user which contains terms and conditions substantially
equivalent to the Authority's industrial discharge permits.
§ 455-27. Access to reports.
The Authority shall file with the Borough a certified copy of its ordinance
and any amendments thereto, other interjurisdictional agreements, each
industrial waste discharge permit issued, and any contract entered into
for the purpose of industrial waste control. The Authority shall provide the
Borough access to and copies of, if requested, all industrial monitoring
reports, including 40 CFR 403.12 compliance reports, self-monitoring
reports, baseline reports, records of violations and actions taken, and any
A. The service agreement of November 30, 1976, remains in effect; or
B. The federal government continues to require this article for
pretreatment; or
C. The parties hereto agree to terminate and repeal the same.
§ 455-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-27
1:241
other monitoring or reporting requirements imposed by federal, state or
local regulations. These records and other relevant information shall be
maintained for at least three years.
§ 455-28. Inspection.
Any authorized officer or employee of the Borough may enter and inspect
at any reasonable time any part of the sewerage system of the Authority.
The right of entry and inspection shall extend to public streets, easements
and property within which the system is located. Additionally, the Borough
shall be permitted, as appropriate, to enter onto private property to inspect
industrial waste dischargers. The Authority shall make all necessary legal
and administrative arrangements, including the procurement of search
warrants, for these inspections. The right of inspection shall include on-site
inspection of pretreatment and sewer facilities, observation, measurement,
sampling, testing and access to (with the right to copy) all pertinent
compliance records located on the premises of the industrial user.
§ 455-29. Technical and administrative activities.
§ 455-30. Review of Authority's rules.
A. The Authority and the Borough may enter into a pretreatment
agreement providing the Borough with the legal authority and
responsibility for performance of technical and administrative activities
necessary for implementation of a pretreatment program within the
Authority's jurisdiction. These activities may include, among others:
(1) Updating the industrial waste survey.
(2) Providing technical services, such as sampling, process chemical
analysis, and engineering advice.
(3) Issuance of permits.
(4) Compliance monitoring.
(5) Enforcement support.
B. Where pretreatment delegation occurs, the Borough shall assess the
Authority the cost incurred by the Borough in conjunction with the
administration of the pretreatment program on behalf of the Authority,
including costs of overhead insurance and maintenance personnel. The
Borough shall provide the Authority with a detailed accounting of the
pretreatment costs so assessed.
A. The Borough shall review the Authority's rules and regulations and the
townships' ordinances and any amendments thereto. The Borough shall
further review any interjurisdictional agreements by or among the
parties hereto. Such ordinances, rules, regulations and
interjurisdictional agreement shall be reviewed for conformance with
40 CFR, Part 403, to ensure inclusion of all other legal provisions
§ 455-27 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-30
1:242
§ 455-31. Remedial plan.
If the Borough determines that the Authority has failed or has refused to
fulfill any pretreatment obligations, the Borough may develop and issue a
remedial plan containing a description of the nature of the pretreatment
deficiencies, an enumeration of steps to be taken by the Authority and a
time schedule for attaining compliance with all pretreatment requirements.
Such plans shall be specifically enforceable in a court of competent
jurisdiction, at law or in equity, as the Borough may choose. Where the
Authority fails to satisfy the terms of the remedial plan, the Borough may,
upon 30 days' written notice, refuse to accept any industrial waste
discharges from the Authority.
§ 455-32. Indemnification.
The Authority shall indemnify the Borough, the Borough Authority and
the Townships for all damages, fines, costs, legal fees or other charges
incurred as a result of industrial waste discharge from the Authority, and
further shall hold harmless and indemnify the municipalities, including the
Borough Authority, for all costs incurred on account of the defense of the
Borough or the Authority against any claim for injuries or property damage,
or for any other matter whatsoever, made by a third party, resulting from
the discharge, accidental, negligent or purposeful, from the Authority. The
Authority shall reimburse the municipalities for all fines, costs, attorney's
fees, charges or damages stemming from injury or property damage to
personnel of the municipalities or to third parties; damage to facilities
of the municipalities; disruption of treatment processes or operations;
degradation of sludge quality; NPDES permit violations; interruption of
service to any other customer; and other air, water and sludge quality
violations.
§ 455-33. Dangerous discharge.
When a discharge to the Borough's wastewater treatment system
reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the environment,
or threatens damage to any stream into which the wastewater treatment
system discharges, or threatens to interfere with the operation of the
mandated by this agreement. The Borough shall periodically review the
enforcement efforts of the Authority to ascertain whether or not the
pretreatment requirements are being diligently enforced.
B. To the extent that the Authority chooses to administer its own
pretreatment program, the Borough may periodically review the
Authority's pretreatment program activities and funding to ensure that
the Authority and/or the Township and/or any outside jurisdiction is
adequately administering its pretreatment program in conformance
with the federal pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, Part 403), all
commonwealth requirements, all county requirements and all Borough
requirements.
§ 455-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-33
1:243
wastewater treatment system, the Borough may immediately initiate steps
to identify the source of the discharge and to halt or prevent such discharge.
The Borough may seek such legal or equitable relief as is necessary against
the Authority, an outside jurisdiction and/or any industrial user contributing
to such emergency condition and may pursue such other self-help remedies
as will bring a reasonable judgment, mitigation or a stop to the danger
presented by such discharge. The Authority agrees to reimburse the
Borough for all costs, legal fees or other charges incident to the
implementation of this section if such discharge emanates from the
Authority's geographical area and the Authority has failed to take such
action necessary to mitigate or eradicate such danger after oral or written
notice from the Borough. The Authority, for its part, agrees to act promptly,
diligently and immediately to alleviate, mitigate or eradicate any danger
to the environment or to the health, safety or welfare of the public or any
threat to the operation of the Borough's wastewater treatment facility from
any such industrial discharge within its service area.
§ 455-34. Reservation of right to issue zoning and sewage permits.
Each municipality reserves the right to issue zoning or sewage permits to
new industrial users if the entire system has the capacity to accept such
new users. Such permits may be issued in the properly zoned areas of
any of the four municipalities involved, up to the capacity of the system.
The permit system shall not be used to favor or detrimentally affect one
municipality over another but shall operate equally on all users, industrial
or otherwise, regardless of which municipality the user desires to locate in.
§ 455-35. Adoption of pretreatment ordinance.
§ 455-36. Interjurisdictional pretreatment agreement.
Upon the adoption of this article by all parties identified herein, an
interjurisdictional pretreatment agreement shall be executed by the proper
officers of the Borough, as directed by Council, on behalf of the Borough,
which agreement shall incorporate therein the provisions of this article.
A. Each municipality, by the adoption of this article, adopts the provisions
of the ordinance entitled:
(1) "A joint municipal ordinance of the Borough of Bellefonte and the
Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker, setting forth uniform
requirements from direct and indirect contributors into the
wastewater and treatment system of the Borough of Bellefonte, as
required by state and federal regulations."
B. Such ordinance has been adopted by the Borough as Ordinance No.
913, adopted June 18, 1984, and is hereby incorporated herein by
reference. Such ordinance shall be adopted together with this article by
the Townships of Spring, Benner and Walker and numbered
successively.
§ 455-33 BELLEFONTE CODE § 455-37
1:244
§ 455-37. Local limits. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord. No.
10192015-02]
A. The following pollutant limits are hereby established to assure biosolids
quality and to protect against pass-through and interference. No person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
maximum allowable discharge limits.
Pollutant
Monthly
Average
Limit
(mg/l)
Maximum
Daily
Limit
(mg/l)
Instantaneous
Maximum
Limit
(mg/l)
Arsenic (T) 0.078 0.117 0.156
Cadmium (T) 0.169 0.254 0.338
Chromium (T) 8.021 12.032 16.042
Copper (T) 1.181 1.772 2.363
Cyanide (T) 2.949 4.423 5.897
Lead (T) 1.471 2.207 2.942
Mercury (T) 0.065 0.097 0.129
Nickel (T) 2.496 3.743 4.991
Silver (T) 8.004 12.006 16.008
Zinc (T) 3.216 4.824 6.432
Benzene 0.130 0.195 0.260
Ethylbenzene 1.590 2.385 3.180
Toluene 1.350 2.025 2.700
Xylene 232.00 348.00 464.00
Oil and grease 100.00 150.00 200.00
B. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances shall be for the
"total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentrationbased
limitations set forth herein.
§ 455-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-37
1:245
Chapter 478
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 478-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Identical to the definition of an accessory
building contained in the Bellefonte Borough Zoning Ordinance.50
ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (ASES) — An area of land or other
area used for a solar collection system used to capture solar energy, convert
it to electrical energy or thermal power and supply electrical or thermal
power primarily for on-site use. An accessory solar energy system consists
of one or more freestanding ground or roof-mounted solar arrays or solarrelated
equipment and is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption
of utility power or fuels.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS — Structures, equipment, devices or
construction techniques used for the production of heat, light, cooling,
electricity or other forms of energy on site and may be attached to or
separate from the principal structure.
FREESTANDING OR GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM —
A solar energy system that is directly installed in the ground and is not
attached or affixed to an existing structure.
HISTORIC PROPERTY — For the purpose of this chapter, a property is
considered historic if it:
PRIMARY FACADE OR ELEVATION — That part(s) of the building which
fronts (directly or at an angle) the main roadway(s) serving the building. It
will usually contain the main architectural features of the building.
ROOFTOP OR BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar power
system in which solar panels are mounted on top of the structure of a roof
Is a contributing property located within one or both of Bellefonte
Borough's locally reviewed or nationally designated historic districts;
or
A.
Is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or by
the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission;
B.
C. Is protected by a historic preservation easement.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 575, Zoning.
§ 455-37 BELLEFONTE CODE § 478-1
1:246
either as a flush-mounted system or as modules fixed to frames which can
be tilted toward the south at an optimal angle.
SOLAR ACCESS — Space open to the sun and clear of overhangs or shade,
including the orientation of streets and lots to the sun, so as to permit the
use of active and/or passive solar energy systems on individual properties.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot
air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation as an energy
source for the generation of electricity or transfer of stored heat.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT/SYSTEM — Items including a solar
photovoltaic cell, module, panel, solar shingle, or array, or solar hot air or
water collector device modules, lines, pumps, batteries, mounting brackets,
framing and possibly foundations or other structures used for or intended
to be used for collection of solar energy to convert solar energy for use in
space heating or cooling, water heating, or generating electricity.
§ 478-2. Accessory solar energy systems (ASES).
SOLAR ARRAY — A grouping of multiple solar modules with the
purpose of harvesting solar energy.
A.
SOLAR CELL — The smallest basic solar electric device which
generates electricity when exposed to light.
B.
SOLAR MODULE — A grouping of solar cells with the purpose of
harvesting solar energy.
C.
A. Regulations applicable to all accessory solar energy systems.
(1) ASES shall be permitted as a use by right in all zoning districts and
shall comply with the Pennsylvania Utility Commission
Interconnection Guidelines.
(2) Exemptions.
§ 478-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-2
1:247
(a) Systems generating less than 50 V and that are not tied into
either the building wiring or the electrical utility grid are
exempt from this chapter.
(b) ASES constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall not be required to meet the terms and conditions of this
chapter. Any physical modification altering the footprint or
placement of an existing ASES, whether or not existing prior to
the effective date of this chapter, requires the issuance of a
zoning permit. Routine maintenance or like-kind and size
replacements do not require a permit.
(3) ASES installers must certify, upon request by the zoning officer,
that they are listed as a certified home improvement contractor
with the Pennsylvania Attorney General's Office and have
successfully installed a minimum of three ASES systems.
(4) All on-site utility, transmission lines, and plumbing shall be placed
underground to the extent feasible.
(5) The display of advertising is prohibited except for the reasonable
identification of the ASES system, such as a nameplate of the
manufacturer.
(6) With the installation of an ASES, applicants acknowledge that the
issuing of said permit for a solar energy system shall not and does
not create in the property owner, its, his, her or their successors
and assigns in title or create in the property itself:
(a) The right to remain free of shadows and/or obstructions to
solar energy caused by development of adjoining or other
property or the growth of any trees or vegetation on such
property; or
(b) The right to prohibit the development on or growth of any trees
or vegetation on such property.
(7) Decommissioning.
(a) Each ASES and all solar-related equipment shall be removed
within 12 months of the date when the use has been
discontinued or abandoned by the system owner and/or
operator, or upon termination of the useful life of same.
(b) The ASES owner shall, at the request of the Borough, provide
adequate information to justify that the system has not been
abandoned.
(8) Permit requirements.
(a) Prior to the installation or modification of any ASES, a zoning
permit shall be obtained from the Borough of Bellefonte.
§ 478-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 478-2
1:248
Failure to obtain a permit shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
(b) Zoning permit applications shall document compliance with
this chapter and at a minimum shall be accompanied by
drawings showing the location of the system on the building
and/or property, including property lines, zoning setbacks, and
structures. Permit documents must be kept on the premises
where the ASES is constructed.
B. Roof-mounted and wall-mounted accessory solar energy systems.
(1) A roof-mounted or wall-mounted ASES may be located on a
principal or accessory building.
(2) ASES mounted on roofs or walls of any building shall be subject to
the maximum height regulations specified for principal and
accessory buildings within the underlying Zoning District.
(3) Wall-mounted ASES shall comply with the setbacks for principal
and accessory structures in the underlying zoning district.
(4) In all cases, solar modules shall not extend beyond any portion of
the roof edge.
C. Ground-mounted accessory solar energy systems.
(1) Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks from the side and rear
property lines shall be the same as the accessory structure setback
in the zoning district.
(a) For small ground-mounted units under 225 square feet in
ground floor area and not exceeding 10 feet in height, the
minimum yard setback for the side and rear property lines
shall be the same as that of a small accessory structure setback
in the zoning district.
(b) For large ground-mounted units between 226 square feet in
ground floor area and 1,000 square feet and not exceeding 15
feet in height, the minimum yard setback shall conform to the
same standards set forth for accessory structures in the zoning
district.
(2) Ground-mounted ASES shall not be installed in the front yard of the
property as defined by the zoning code of the Borough of
Bellefonte.
(3) Coverage.
(a) The area beneath the ground-mounted ASES, if not otherwise
disturbed, is considered pervious cover. However, use of
impervious construction materials under the system could
cause the area to be considered impervious and subject to the
§ 478-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-2
1:249
§ 478-3. Solar modules on historic properties.
impervious surfaces limitations for the applicable zoning
district.
(b) The total surface area of the ground-mounted ASES on a
residential property shall not exceed more than 15% of the
total pervious lot area.
(c) The total ground floor area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(4) Screening. Mechanical equipment of the ground-mounted ASES
shall be screened from any adjacent property. The screen shall
consist of shrubbery, trees, or other plant materials which provides
a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence
meeting the requirements of the Borough of Bellefonte Zoning
Ordinance51 may be used.
(5) Location limitations. Ground-mounted ASES shall not be placed
within any legal easement or right-of-way location or be placed
within any storm, water conveyance system or in any other manner
that would alter or impede stormwater runoff from collecting in a
constructed stormwater conveyance system.
A. All solar modules on roof surfaces shall blend in or not be visible from
the primary facade or elevation
B. All ASES installations shall meet the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and Standards for
Rehabilitation, Illustrated Guidelines on Sustainability for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, and Incorporating Solar Panels in a
Rehabilitation Project disseminated by the National Park Service (NPS)
and available on their website online.
C. All solar installations placed on historic properties shall comply with
the Historic District ordinance. Individually designated historic
properties not located in the Historic District shall adhere to the same
process and limitations.
D. If an installed ASES is to be decommissioned per § 478-2A(7) of this
chapter and removed from an historic property, application must be
made to the Historical Architectural Review Board for the alteration of
the historic structure.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 575, Zoning.
§ 478-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 478-3
1:250
Chapter 482
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Refuse Collection Department — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 425.
Discontinuance of utility service — See Ch.
524, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 478-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-3
1:251

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 7-24-1989 by Ord. No. 1017 (Ch. 1049 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 482-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Bellefonte Borough Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 482-2. Public policy.
The Borough, recognizing that the reclamation of recyclable materials has
become an important method for addressing the growing solid waste
disposal problem through conservation of landfill space, preservation of
natural resources and a reduction in energy consumption, does hereby
authorize the storage, collection and transportation of recyclable materials
in accordance with the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act52 (Act No. 101), the Centre County Solid Waste Management
Plan, and this article. This article is intended to be an integral part of an
overall system designed to facilitate recycling and foster the cooperation of
the residents.
§ 482-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
AUTHORITY — The County Recycling and Refuse Authority.53
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty beverage or food containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
COLLECTOR — For purposes of collecting and transporting recyclables,
means the County Recycling and Refuse Authority or its authorized agent.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, including, but not
limited to, those engaged in retail trade or sale of goods. Expressly included
are all restaurants and taverns, all industrial or manufacturing businesses,
and all types of offices.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Refers to church, school, civic, service group,
municipal functions and all other such functions.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
53.Editor's Note: References to the "Centre County Solid Waste Authority" were changed to
the "Centre County Recycling and Refuse Authority" throughout this chapter at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-3
1:253
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transportation of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other area
designated by the collector.
DROPOFF SITES — Those specified locations, staffed or unstaffed, where
recyclable materials may be taken at specified times.
DWELLINGS — Shall be defined as follows:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated herein or otherwise
charged with the responsibilities of administering this article, or such
official's authorized representative.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or amber
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, automobile glass, plate
glass, blue glass, lead crystal, and porcelain and ceramic products.
HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) CONTAINERS — Plastic bottles
and jars made exclusively from high-density polyethylene, such as milk and
water jugs.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — A facility that houses or serves
groups of people, such as a hospital, school, day-care center or nursing
home.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Includes, but is not limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residue, chipped shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass
clippings.
MAGAZINES — Matter containing written pieces published at fixed or
varying intervals, printed on slick or glossy paper which contains
contaminants not found in newsprint.
MULTIFAMILY-HOUSING FACILITY — See "dwellings."
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Borough and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING FACILITY — A building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one- or
two-family dwelling.
A.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit
only.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units
only.
C.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
D.
§ 482-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-3
1:254
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities.
Also included is any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or
hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act54 from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. "Municipal waste" does not
include source-separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint,
distributed at fixed intervals and having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are glossy advertising inserts, often included with newspapers, as
well as newspapers which have been soiled.
OCCUPANT — Any person, including domestic service employees, living
and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, municipal waste hauler, scrap
dealer, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise,
municipality, municipal authority, federal government or agency thereof,
state institution or agency thereof, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty, or
any combination of the foregoing, "person" shall include the officers and
directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE (PET) CONTAINERS — Plastic soda
bottles or other containers composed of the polymer PET.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any used material having an economic value
in the secondary materials market. This term includes, but is not limited
to, the following materials: aluminum cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass
containers, corrugated paper, magazines, computer printout paper,
computer tab cards, high-grade office paper, steel cans, newspaper, paper
products not chemically coated, plastic polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
bottles, plastic high-density polyethylene (HDPE) containers and other
materials designated by the County Recycling and Refuse Authority as
having value.
STEEL CANS — Empty all-steel and tin-plated-steel food and beverage
containers.
§ 482-4. Exemption from waste disposal requirements.
Recyclable materials provided for in this article shall not be considered
municipal waste and shall not be subject to those ordinances which require
disposal of municipal waste at designated facilities. This exemption applies
to recyclable materials collected by the County Recycling and Refuse
54.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 482-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-4
1:255
Authority or its agents and delivered to the Authority's Intermediate
Processing Facility for purposes of materials recovery. Recyclables
separated, stored, collected or delivered in any manner other than the
approved methods listed in the Authority regulations authorized by § 482-8
shall be considered municipal waste and are subject to the appropriate
ordinances.
§ 482-5. Establishment of program.
§ 482-6. Lead acid batteries.
No person shall place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid
waste or discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery, except by
delivery to an automotive battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary
lead smelter permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency, or to a
A. The Borough hereby establishes a mandatory program for the
separation of recyclable materials from municipal waste by all persons
within the Borough. In doing so, the Borough officially becomes a
participant in the County Recycling and Refuse Authority Recycling
Program, for which the Authority is the implementing agency. Upon
notification of Bellefonte's intent to participate in the county program,
the Authority will evaluate the applicability of curbside collection of
recyclables from residents in the Borough. If this service is deemed
appropriate, the Authority will develop and identify routes as indicated
in § 482-8 and will add each route to the curbside program individually.
After curbside service has been instituted within the Borough, the
recycling program will be mandatory. Occupants shall be responsible
for the separation of recyclable materials from solid waste and their
preparation and placement at curbside. Recyclable materials may also
be delivered to any established dropoff site.
B. Dropoff facilities will be sited for use by those residents occupying onefamily
and two-family dwellings located within the Borough not
serviced by a curbside route. After all curbside routes within the
Borough have been established, the recycling program for those
households not serviced by curbside collection will also be mandatory.
Occupants of these dwelling units shall be responsible for the
separation of recyclable materials from municipal waste and their
preparation and delivery to dropoff sites established by the Authority.
C. Following implementation of the residential curbside collection and
dropoff facility programs within the Borough, the program will be
expanded to include multifamily housing facilities, as well as
commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and community
activities. It is understood that, as new recycling programs are
developed in each of these areas, the recycling program instituted will
be mandatory. Immediately following program initiation, all affected
persons will be governed by this article.
§ 482-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-6
1:256
collection or recycling facility authorized under the laws of the
commonwealth.
§ 482-7. Separation and disposal of leaf waste.
All persons who reside in residential dwellings and all persons who are
responsible for the administration of multifamily housing properties or
commercial, municipal or institutional establishments who gather leaves
shall separate all leaf waste from other waste and place it for collection
at the times and in the manner theretofore or hereafter prescribed by
the Borough. Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves
or prevent any person from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch or other
agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or landscape purposes.
§ 482-8. Establishment of regulations.
The County Recycling and Refuse Authority is hereby authorized and
directed to establish and advertise regulations concerning:
§ 482-9. Collection by unauthorized persons.
§ 482-10. Enforcement and administration.
The Borough shall appoint an enforcement officer or officers to enforce and
administer this article.
§ 482-11. Agreement with authority.
The Borough intends to enter into an agreement with the County Recycling
and Refuse Authority to authorize the Authority to collect all or part of the
A. Recyclables to be collected in each phase of the program;
B. The preparation of recyclable materials for collection in each program
phase;
C. The method of collection of recyclables in each program phase;
D. Scheduled days and times of collection in each program phase; and
E. The identification of residences to be served by curbside collection.
A. Any recyclables located at the curbline, in dropoff sites or in storage
bins associated with commercial, municipal, institutional or multifamily
housing establishments are the property of the County Recycling and
Refuse Authority.
B. No person shall collect or remove or cause to be collected or removed
any such recyclable materials specified by the Authority as indicated in
§ 482-8, unless authorized by the Authority. Each such collection in
violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as set forth in § 482-15.
§ 482-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-11
1:257
recyclable materials from curbside, dropoff or other designated locations.
Until the parties enter into such an agreement, this article shall not be in
effect.
§ 482-12. Alternative disposition of recyclable materials.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations unless or until such materials are placed at curbside, in
dropoff facilities or storage bins, or in similar locations intended for
collection by the County Recycling and Refuse Authority or its agent.
§ 482-13. Applicability of other laws.
This article shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws
and ordinances as well as rules and regulations as set forth by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the commonwealth.
§ 482-14. Rates. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 482-15. Violations and penalties.
A. The recycling charge for services provided for in this article shall be
established by resolution of Borough Council.55
B. The provisions of § 482-32, including the definitions and formulas
contained therein, are hereby included in this section by reference.
A. Notice of violation; noncompliance.
(1) Upon the discovery of any violation under the terms of this article,
the municipality shall, through its authorized agent or agents, give
notice to the owner or occupant of the premises, or both, of a
violation hereunder, either by personal delivery to such owner or
occupant by United States mail directed to the last known address
of such person as shown in the real estate registry records of the
municipality or by leaving the same on the premises where such
violation occurs.
(2) Upon the neglect or refusal of the occupant of any dwelling
serviced by curbside recycling collection, a multifamily housing
program or a commercial, municipal or institutional program to
separate recyclable materials from municipal solid waste and place
them at curbside or sites established by the County Recycling and
Refuse Authority, he or she shall, upon conviction of such default,
neglect or refusal, pay a fine of not less than $25, together with the
costs of prosecution, to be collected as now provided by law. Each
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Unauthorized collection. Whoever, unauthorized by the Authority,
collects, removes or causes to be collected or removed any such
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-11 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-15
1:258
recyclable materials as specified in the Authority regulations provided
for in § 482-8, in violation of this article, shall, upon conviction by a
Magisterial District Judge in a summary proceeding, be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 and not more than $300, together with the
costs of prosecution. Upon judgment against any such defendant by
summary conviction, and upon default of the payment of the fine or
penalty imposed and the costs, such defendant may be imprisoned in
the County Jail for a period of not more than 30 days. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. Each violation shall be subject to a separate
summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge and shall be
subject to the penalty imposed by this subsection.
C. Pilfering of collection containers. If any person is responsible for the
pilfering of collection containers issued to a residence slated for either
curbside collection or any other phase of the County Authority
Recycling Program, such person shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not less than $100 and not more than $300. The affected resident will
be responsible for replacing any missing container through purchase
from the Authority.
§ 482-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-15
1:259

ARTICLE II
Refuse Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 1206 (Ch. 1048 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances); amended in its entirety 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 090611.]
§ 482-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials for the purpose of heating and cooking.
BUILDING DEBRIS — Any accumulated building materials resulting from
construction or reconstruction on a property.
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE — Includes all paper, straw, excelsior, rags, rubber
and such other refuse as may result from ordinary housekeeping or
commercial pursuits and which may be burned by fire, excluding garbage.
COMPOSTABLE MATERIALS — Organic material, which, when decayed, is
used for fertilizing and conditioning of land and for purposes here, shall
be defined as including leaves, grass clippings, brush and small tree limbs
under two inches in diameter.
CONTAINER — Container provided to each resident. These containers are
the property of the Borough of Bellefonte and must be left at the residence
upon moving out.
CUSTOMER — A person who is receiving refuse service on a weekly basis
and who is on regular quarterly or annual billings.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable refuse from the storage, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
MULTIPLE-USE BUILDING — Any building being used for more than one
purpose, such as apartments, offices of commercial units, or any
combination thereof.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE REFUSE — Consists of all discarded articles or
materials except sewage, liquid waste, garbage and combustible refuse.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material in the waste stream which has
recapture value designated by Council or by the Centre County Recycling
and Refuse Authority, which materials shall be collected separately from
rubbish and is not subject to the provisions of the Municipal waste
ordinance.
REFUSE — Garbage, ashes, or rubbish.
RUBBISH — All waste materials not included in the definition of garbage,
except building rubbish from building construction or reconstruction,
industrial refuse, dead animals, abandoned large vehicles or other
machinery, or such other waste materials as are not commonly produced
in homes, stores and institutions. Also excluded from the term "rubbish"
are materials designated as recyclable. These designated materials may
§ 482-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-16
1:261
vary from time to time, depending on the different markets for their reuse.
Recyclable material will be designated by Council or by the Centre County
Recycling and Refuse Authority.
SPECIAL COLLECTION — Any collection of objects, other than collections
on the regular refuse route, that do not fit into the Borough-provided refuse
containers, such as furniture, white goods, etc.
WHITE GOODS — Items like refrigerators, hot-water heaters, washers and
dryers.
§ 482-17. Collection, transportation or disposal by other than
Borough personnel prohibited.
All refuse produced and accumulated in the Borough shall be collected,
transported and disposed of only by the Refuse Collection Department of
the Borough. The Department shall be the sole and exclusive agency for
such collection, transportation and disposal. No other person shall collect,
transport or dispose of refuse in the Borough. Recyclables which are not
part of the Municipal Waste Ordinance shall be collected in a manner
approved by Council.
§ 482-18. Requirements for garbage and rubbish. [Amended
10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152012-001]
A. All residents shall be required to use Borough-provided containers. All
containers for garbage or rubbish shall be provided by the Borough and
shall be kept watertight by the resident. The Borough shall provide the
homeowner with the first container at no expense. Should a resident
require one additional container, the resident may purchase it from the
Borough at the Borough's current cost for the container. Should the
customer have on occasion an event knowing more garbage and/or
rubbish will be generated (e.g., holiday, graduation party, moving, yard
cleanup, additional rubbish, etc.), he may contact the Borough in
advance and, for a nominal fee, rent containers on a temporary basis.
The rental fee shall be set by resolution but will only cover the cost of
delivery and pickup of the container; no additional cost for refuse will
be charged. All containers shall be kept as clean as possible and shall
be replaced by the customer when they are no longer in good condition.
The refuse crew will provide notice of needed container replacement by
tie-on tag, sticker or card.
B. The storage of all garbage or rubbish shall be practiced so as to prevent
the attraction, breeding or harborage of insects or rodents and to
prevent conditions which may create potential hazards to the public
health or which may create fire and other safety hazards, odors,
unsightliness or public nuisance. Any person accumulating or storing
garbage or rubbish on private or public property in the Borough for any
purpose whatsoever shall place the same, or cause the same to be
placed, in sanitary closed containers supplied by the Borough for that
purpose. Storage in other containers and/or bags is not permitted. All
§ 482-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-18
1:262
§ 482-19. Ashes to be separated.
Ashes shall be placed in containers not larger than five gallons in capacity
and shall be provided by the customer. Ash containers shall be metal.
Ash containers shall be picked up separately on Wednesdays, beginning
November 1 through March 31. Ash containers must be placed at the curb
in front of the residence.
§ 482-20. Location of refuse and recycling material to be collected.
§ 482-21. Special preparation requirements; special collections.
garbage and rubbish, before being placed in the container(s), shall have
all liquids drained, and the lids must be kept closed. Garbage must
be placed in plastic or paper bags prior to being placed in containers.
Small loose rubbish shall be secured by bags, bundles or boxes.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06152015-02]
A. The occupant shall have the refuse and recycling material readily
accessible to the refuse collector on the day of collection and shall place
his container(s) and recycling materials in front of the residence on the
curb or at the edge of the street. The collector shall not enter a building
to collect refuse. The customer shall not place any recycling material in
the appropriate bins or any refuse in cans, bags or other approved
containers at curbside for pickup prior to 6:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the scheduled pickup. Such approved containers, cans or
bags, including recycling bins, shall be removed out of sight of the
thoroughfare which fronts the property from which such refuse has
been removed by 7:00 p.m. on the day scheduled for refuse pickup.
B. Those residents either unable or wanting to have refuse personnel pick
up their garbage and/or rubbish at a location other than the curb may
do so by contacting the Borough. There will be an additional cost for
this service, to be set by resolution. This service applies only to garbage
and rubbish. All grass clippings, brush and ash containers must be
placed at the curb on Wednesdays during their respective pickup
months. [Amended 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 10152012-001]
C. If you are physically unable to maneuver the container to the curb for
pickup due to a disability, you may apply for a cart exemption, which
will allow you to place bags directly at the curb. Please contact the
Borough office at 236 West Lamb Street for more information. You will
be asked to complete a cart exemption application which will include a
section for a doctor's verification. This will apply to all persons living in
the residence.
A. Rubbish that cannot conveniently be placed in the required type of
container shall be assembled or bundled in such a way that it can be
handled by one man and will not be disseminated by the wind or
otherwise while awaiting collection. Material requiring special
§ 482-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-21
1:263
§ 482-22. Frequency of collection; collection schedule.
Refuse shall be collected from premises at such intervals and according
to a schedule determined and established from time to time by Council.
Such schedule may provide for more frequent collection from restaurants,
hotels and other businesses and institutions producing large quantities
of garbage and/or other refuse than from dwellings, and such schedule
may also require that special kinds of refuse of unusual bulk, shape, size,
quantity or nature be withheld from the regular collection and be collected
separately at a special collection.
§ 482-23. Refuse collection vehicles.
Vehicles used by refuse collectors shall be fully enclosed packer-type
vehicles and shall be cleaned at frequent intervals to prevent any nuisance
by odors. Where disposal is made by transportation of covered cans, other
types of vehicles may be used. Recyclables which are not part of the
Municipal Waste Ordinance shall be collected in a manner approved by
Council.
§ 482-24. Use of landfill; ownership of refuse.
All refuse accumulated and collected by the Borough shall be disposed of in
a sanitary landfill or other licensed facility for refuse disposal. Ownership
of material placed at the curb for collection, including recyclables, shall be
vested in the Borough. The collection of these items shall be at the direction
of Council.
§ 482-25. Establishment of refuse collection fees.
collection shall be collected at the special collection rate. [Amended
6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06152015-02]
B. Electronic material (e.g., TVs, computers, microwave ovens, etc.)
requiring a special pickup and surcharge may be dropped off at a
Borough location (trailer) at any time by a Borough customer with no
applied fee. This will be in effect as long as the Centre County Recycling
and Refuse Authority receives this material for no cost to the Borough.
A. All fees for the collection and disposal of refuse in the Borough shall be
established by resolution of Council and may be changed from time to
time by the same procedure.
B. A fee or fees as set forth by resolution shall be paid to the Borough for
every place of residence and every place of business within the Borough
for the removal and disposal of refuse. Such fees shall be determined by
the Borough Council as necessary and commensurate with the services
rendered, computed on basis of expense, depreciation and reasonable
charge for readiness to serve.
§ 482-21 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-26
1:264
§ 482-26. Billing or collection charge; discontinuance of service for
nonpayment.
§ 482-27. Temporary vacancies.
A. Bills for refuse collection service for dwelling units shall be rendered in
advance of the period for which the service has been contracted. Bills
for multiple-use commercial or industrial occupancies, schools, and
hospitals shall be rendered after the service has been performed. Bills
are payable within 20 days of the date of billing. If bill is not paid by the
due date, the amount owed will be subject to a penalty set by Council
resolution.
B. Bills for special collections shall be rendered on a monthly basis
following such collections and shall be due and payable within 20 days
of the day bills are sent. If a special collection bill is not paid by the due
date, the amount owed will be added to the normal quarterly bill and
will be subject to a late penalty set by Council resolution.
C. All bills for refuse service to apartments, row houses, multiple
dwellings and similar dwelling units, where refuse service is tendered
to the tenants of such premises, shall be sent to the owner of such
premises. Such bills shall be paid by such owner in accordance with the
rate schedule then and there prevailing. The owner of such premises
shall be responsible solely to the Borough for payment of such refuse
billing irrespective of any agreement, oral or written, between such
owner and the person on whose behalf such refuse service is rendered.
Such billing shall be made and directed to the owner of the premises
served by the Borough Refuse Collection Department, and payment
shall be made by such owner or his agents as previously stated.
D. Bills for refuse service to commercial customers may be sent to the
commercial tenant if different than the property owner. If the
commercial tenant does not submit payment for two consecutive billing
periods, the bill may be sent to the property owner who is ultimately
responsible for the bill.
E. It is the responsibility of the property owner to report in writing all
commercial and residential unit changes in vacancy, additions or
deletions to the Borough office within 10 working days for proper
billing of services rendered. In the event services are rendered without
proper payment, the property owner will be responsible for any
backpayments due to the Borough.
F. In the event that payment is not made for such refuse billings, then, at
the option of the Borough and subject to the provisions of Chapter 524,
§ 524-1, service may be discontinued, and the amount due and payable
shall be collected from the owner of such premises in the manner that
municipal claims are presently collected or an action in assumpsit may
be commenced by the Borough against the owner of such premises,
such method of collection to be solely at the option of the Borough.
§ 482-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-27
1:265
A. Vacancies of single-family dwellings. No credit or abatement shall be
permitted or allowed from any refuse bill during a temporary vacancy of
less than three months for any single-family premises served by such
utility. Abatement or release from such a utility bill during a temporary
vacancy of a single-family premises shall only be permitted after an
application for the same is made and approved by the Borough
Manager, who shall render a written response accepting or rejecting
such application within 30 days. The form of the application shall be
prescribed from time to time by Borough Council by resolution. In the
event any such application is disapproved by the Borough Manager,
then the applicant may appeal within 30 days of such filing, and the
applicant will be notified in writing of its decision within 15 days of the
date of the hearing. The decision of Council relating to the appeal shall
be final. In the event the abatement or credit is allowed, the applicant
shall pay to the Borough the sum as set by resolution to discontinue
utility and the sum as set by resolution in addition thereto to turn on
such utility service at the end of the temporary vacancy. There will be
no charge for refuse service during the period of approved vacancy.
Vacancy credits shall not be considered for a period of less than three
months.
B. Vacancies of industrial, commercial, and multifamily buildings
(including units). In cases relating to the temporary vacancy of
industrial, commercial, multifamily residential buildings (or units
thereof), wherein a credit is claimed for temporary vacancy by the
owner, the owner thereof may make application to the Borough
Manager in the same manner as prescribed in Subsection A hereof for
relief, provided that the temporary vacancy period shall be for a period
of not less than one month nor more than nine months. Only temporary
vacancies for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, remodeling,
painting, major repair or major alterations, as defined, shall be
considered for relief under this section. No relief for temporary vacancy
shall be granted for failure to rent the premises in whole or in part. The
written application shall specify whether the period of time is for one
month or more, not to exceed nine. The Manager shall have 30 days to
render a written opinion accepting or rejecting any such application.
C. Fees; inspections. In the event the application is allowed by the
Manager, relating to industrial, commercial, and multifamily units, the
petitioner shall pay to the Borough the sum set by resolution per
industrial, commercial, and multifamily unit. Upon receipt of the
inspection fee, the Borough Manager and/or the Building Inspector
shall cause the unit for which relief is sought to be inspected. At the
close of the temporary vacancy period, the Borough Manager and/or
the Building Code Official shall cause the unit for which relief is sought
to be reinspected to ascertain the condition of the unit and that it is
ready to be reserviced by the Borough utility. There will be no charge
for refuse service during the period of approved vacancy.
§ 482-27 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-27
1:266
§ 482-28. Unauthorized deposit of refuse.
§ 482-29. Removal of unauthorized accumulation of refuse.
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse amounting to a public nuisance is
prohibited. Failure to remove the same within two days after notification to
the owner or occupier of the premises by Council or its representative shall
be a violation of this section, and in addition to other penalties provided in
§ 482-33, the Borough may authorize the collector to remove the refuse, and
the expense thereof, plus any additional charge authorized by law, shall be
collected from the owner or occupier either by an action in assumpsit or by
the filing of a municipal claim.
§ 482-30. Burning of garbage and rubbish prohibited.56
The burning of garbage and/or rubbish of any kind is prohibited in the
Borough.
D. Decisions of Council. The decision of Council shall be final in all cases
relating to credit for temporary vacancies as provided in Subsections A
and B hereof.
E. Violations. The following acts shall be deemed a violation of this
section:
(1) The leaving, transferring, letting, assigning, or renting of any
property as real estate for which a vacancy credit is given without
first having an inspection of the premises as provided in this
section.
(2) The removal of any property from the public housing list of the
Borough, then rerenting before a public housing permit is issued.
Such action shall be deemed a violation of this section, and in
addition to any fine assessed, the owner of said property shall pay
all back utility charges, connection fees and all other costs of utility
service due the Borough from the time the property is removed
from the public housing list to the time a new public housing permit
is issued.
F. Application of Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance and
regulations relating to nonconforming uses apply to all properties
vacant for a period exceeding one year.
A. No person shall transport or remove from private premises within or
from outside the Borough any refuse for the purpose of depositing the
same in any publicly owned can or receptacle within the Borough parks,
at publicly owned buildings, or along publicly owned rights-of-way.
B. No person shall bury any refuse in the Borough.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-31
1:267
§ 482-31. Related services.
§ 482-32. Roll-off containers, dumpsters, etc., on public rights-ofway.
A. Compostable materials. Compostable materials shall be separated from
other refuse and placed close to the curb on Wednesdays from April 1
through October 31. All compostable materials shall be set aside from
other refuse presently collected by the Borough. No compostable
materials shall be placed in plastic bags. Brush shall be tied in bundles.
Bundles shall be no longer than six feet and manageable by one person.
The use of plastic bags as storage containers for compostable materials
to be picked up by the Borough shall be considered a violation of this
section.
B. Grass clippings. This service is optional and shall be for the collection of
grass clippings generated by the lot receiving the service only. This
service shall be available beginning April 1 and ending October 31. The
Borough shall be the provider of a grass clippings container at the
resident's expense. Grass clippings shall be picked up on Wednesdays.
Once a grass container is purchased, there will be no charge for pickup
of grass clippings.
C. White goods and large items. The Borough will charge for the disposal
of white goods and unusually large items as a separate charge in
addition to the normal quarterly refuse rate. These items can be
scheduled for pickup on Wednesdays. The bill will be collected as
outlined in § 482-27B.
D. Building materials. Building materials and construction debris of any
kind are not considered refuse and will not be picked up by the
Borough.
E. Recycling fee. In addition to the quarterly refuse rate, the Borough will
add to the rate a separate fixed fee for recycling.
F. Rental containers. Should the customer have on occasion an event
knowing more garbage or rubbish will be generated (e.g., holiday;
graduation party; moving, yard cleanup, etc.), he may contact the
Borough in advance and, for a nominal fee, rent containers on a
temporary basis. The rental fee shall be set by resolution but only cover
the cost of delivery and pickup of the container; no additional cost for
refuse will be charged.
A. A roll-off container, dumpster, etc., may be placed on a public right-ofway,
provided that the following requirements are met:
(1) Application is made to the Borough office stating the location of the
placement of the dumpster and the period of time it will be on the
public right-of-way.
§ 482-31 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-32
1:268
§ 482-33. Violations and penalties.
(2) A fee set forth by Council resolution shall be paid upon application
to the Borough.
(3) No dumpster placed on a public right-of-way shall exceed eight feet
in width or take up more than one parking space.
(4) Any dumpster placed in a public right-of-way shall have reflective
material on the end that faces the direction of traffic and shall have
at least one orange marker cone positioned at the corner facing the
direction of traffic.
B. No dumpster shall be used for more than 30 days without permit
renewal. Repeated disposal and dropoff of a roll-off dumpster
constitutes a continual use and is calculated in the thirty-day period.
This section does not apply to roll-off containers, dumpsters, etc., that
may be placed on private property.
A. Violators of this article or any of its sections shall receive a ticket or
have a criminal complaint filed and served on the tenant or owner of the
property on which the violation has occurred. A landlord will only be
held responsible for violations of the tenant when reasonable efforts
have been exhausted to collect from the tenant or two violations occur
at the same property. It is the responsibility of the landlord to notify
tenants of the proper place and time for refuse pickup. By
advertisement and passage of this section, Council has hereby given
notice to all interested parties.
B. Any person wishing to appeal a notice of noncompliance or a citation
issued for a violation of this article may, within 48 hours of receiving
said notice, request in writing a hearing before the Mayor. An appeal of
the Mayor's decision may be made to the Magisterial District Judge
having jurisdiction in the Borough in the event the ticket is not paid
after denial of exoneration.
C. The fact that refuse remains on any owner's or occupant's premises in
the Borough in violation of this article shall be prima facia evidence that
the owner or occupant of such premises is responsible for the violation.
D. Fines shall be $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense, and
$300 for the third offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 482-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-33
1:269
Chapter 490
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning commissions — See Ch. 103.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
500.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 482-33 BELLEFONTE CODE § 482-33
1:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 490-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bellefonte Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 490-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 490-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
Bellefonte Borough by minimizing the damages described in § 490-2A of this
chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities; contributes to erosion and sedimentation; overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers; greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater;
undermines floodplain management and flood-reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities; reduces groundwater
recharge; and threatens public health and safety.
B. This stormwater management ordinance has been developed
considering the actual hydrologic processes that occur within the
Spring Creek Watershed and how these processes can best be
represented in hydrologic models that are used in engineering practice
to model developing areas for stormwater management purposes.
Process-driven stormwater management planning is critical in the
Spring Creek Watershed due to the underlying geology. The Spring
Creek Watershed is mainly underlain by carbonate formations. As a
result, significant areas within the watershed do not produce overland
or surface runoff, but rather contribute to the storm-flow component of
runoff in larger tributary areas via a greater than normal interflow
component.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare
and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
A. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
§ 490-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-3
1:271
§ 490-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32
P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act," and
Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., as amended.
§ 490-5. Applicability.
C. Encourage the use of low-impact development techniques to promote
infiltration and groundwater recharge where appropriate.
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
municipality and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities that are constructed in the basin.
G. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
H. Protect groundwater and surface water quality.
A. This chapter shall apply to all land and watercourses within Bellefonte
Borough, except with respect to property and rights-of-way owned,
leased, managed or used by the Borough of Bellefonte and/or the
Bellefonte Borough Authority for public purposes.
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in
this section. Stormwater management and erosion and sediment
pollution control during construction activities are specifically not
regulated by this chapter, but shall continue to be regulated under
existing laws and ordinances.
C. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development;
(2) Subdivision;
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (roadways, driveways, parking lots, etc.);
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel;
and
§ 490-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-5
1:272
§ 490-6. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, statutes or
ordinances.
§ 490-7. Landowner responsibility.
The granting of any exemption, permit or approval by the municipality
does not relieve the applicant from assuring that stormwater runoff from
the development site will not cause injury or damage to other persons or
property.
§ 490-8. References.
Specific methods and publications indicated in this chapter shall, in all
cases, refer to the latest available edition and include revisions or
amendments thereto.
§ 490-9. Exemptions.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
A. Activities identified below are exempt from the requirement to submit a
stormwater management plan to the governing municipality for review.
Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property. These
measures include adequate and safe conveyance of stormwater on the
site and as it leaves the site. This exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from meeting the special requirements for water quality and
groundwater recharge for high quality (HQ) and exceptional value (EV)
watersheds (DEP Chapter 93 and antidegradation requirement), and
§ 490-16C and E of this chapter relative to recharge and water quality
volume requirements.
(1) All development activities having impervious coverage of less than
10% of the total site area up to a maximum impervious area of
5,000 square feet. However, adequate and safe conveyance of
stormwater from the site must be provided. For developments that
are to be constructed in phases, the sum of all final phases must be
considered in establishing exemption eligibility. Impervious cover
shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway
areas, and any new streets and sidewalks or bikeways.
(2) Land disturbance associated with the construction or alteration of
one- and two-family dwellings, provided that the disturbance does
not alter any stormwater condition beyond the boundaries of the lot
or alter provisions of a previously approved stormwater
§ 490-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-9
1:273
§ 490-10. Municipal liability.
The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the municipality, any appointed or elected
official of the municipality, the Centre County Conservation District, or any
officer, engineer or employee thereof for the erosion, sedimentation or flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
management plan for the lot or encompassing subdivision. Multiple
(greater than two) lot subdivisions cannot be exempted.
(3) Any site less than one acre in size that decreases the total site
impervious area following development, and:
(a) Is not located within a recognized sensitive area (as defined in
Article II, Definitions, of this chapter);
(b) Is not defined as a water-quality-sensitive (WQS) development
(as defined in Article II, Definitions); or
(c) Is not located in an area where existing downstream
stormwater problems are known to occur. (The Municipal
Engineer shall make the final determination as to preexisting
problems, but the municipality must have supporting
documentation of past problems.)
(4) In addition, the Municipal Engineer may waive the requirement to
prepare a stormwater management plan for sites larger than one
acre for which the overall site impervious area is being decreased
and which meets the other conditions identified above.
B. The diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel
and/or for the installation of stormwater management facilities or
modifications thereto cannot be exempted. These activities always
require the submission of a stormwater management plan. Exemptions
A(1) and (2) cannot be combined for use with small residential
subdivisions.
C. In calculating the area of new development impervious, the Borough
may allow for deduction from the area of new impervious any previously
existing impervious structures such as buildings and paved parking lots
that can be shown to have existed on the site within a period of one year
prior to submittal of a sketch or preliminary plan. The Borough shall
have sole discretion on the allowance of the deduction and the value of
the deduction. For sites where there are known downstream drainage
problems, this deduction will not be allowed.
D. In addition to the general exemptions identified above, exemptions for
specific technical criteria are identified where applicable in Article III.
§ 490-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-10
1:274
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 490-11. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as presented below:
§ 490-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval to engage in any regulated activities, as defined in § 490-5 of this
chapter.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Stormwater structures, facilities
and techniques to maintain or improve the water quality of surface runoff.
BUFFER AREA — Area that is protected from development in order to
prevent degradation of the water body or water quality.
CAPTURE DEPTH — Depth of runoff captured from a given area and either
allowed to evaporate, infiltrate or be discharged through a spillway at a
negligible rate.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 490-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-12
1:275
CARBONATE — A sediment formed by the organic or inorganic
precipitation of mineral compounds characterized by the fundamental
chemical ion CO3, the principal element in limestone and dolomite strata.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway, which
periodically or continuously contains moving water, having a definite bed
and banks which confine the water.
CLOSED OR UNDRAINED DEPRESSION — In a Karst geologic area, a
distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land surface; size and amplitude are
variable; drainage is internal. It differs from a sinkhole in that the ground
surface is unbroken and usually occurs in greater density per unit area.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Centre County Conservation District.
CREDITS — A deduction from the required amount. In this chapter, implies
reduction of required water quality volumes due to using a recommended
practice.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DESIGNEE — The agent of a planning commission and/or agent of the
governing body involved with the administration, review or enforcement
of any provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DOLOMITE —
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract or parcels of land being developed, located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
A mineral consisting of calcium magnesium carbonate found as
compact limestone; or
A.
B. Limestone or marble rich in magnesium carbonate.
§ 490-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-12
1:276
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff, and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — The natural or man-made path of surface water from a
given area.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is
designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXFILTRATION — The process by which water or moisture moves from a
subsurface trench, bed or other feature into the subsoil. Exfiltration is best
measured by a soil's percolation rate.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary — Mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed — absent evidence to the contrary — that the floodway extends
from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
§ 490-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-12
1:277
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION RATE — The infiltration rate of a soil is related to the soil's
final infiltration capacity and represents the rate at which water enters the
soil/air interface at the top of the soil profile. Infiltration rates are measured
in units of length/time.
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
INTERCEPTOR — A channel, berm or dike constructed across a slope for
the purpose of intercepting stormwater, reducing the velocity of flow, and
diverting it to outlets where it may be disposed.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone, dolomite
or gypsum by bedrock solution, and that is characterized by closed
depressions or sinkholes, caves and underground drainage (from AGI,
Glossary of Geology, 1972).
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LAND USE — The primary application employed in an area such as
residential, commercial, etc.
LIMESTONE — A rock that, by accumulation of organic remains, consists
mainly of calcium carbonate.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.57
C.
57.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 490-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-12
1:278
LINEAMENTS — Straight or gently curved, lengthy features frequently
expressed topographically as depressions or lines on the earth's surface.
They can be more easily observed at a height of 100 meters or more and are
usually found by researching aerial photographs or satellite photography.
They are usually located in areas of faulting or in dense jointing along some
rock stratigraphy.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Spring Creek hydrologic model.
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE — In relation to this chapter, the
minimum rate that can be discharged for any drainage area for design
storm events up to and including the ten-year event, regardless of the
modeled predevelopment runoff estimate.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and duly appointed by the municipality as
its representative. The Municipal Engineer shall make recommendations to
the Borough concerning stormwater management and will work with the
Bellefonte Borough Planning Commission and/or the Bellefonte Borough
Zoning Hearing Board as may be appropriate.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Bellefonte, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONSERVATION AREAS — A natural area protected during
development for its water-quality- or recharge-enhancing abilities.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PADEP — Pennsylvania State Department of Environmental Protection.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PennDOT — Pennsylvania State Department of Transportation.
PERCOLATION RATE — The rate at which water moves through a soil
profile. Percolation rates are measured in units of time/length.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The planning commission of a municipality.
POINT DISCHARGE — The discharge from a pipe or channel that
concentrates runoff at a single area.
RECHARGE VOLUME — The volume of water that is required to be
recharged from developed sites.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL — An individual registered in and licensed
by the State of Pennsylvania, including, for the purposes of this chapter,
land surveyors, landscape architects, architects and engineers.
§ 490-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-12
1:279
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 490-5 of this
chapter.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall has a four-percent probability of
occurring in any given year.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SAFE PASSAGE — The routing of peak runoff events, usually the onehundred-
year design event, safely through a structure without failure of
that structure.
SCOUR — Generally refers to the change in a channel configuration
provoked by sediment imbalance, due to natural or man-made causes,
between the supply and transport capacity of the channel.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported
by water.
SENSITIVE (WATER QUALITY) AREA — An area protected because
development within that area could potentially cause contamination of
groundwater reservoirs.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SINKHOLE — A localized, gradual or rapid sinking of the land surface
to a variable depth, occurring in areas of carbonate bedrock; generally
characterized by a roughly circular outline, a distinct breaking of the
ground surface and downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STABILIZATION — The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil, rock
or earth to ensure its resistance to erosion, sliding or other movement.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design or construction, conveys, stores
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes and infiltration structures.
§ 490-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-12
1:280
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The documentation of the
stormwater management system, if any, to be used for a given development
site, the contents of which are established in § 490-23.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN/SPRING CREEK ACT 167
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff in the Spring Creek Watershed, adopted by the Centre County
Commissioners as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act
167), and known as the "Spring Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan."
STRATA — Tabular or sheet-like mass, distinct layers of homogenous or
gradational sedimentary material (consolidated rock or unconsolidated
earth) of any thickness, visually separable from other layers above and
below by a discrete change in the character of the material deposited or by
a sharp physical break deposition, or both.
STRATIGRAPHIC UNIT — A stratum or body of strata recognized as a
unit in the classification of the rocks of the earth's crust with respect to
any specific rock character, property, attribute or for any purpose such as
description, mapping and correlation.
STRUCTURAL FILL — For the purposes of this chapter, shall imply any soil
mass that is compacted in lifts to some tested criteria (standard or modified
proctor), such as those under foundations or adjacent to retaining walls.
Areas that for several years after construction respond to precipitation
events similar to impervious areas.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SWALE — A natural low-lying stretch of land or minor man-made
conveyance channel which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
TOPOGRAPHY — The general configuration of a land surface or any part
of the earth's surface, including its relief and position of its natural and
man-made features. The natural or physical surface features of a region
considered collectively as to its form.
UNDETAINED AREA — An area of a site that cannot be routed to a
stormwater management facility because of its location. Generally, small
areas around access drives or below stormwater management facilities.
WATER QUALITY DEPTH — Depth of precipitation required to be used
in computing the water quality volume based on the percentage of
imperviousness of a site.
WATER-QUALITY-SENSITIVE (WQS) DEVELOPMENT — Land development
projects that have a high potential to cause catastrophic loss to local water
quality and could potentially threaten groundwater reservoirs. See § 490-14
for additional definition.
§ 490-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-12
1:281
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — Volume of runoff required to be controlled
from a site in a water quality BMP.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial, a drainage basin or sub-basin.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — Upper surface of a layer of saturated material in the soil.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns and similar areas.
§ 490-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-12
1:282
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 490-13. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the municipality which do not fall under the
exemption criteria shown in § 490-9 of this chapter shall submit a
stormwater management plan to the governing municipality for review.
This plan must be consistent with the Spring Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan. These criteria shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in phases.
Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any areas
designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be
impervious for the purposes of comparison to the waiver criteria.
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
(1) Stormwater management facilities and related installations also
shall be provided:
(a) To ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the
curbline of streets.
(b) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained
and to prevent substantial flow of water across intersections or
flooded intersections during storms, in accordance with the
procedures contained in Design Manual Part 2 (DM-2),
Chapter 10, of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
(c) To ensure adequate and unimpeded flow of stormwater under
driveways in, near or across natural watercourses or drainage
swales. Suitable pipes or other waterways shall be provided as
necessary.
(d) To properly drain stormwater runoff from all land development
projects, except as required by recharge criteria. All lot and
open areas shall be designed to drain to the nearest practical
street or drainage system, existing or proposed, as defined by
the respective municipal engineer, with no impact on adjoining
properties, unless an area specifically designed for stormwater
detention is provided.
C. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the altered
property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge
criteria specified in this chapter.
§ 490-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-13
1:283
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
E. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement,
shall be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. The municipality may require that
work within natural drainageways shall be subject to approval by
PADEP through the joint permit application process or, where deemed
appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
G. The municipality may require that any stormwater management
facilities regulated by this chapter that would be located in or adjacent
to waters of the commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval
by PADEP through the joint permit application process or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the developer or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands, otherwise the municipality may require that
approval to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
H. The municipality may require that any stormwater management
facilities regulated by this chapter that would be located on state
highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
I. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to relieve the
applicant from any obligation to comply with other laws, rules or
regulations that may be otherwise applicable, as enacted by
governmental bodies such as PADEP and PennDOT.
J. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, recharge trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
§ 490-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-13
1:284
§ 490-14. Sensitive areas and developments.
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities.
K. To promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of stormwater,
roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers, or roadside ditches unless approved by the Municipal Engineer
on a case-by-case basis.
L. Where deemed necessary by the respective Municipal Engineer, the
applicant shall submit an analysis of the impacts of detained
stormwater flows on downstream areas within the watershed. These
impacts shall be identified with concurrence from the Municipal
Engineer. The analysis shall include hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations necessary to determine the impact that peak discharge
modifications from the proposed development have on critical locations
such as dams, tributaries, existing developments, undersized culverts,
flood-prone areas, etc.
M. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the analysis of downstream impacts shall
be submitted to the downstream municipality's engineers for review
and comment.
A. Sensitive areas and water-quality-sensitive developments have been
identified which require special consideration with regard to
stormwater management.
B. Sensitive areas are defined as those areas that, if developed, have the
potential to cause catastrophic loss or groundwater reservoir
contamination to a water authority or association or Penn State
University wellfield. These areas consist of the delineated one-year
zone of contribution and direct upslope areas tributary to the wells or
springs used as public water sources. Municipalities may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies, as
required.
C. Water-quality-sensitive (WQS) development is defined as a land
development project that has a high potential to cause catastrophic loss
to local water quality and could potentially threaten groundwater
reservoirs. The following is a provisional list of water-quality-sensitive
developments. This list may be amended at the discretion of the local
municipality.
(1) Vehicle fueling stations.
(2) Industrial manufacturing sites.*
(3) Salvage yards.
(4) Recycling centers.
§ 490-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-14
1:285
§ 490-15. Performance standards.
(5) Hazardous material storage areas.*
(6) Interstate highways.
(7) Geothermal wells.
* The Municipal Engineer will make the determination relative to
what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case basis.
The Pennsylvania DEP wellhead protection contaminant source
list shall be used as a guide in these determinations. Industrial
manufacturing sites and hazardous material storage areas must
provide NPDES SIC codes.
A. General. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified.
B. Sensitive area district (SAD) boundaries. The location of sensitive areas
or sensitive area districts within the watershed are illustrated on a map,
which is available for inspection at the municipal office. The exact
location of the boundaries of sensitive areas are set by drainage areas
tributary to each of the points of interest. The exact location of these
boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive area
(in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall be
provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is
not adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive area, a
five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the sensitive area
shall be included in the stormwater management plan to document the
site's location relative to the sensitive area.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
which is traversed by a SAD boundary, the design criteria for sensitive
areas must be applied if post-development runoff is directed towards
the sensitive area.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain from sensitive areas through a
proposed development site that is located entirely in a nonsensitive
area are not required to use or apply the sensitive area criteria.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area shall be subject to the design criteria.
F. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream or off-site
hydraulic capacity analysis conducted in accordance with these
standards shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
§ 490-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-15
1:286
§ 490-16. Calculation methodologies.
Design criteria and calculation methodologies have been classified by
functional group for presentation as follows: 1) peak runoff rate discharge
requirements; 2) stormwater pond capture volumes; 3) recharge volumes;
4) storm drain design including conveyance, channel protection, and
stability; and 5) water quality standards. These criteria and calculation
methodologies have been developed to simplify stormwater management
designs, unify methods, remove model parameter subjectivity, remove
improperly used methods, and to ensure stormwater management decisions
are based more realistically on hydrologic processes. In addition, common
sense should always be used as a controlling criteria. These standards
provide consistent and process-oriented design procedures for application
by land development professionals. It is recognized that, in an attempt
to generalize the computational procedures, assumptions have been made
which on some occasions may be violated. If such a violation is identified,
alternate standards and procedures may be applied. Both the violation and
the alternate procedures to be applied must be documented by a hydrologist
or hydrogeologist. Any request for use of alternate standards or procedures
under this provision must be agreed to by the Municipal Engineer prior
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the post-development runoff associated with a two-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall
be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the post-development twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at a minimum, pass the post-development twenty-five-year return
period runoff.
(4) It must be demonstrated that the downstream conveyance channel,
other stormwater facilities, roadways or overland areas must be
capable of safely conveying the one-hundred-year design storm
without causing damage to buildings or other infrastructure.
(5) Where the downstream conveyance channel or other facility is
located within a special flood hazard area (as documented on the
municipal Flood Insurance Rate Map), it must be demonstrated
that the limits of said flood hazard area are not increased by the
proposed activity.
(6) Stormwater management ponds that fall under the DEP Chapter
105 criteria of a "dam" must meet the criteria within Chapter 105.
§ 490-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:287
to formal submission of plans for consideration by the municipality. A flow
chart documenting the stormwater management design process is provided
as Chart A-9, Stormwater Procedural Flow Chart, of this chapter.58
A. Peak runoff rate control.
(1) Exemption.
(a) Any site where the increase in post-development peak runoff
rates is determined to be negligible by the Municipal Engineer
is exempt from the requirement to provide stormwater
detention. In support of this exemption, it must be shown that
the downstream conveyance systems have adequate capacity
to convey the additional discharge without adversely affecting
downstream properties. This does not exempt the requirement
for implementation of designs for water quality, stormwater
conveyance, and/or recharge as required. A stormwater
management plan and report documenting these design
elements is also required. The Municipal Engineer shall use a
five-percent increase as a general bench mark for defining
"negligible." The final definition of "negligible" shall be at the
Municipal Engineer's discretion. Prior to using this exemption
(and prior to any land development plan submission), the
design engineer must provide written documentation and
computations as to why no peak runoff control should be
required. The Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any
plan which uses this assumption without prior approval of the
Municipal Engineer. The intent of this exemption is to
eliminate the need for multiple or "piggyback" detention
facilities as a result of minor changes in imperviousness or land
use upstream of existing stormwater control facilities.
(b) Small sites (less than five acres) located directly adjacent to
the main stem of creeks or within the floodplain are not
required to provide stormwater detention unless directed to do
so by the Municipal Engineer as a result of a documented
drainage problem. All other stormwater management
standards must be implemented, including water quality,
adequate stormwater conveyance, and/or recharge as
required. The Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any
plan that uses this exemption without prior approval of the
Municipal Engineer.
(2) Stormwater management analysis.
(a) Stormwater management analysis must be performed using
the following models. The size criteria are based on drainage
area size, including site area and all off-site area draining
across the development.
58.Editor's Note: The flow chart is on file and available in the Borough's offices.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:288
[1] Up to 100 acres in size: NRCS's TR-55 or TR-20.
[2] Over 100 acres in size: NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-1 (HECHMS).
(b) The Rational Method or Modified Rational Method may be used
for any site less than or equal to two acres in size without prior
authorization from the Municipal Engineer. The Rational
Method or Modified Rational Method may also be used for sites
between two and 20 acres in size where the Municipal
Engineer has approved the method's use. In this case, the
design engineer must make a written request to the Municipal
Engineer explaining why the use of the Rational Method is
more appropriate than the NRCS's methods for the site in
question. The design engineer should keep in mind that the
Rational Formula methodology was not calibrated to account
for the karst nature of the Spring Creek Drainage Basin; and
therefore, its use should be limited to the special cases
identified above. In addition, since the minimum discharge
criteria are based on a calibration of the NRCS runoff mode,
their use is not appropriate if the Rational Method is used for
runoff computations.
(c) The Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any SWM
design that uses hydrograph combinations with the Rational
Method where the designer has not validated that the effects of
the timing differences are negligible. In addition, the
Municipal Engineer has the right to reject any SWM design
that improperly uses the method for determining runoff
volumes or does not properly apply the method.
(d) More-intensive physically-based models may be used at the
discretion of the Municipal Engineer, but only for sites greater
than 100 acres in size.
(e) Commercial software packages that use the basic
computational methods of TR-55 or TR-20 are permitted.
(f) The NRCS models and methods recommended above are based
on data collected from actual watersheds. In contrast to this,
stormwater management analysis for land development
activities is often conducted using property lines to define
drainage boundaries. Drainage areas based on property
boundaries are not true watersheds and are referred to here as
"hypothetical" drainage areas. It is known that these
hypothetical drainage areas do not respond like natural
watersheds. Peak runoff rates from hypothetical drainage
areas are much smaller than comparable runoff rates from
natural watersheds of the same size. Therefore, wherever
possible, predevelopment and post-development stormwater
analysis should be conducted for watersheds that are as nearly
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:289
natural as possible. Also, conducting stormwater analysis for a
lot-by-lot comparison, such as within residential developments,
is not permitted. Partitioning drainage areas into different
subwatersheds for the post-development scenarios is
acceptable.
(g) It is noted that natural watershed boundaries should not be
used where the relative size of the watershed compared to the
site size would inappropriately distort the predevelopment to
post-development runoff comparison. In these cases, a
hypothetical drainage area defined by the property boundary
should be used because it will allow for a better estimate of
runoff changes directly downstream of the site. In addition, the
designer should recognize that, within the Spring Creek
Watershed, typical hypothetical drainage areas, in their
predevelopment or natural condition, do not produce surface
runoff during minor to moderate rainfall events. Available
hydrologic models do not accurately reflect this condition. This
often results in post-development nuisance flooding since the
models overestimate the predevelopment runoff magnitude.
(3) Major natural drainage divides may not be altered without the prior
consent of the Municipal Engineer.
(4) Predevelopment and post-development stormwater management
analysis.
(a) Predevelopment and post-development stormwater
management analysis shall be conducted using the following
design storms:
[1] One year: two-year.
[2] Ten year: one-hundred-year.
(b) For sites less than one acre in total area that connect directly
to existing storm sewer systems, surface or subsurface
(underground) stormwater detention facilities only need to be
designed to control storm events up to the design return period
of the existing pipes (usually 10 years). However, it must be
demonstrated that adequate conveyance capacity (overland or
within the existing storm sewer system) exists to ensure that
flooding or damage from proposed releases will not exceed the
existing potential for the system. If warranted by historic
flooding in the tributary storm sewer system, the municipality
may require more stringent criteria.
(c) The Municipal Engineer may waive the requirement to detain
the one-hundred-year storm as long as the discharge is to a
well-defined, functioning conveyance system that does not
currently exhibit flooding or other conveyance problems. The
downstream conveyance system must be analyzed for the one-
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:290
hundred-year event to ensure that the proposed development
will not increase flooding or damage to existing buildings and/
or infrastructure.
(5) The following twenty-four-hour precipitation depths shall be used
for stormwater management analysis for the entire Spring Creek
Basin. These values override the use of TP-40 (the basis of the
NRCS twenty-four-hour precipitation maps).
Return Period
Precipitation Depth
(inches)
1-year 2.2
2-year 2.6
10-year 3.5
25-year 4.2
50-year 4.7
100-year 5.3
(6) The NRCS's Type II precipitation distribution is required for all
stormwater management analyses.
(7) The NRCS's dimensionless unit hydrograph "K" factor shall be 484
for both predevelopment and post-development stormwater
analyses.
(8) All undeveloped areas are to be modeled as meadow or woods in
good hydrologic condition. Existing impervious areas may be
modeled as being impervious for predevelopment conditions. The
only exception is areas that are actively in agricultural production
(nonfallow). The designer may model the watershed using the
actual agricultural land use/cover condition to show that increases
from the site as compared to the all-meadow condition are
negligible.
(9) The NRCS's curve number (CN) shall be used as the rainfall-torunoff
transformation parameter for all stormwater management
analyses.
(10) Curve numbers should be rounded to tenths for use in prepackaged
hydrologic models. It should be recognized that the CN is only a
design tool with a large degree of statistical variability. For large
sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
(11) The NRCS's method to determine unconnected impervious area
adjustments for CN can be used for distinctly defined impervious
land areas that flow onto pervious areas in a dispersed manner. The
method may only be used to calculate runoff from site impervious
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:291
areas that actually flow across pervious areas. The method cannot
be applied to the entire site using average weighted CN values.
(12) Soils underlain by carbonate geology (limestone or dolomite) shall
have a hydrologic soil group (HSG) B used for both predevelopment
and post-development conditions, regardless of the NRCS or soil
survey's description, except for the following two conditions:
(a) Compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of HSG C
for post-development conditions regardless of the NRCS or soil
survey's description. For most developments, compacted
structural fill areas are under impervious surfaces, but may
include islands within parking areas, fringe land, etc. A HSG C
shall also be applied to large projects that clear and compact
building pad areas for later phases of development under an
initial phase. The Municipal Engineer shall make the final
determination as to what areas of a land development site
constitute compacted structural fill. The intent is to account for
large compacted areas and not minor grading within lawn
areas.
(b) Soils identified as "on floodplains" or "on terraces above
floodplains" in the Centre County Soil Survey will use the HSG
as designated in the soil survey. Refer to Appendix A, Table A-8,
for a list of the soils.59
(13) Soils not underlain by carbonate geology shall use the HSG as
specified by the NRCS or soil survey's description, except for the
following two conditions:
(a) Wooded areas on HSG C and D soils shall be treated as HSG B
for predevelopment conditions. Disturbed post-development
wooded areas shall carry the NRCS or soil survey's defined
HSG with a minimum HSG of B.
(b) Highly compacted structural fill areas shall use a minimum of
HSG C for post-development conditions, regardless of the
NRCS or soil survey's description. For most developments
these areas are normally covered with impervious surfaces,
but may include islands within parking areas, fringe land, etc.
A HSG of C shall also be used for large projects that clear and
grade land for later phases of development. The Municipal
Engineer shall make the final determination as to what areas of
a land development site constitute compacted structural fill.
The intent is to account for large compacted areas and not
minor grading within lawn areas or small areas around
buildings, etc.
(14) Areas draining to closed depressions must be modeled by removing
the storage volume from the predevelopment condition. The
59.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file and available in the Borough's offices.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:292
designer may assume that infiltration in the closed depression
does not occur during a design runoff event. Areas draining to
closed depressions may also be used to adjust peak runoff rates to
stormwater management ponds for the post-development analysis.
This allowance has been developed to entice designers to
intentionally design or leave in place small closed depressions
that can reduce the total volume required from a stormwater
management pond. The site designer is responsible to document
downstream impacts if the closed depression were removed.
(15) Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes shall be excluded from the
modeled point-of-interest drainage areas defining predevelopment
peak flows. Assumptions that sinkholes spill over during some
storm events must be supported by acceptable documentation (as
determined by the Municipal Engineer). In addition, the design
professional must be aware that bypassing or sealing sinkholes will
frequently result in downstream flooding and should not be done if
existing downstream flooding already occurs. The site designer is
responsible to document downstream impacts if the sinkhole were
to stop taking stormwater runoff.
(16) Ponds or other permanent pools of water are to be modeled by the
methods established in the NRCS's TR-55 manual (1986). However,
more rigorous documented methods are acceptable (as determined
by the Municipal Engineer).
(17) The NRCS antecedent runoff condition II (ARC II, previously AMC
II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes. In addition, prior to any
continuous simulation model being used in the Spring Creek Basin
for any other purposes, the model unit hydrograph must be
modified for common events in addition to extreme events, based
on an in-depth analysis of historical data from the basin.
(18) Time-of-concentration computational methodologies.
(a) The following time-of-concentration (Tc) computational
methodologies shall be used unless another method is
preapproved by the Municipal Engineer:
[1] Predevelopment: NRCS's Lag Equation.
[2] Post-development; commercial, industrial or other areas
with large impervious areas (greater than 20% impervious
area): NRCS's Segmental Method.
[3] Post-development; residential, cluster or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NCRS's
Lag Equation.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:293
(b) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition
that best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. For
example, large impervious areas bordered by small pervious
areas may not consider the effect of the pervious areas in the
Tc computation. If the designer wants to consider the effect of
the pervious area, runoff from the pervious and impervious
areas must be computed separately, with the hydrographs
being combined to determine the total runoff from the area.
(c) Under no circumstance will the post-development Tc be
greater than the predevelopment Tc for any watershed or
subwatershed modeling purposes. This includes when the
designer has specifically used swales to reduce flow velocities.
In the event that the designer believes that the postdevelopment
Tc is greater, it will still be set by default equal to
the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
* Refer to Subsection A(28) regarding impervious area
flashing (IAF).
(19) Post-development minimum discharges.
(a) The following post-development minimum discharges are
permitted for use with the NRCS (CN) runoff model*:
1-year return period Qpmin = 0.018 (DA) + 0.2
2-year return period Qpmin = 0.03 (DA) + 0.4
10-year return period Qpmin = 0.09 (DA) + 1.0
Where:
DA = the drainage area in acres
Qpmin = minimum allowable peak runoff rate in cfs
(b) For return periods greater than 10 years, the minimum
discharge shall be equal to the computed predevelopment peak
runoff rate.
(c) The minimum discharge criteria above are not appropriate for
use with the Rational Method. This is because these values
were developed based on NRCS model corrections and do not
actually represent a true physical process or discharge.
However, common sense should be used by both the designer
and reviewer in the evaluation of acceptable minimum
discharges for use with the Rational Method.
(d) The intent of the minimum discharge is to allow reasonable
runoff release from a site when a hydrologic model has
produced a predevelopment runoff rate close to zero. The
method is NOT permitted for areas that previously drained
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:294
completely to sinkholes in order to bypass the sinkhole after
development.
(e) These minimum discharge values include the total of all
stormwater management facilities discharges and undetained
area discharges. Peak runoff rates for undetained fringe areas
(where the designer has made a realistic effort to control all
new impervious areas) will be computed using the
predevelopment time of concentration for the drainage areas
tributary to them. Undetained areas are those portions of the
site that cannot be routed to a stormwater management facility
due to topography and typically include lower pond berms or
small areas around entrance drives. The site drainage areas
used shall represent the predevelopment condition, even if
drainage areas are altered following development.
(20) All lined stormwater management ponds in carbonate and
noncarbonate areas must be considered impervious and may not be
used as pervious areas for stormwater management computations.
"Lined" here means lined with synthetic liners or bentonite. All
other compacted soil liners will be considered to be HSG D for
hydrologic computations.
(21) Stormwater management ponds that have a capture depth for the
purposes of water quality or volume capture shall assume a
negligible discharge from these structures during design event
routing. Only discharges from the primary principal spillway or
emergency spillway need to be considered. Discharges from
subsurface drains that tie into a principal spillway should not be
considered during design event routing.
(22) Stormwater management ponds that have a capture depth for the
purposes of water quality or volume capture shall assume that the
pond water quality or capture volume is full at the beginning of
design event routing.
(23) Stormwater management ponds must provide safe passage of the
one-hundred-year return period peak runoff rate assuming that all
of the principal spillway orifices are fully clogged and the principal
spillway overflow is 50% clogged. A minimum of a six-inch
freeboard must also be maintained above the resulting "maximum"
water surface elevations (W.S.E.). Any embankment emergency
spillway can be assumed to be unclogged. SWM ponds with
embankments completely made up of natural undisturbed soils
(fully in "cut") or where roadways act as the emergency spillway
are permitted. However, the Design Engineer must verify
downstream stability and control.
(24) All predevelopment and post-development comparisons of peak
flows shall be rounded to tenths of a cfs. The intent here is to
recognize the accuracy and precision limitations of hydrologic
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:295
modeling procedures. Again, small differences between
predevelopment and post-development discharge rates should be
permitted when no negative downstream impacts will result.
(25) The full Modified Plus routing method must be used for stormwater
management pond analyses. Simplified methods of determining
pond size requirements such as those in TR-55 (1986) can only be
used for preliminary pond size estimates. The full Modified Puls
routing method must be used for stormwater management pond
analyses. Simplified methods of determining pond size
requirements such as those in TR-55 (1986) can only be used for
preliminary pond size estimates.
(26) Prepackaged hydraulic programs are not approved for the analysis
of underground stormwater management facilities unless it can be
verified that the program rounding subroutines used for the stage/
storage data do not affect the results. This is because, for very
small storage volumes, the program may round off the volume to a
significant percentage.
(27) Full supporting documentation must be provided for all stormwater
management designs.
(28) Designs must be checked for impervious area flash (IAF). This
check is used to determine if flooding may occur due to poor
modeling choices specifically related to the time of concentration.
This analysis requires that the watershed impervious area be
modeled without the pervious areas. The time of concentration
should also be determined from the impervious areas only. If the
IAF analysis results in a higher peak runoff rate at a culvert or
discharge from a pond, this higher rate must be used for the final
design/comparison. The check will frequently yield higher values if
a watershed's impervious area is located primarily near the
watershed outlet or point of interest.
B. Pond capture volumes (Cv).
(1) To minimize nuisance flooding from small precipitation events, a
runoff capture volume is required for all stormwater management
ponds that do not discharge directly to natural, well-defined (with
bed and banks) perennial streams. In general, natural well-defined
streams in the Spring Creek Basin are limited to those delineated
as USGS perennial streams. This should be treated as a guideline
and not a steadfast rule. The final determination is at the discretion
of the Municipal Engineer. The pond capture volume is a volume of
runoff that will be retained in a pond below the elevation of any free
surface principal spillway orifice. No principal spillway orifice
(except those connected to subsurface drains), regardless of how
small, shall be below the pond elevation equivalent to this volume.
(2) The Centre County Conservation District (CCCD) receives
numerous complaints regarding ponds that are located at the
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:296
downslope edge of a property that result in discharging runoff
onto downstream properties in an uncontrolled manner or where
no existing defined outlet channel exists. This is a very common
problem in areas underlain by carbonate rock. These discharges
can cause erosion and flooding downstream. While the pond
capture volume is intended to minimize some of these negative
effects, it cannot deter or reduce the impacts from poor design
practices. Therefore, whenever possible, the CCCD recommends
that the designer consider the downstream morphological changes
that may occur and, when possible, consider constructing
conveyance systems to a stable natural channel. In some cases this
may require cooperation between landowners.
(3) The capture volume is defined as a runoff depth of 0.25 inches from
all impervious areas tributary to the stormwater management
facility. This volume will be allowed to infiltrate, evaporate or
dewater from a subsurface drain system connected directly to the
facility's principal spillway. Supporting computations that show
that 90% of the capture volume can dewater in a maximum of 72
hours must be provided. For surface ponds, the maximum depth of
ponding for the capture volume shall be three feet (a health and
safety precaution). However, in areas under karst influence, a
limiting maximum ponding depth of 18 inches is recommended.
Designers may always increase the capture volume to a value
greater than the identified standard as long as the ponding depth
criteria are met.
(4) To simplify computational requirements for design event analysis,
designers do not need to calculate discharges from subsurface
drains related to the capture volumes if the filter media is sand or
smaller than AASHTO 57 stone. The capture volume is to control
runoff rates from impervious areas and is not related to water
quality. However, pond designs that include a water quality volume
that is greater than the required capture volume are assumed to
have also met the required capture volume as long as it dewaters as
required.
(5) Designs that rely on the natural infiltration of in-situ soils must
provide documentation supporting the infiltration rates used for
analysis. Infiltration rates reported in the Soil Survey of Centre
County or other published rates may be used, at the discretion of
the Municipal Engineer.
(6) The pond capture volume should always be used when upslope
areas are developed where the pond's design creates a point
discharge that did not previously exist.
(7) Stormwater management detention facilities that connect directly
to storm drainpipe networks that discharge to natural well-defined
channels do not require a capture volume.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:297
C. Recharge volumes (Rv)
(1) The purpose of the recharge portion of the chapter is two-fold.
First, the recharge requirement is to mitigate the loss of
groundwater recharge associated with the creation of impervious
surfaces. In addition, the recharge criteria is to mitigate the
increase in runoff volume associated with the creation of
impervious surfaces. This increase in runoff volume has significant
impacts on downstream landowners. These impacts are most often
exhibited in the form of increased nuisance flooding and channel or
drainageway erosion and instability. According to local municipal
engineers and representatives of the Centre County Conservation
District, these problems are of significant local concern. The
magnitude of these problems increases with the percentage of
impervious coverage created on a site.
(2) Recharge mitigation shall be provided for runoff from all proposed
impervious areas. The required recharge volume shall be computed
as 0.5 inch of runoff from all proposed impervious areas. It is noted
that lined detention ponds and compacted fill areas are considered
to be impervious when calculating site impervious area for
recharge considerations. In addition, land areas covered by paver
blocks, pervious pavement, and other structural surface treatments
which permit surface infiltration can be treated as pervious areas
when calculating the site impervious area for recharge
considerations as long as the structural infiltration practice is
supported by sound design and appropriate construction
specifications. The Municipal Engineer may require submission of
supporting documentation prior to approving structural infiltration
areas as pervious areas.
(3) The following design practices can be used as credits to reduce the
recharge volume requirement:
(a) Residential roof areas (detached, duplex and townhome
dwellings) and commercial/industrial buildings with roof areas
less than 5,000 square feet can be removed from the computed
impervious area when these roof areas are sumped to dry wells
designed in accordance with the following minimum standard:
[1] Sump design criteria. To meet the recharge criteria, sump
storage or voids, volume shall be equal to 0.04 cubic feet
per square foot of roof area (0.5 inch rainfall depth). If
sump stone has a voids ratio of 40%, the total sump volume
will be 0.10 cubic feet per square foot of roof area. When
designed only to meet this recharge criteria, the maximum
size for a single sump is 100 cubic feet, and the minimum
sump surface area (A) to depth (D) ratio (A/D) must be a
minimum of 4/1. The sump depth less any freeboard should
not exceed 24 inches. This roof sump standard shall apply
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:298
unless the municipality has a separate roof sump standard
for water quantity or peak control.
(b) All or portions of driveways, roadways and parking areas can
be removed from the impervious area calculation when sheet
flow from these areas is directed to undisturbed natural buffer/
filter areas or constructed filter strips. This flow must be
dispersed as sheet flow as it crosses the buffer/filter area.
Sheet flow velocities should be nonerosive as they cross the
impervious area/filter interface.
[1] To ensure proper infiltration characteristics, the natural
soil profile within natural buffer/filter areas cannot be
disturbed during construction. Completely undisturbed
natural recharge areas serve this function best. However,
minor surface scarring, seeding and landscaping is
permitted in these areas as long as natural grades are not
altered. In special cases, when approved by the Municipal
Engineer, minor grading, combined with soil profile
reconstruction, may be permitted in natural buffer/filter
areas. In addition, the following standards apply to natural
filter/buffer areas:
[a] Natural filter/buffer areas must have a minimum width
of five feet or 1/2 of the impervious area drainage
length immediately tributary to the buffer area,
whichever is greater. This width is measured parallel
to the direction of sheet flow.
[b] To qualify for a recharge volume credit, the surface
slope of natural filter/buffer areas must be conducive
to recharge and not result in flow concentration or
erosion. To meet this intent, the surface slope of the
area tributary to the natural buffer/filter area and the
surface slope of the natural buffer/filter area itself
may not exceed 5%. In special cases, steeper slopes
may be used if specifically authorized by the
Municipal Engineer.
[c] The total impervious area tributary to a natural buffer/
filter area cannot exceed twice the buffer/filter area.
[2] To qualify for a recharge volume credit, constructed filter
strips shall be designed to the following standards:
[a] The minimum filter strip width shall be five feet or 1/2
of the impervious area drainage length immediately
tributary to the constructed filter strip, whichever is
greater. This width is measured parallel to the
direction of sheet flow.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:299
[b] The total impervious area tributary to a constructed
filter strip area cannot exceed twice the constructed
filter strip area.
[c] The surface slope of the area tributary to the
constructed filter strip area and the surface slope of
the constructed filter strip area itself may not exceed
5% and 3%, respectively. In special cases, steeper
slopes may be used if specifically authorized by the
Municipal Engineer.
[d] The filter strip surface shall consist of a minimum of
six inches of natural or reconstructed topsoil with a
stable grass surface treatment. Reconstructed topsoil
designs must be approved by the Municipal Engineer
prior to application. Reconstructed topsoil consists of
soils augmented by tillage and the addition of soil
amendments, such as compost, lime, animal manures,
crop residues, etc.
[e] To minimize erosion of the topsoil layer during
construction, it is recommended that these areas be
sodded. However, the Municipal Engineer may permit
the use of an acceptable erosion control seeding
application. In this later case, any loss of topsoil and
seed must be replaced until a permanent vegetative
stand is achieved.
(c) Sidewalks separated from roadways and/or other impervious
surfaces by a grass strip of equal or greater width than the
sidewalk itself can be removed from the impervious area
calculation when the sidewalks are graded so that sheet flow
from the walk is directed to the grass strip. Sidewalks with
steep longitudinal slopes that themselves would act as
channels during runoff events cannot take advantage of this
credit. A five-percent longitudinal sidewalk slope shall be used
as the bench mark defining steep slopes.
(d) Impervious areas tributary to natural closed depressions can
be subtracted from the total site impervious area used in the
recharge volume calculation as long as a qualified geotechnical
engineer or soil scientist certifies to the soundness of these
site-specific applications. Water quality pretreatment may be
necessary prior to the direct discharge of runoff to existing
closed depressions or sinkholes.
(e) Impervious areas tributary to man-made closed depressions
can be subtracted from the total site impervious area as long as
a qualified geotechnical engineer or soil scientist certifies to
the soundness of these site-specific applications. Man-made
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:300
closed depressions can be created through the use of low head
berms one foot or less in height.
(f) The entire capture volume provided in a pond without a
subsurface drain may be used as a credit towards the recharge
volume requirement.
(g) Fifty percent of the capture volume in a pond that includes a
subsurface drain may be credited towards the recharge volume
requirement.
(h) Additional credits may apply for undisturbed land areas that
are known to have high-infiltration capacity and that are
maintained or enhanced. These areas must be defined and
quantified from actual site data collection.
(4) After credits, the remaining recharge volume shall be directed to a
recharge BMP, such as infiltration trenches, beds, etc. These
facilities can be located in open areas or under pavement
structures. The appropriateness of the particular infiltration
practice proposed, as well as the design parameters used, shall be
supported by a geotechnical report certified by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, geotechnical
engineer, etc.).
(5) Stormwater recharge requirements or credits affect stormwater
management design requirements. For stormwater management
computations, the reduction of site CNs based only on a weightingtype
analysis, as is sometimes done for cluster-type developments,
is not permitted. However, for stormwater management purposes,
the CN for recharged areas can be computed using the NRCS
method for disconnected impervious areas. The actual hydrologic
process that occurs within the basin must be stressed in all
recharge situations.
(6) These recharge requirements must be met on all sites unless it can
be demonstrated that recharge would be inappropriate. Any
request for such a waiver from these recharge requirements must
be accompanied by a supporting report certified by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, geotechnical
engineer, etc.).
(7) Developers and site design professionals are encouraged to use a
higher standard for recharge volume on sites where local site
conditions do not restrict a higher standard.
(8) Water-quality-sensitive (WQS) developments must use an
acceptable pretreatment BMP prior to recharge. Acceptable
pretreated BMPs for these developments include BMPs that are
based on filtering, settling or chemical reaction processes such as
chemical coagulation.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:301
(9) Accounting for recharge within lined stormwater management
ponds is not permitted. However, if unlined uncompacted ponds
and/or depressed lawn areas are used to satisfy water quality or
capture volume criteria, these areas and volumes can also be used
to meet recharge requirements as previously defined. Additional
recharge volume may be credited to these areas as long as it is
demonstrated by a qualified professional that recharge processes
can naturally occur in these areas.
(10) Finally, because this analysis is concerned with trying to
adequately represent real processes that occur within the
watershed, there will be areas that cannot physically recharge
stormwater. These areas include exfiltration areas that are
commonly found at the base of wooded hillsides where claypans
exist, and saturation areas near major streams or floodplains.
These areas may not accept recharge during most runoff events.
These areas are exempt from recharge requirements when these
conditions are documented and certified by a qualified professional
(soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, or geotechnical engineer).
In addition, stormwater management techniques relying on
infiltration techniques are not permitted in these areas.
(11) The Municipal Engineer may waive the recharge requirement in
the following situations:
(a) The Municipal Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in highly developed areas or areas undergoing redevelopment
where the Municipal Engineer has determined that forced
recharge could have adverse impacts on adjacent landowner
structures, property or municipal infrastructure. These
waivers should be limited to small land areas (generally, less
than five acres in size), where the ability to place recharge
beds may be limited or may hinder redevelopment.
(b) The Municipal Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in areas where a qualified soils scientist or geologist has
determined that none of the site soils are suitable for recharge
or that the location of the suitable soils is such that harm to
adjoining properties could occur as stated under Subsection
C(11)(a) above.
(c) The Municipal Engineer may waive the recharge requirement
in areas where recharge cannot physically occur as
documented by a qualified soil scientist, geologist or
hydrologist. These areas include:
[1] Exfiltration areas commonly found at the base of wooded
hillsides where claypans or fragipans exist; and
[2] Saturation areas near major streams or floodplains.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:302
(12) As identified above, recharge analysis and/or waiver requests must
be supported by a geotechnical report sealed by a qualified
professional (soil scientist, geologist, hydrogeologist, or
geotechnical engineer). The intent of this report will be to establish
the suitability of a particular parcel of land or area for recharge and
to identify areas on a development site appropriate for recharge. It
is recommended that the geotechnical/soils consultant discuss the
extent and approach to the analysis with the Municipal Engineer
prior to initiating the field investigation. At a minimum, this report
should include the following information:
(a) A description of the geotechnical site investigation performed,
including the methods and procedures used;
(b) Data presentation;
(c) Analysis results, including the following minimum information:
[1] A map identifying site areas inappropriate for recharge
along with supporting justification. In addition to
illustrating topographic features, significant geologic and
hydrologic features should be identified (rock outcrops,
sinkholes, closed depressions, etc.).
[2] Determination of the permeability coefficient for potential
recharge areas.
[3] Determination of the infiltration capacity of natural site
soils.
[4] Location, depth and permeability coefficient for any
restrictive layers identified.
[5] Soil uniformity.
[6] Depth to bedrock in potential recharge areas, and a
statement reflecting the uniformity of the depth to bedrock
across the site.
[7] A statement relating to the site's proximity to fracture
zones within the bedrock.
[8] Additional information deemed pertinent by the
geotechnical engineer.
(d) Recommendations for any special design considerations
necessary for the design of recharge systems on the site. For
example, required soil depth over bedrock, appropriate surface
grades over recharge areas, appropriate hydraulic head over
recharge areas, etc.
(e) Justification as to why the site should be developed to a high
impervious density if the site has adverse soil and geotechnical
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:303
limitations which prohibit the ability to induce natural
recharge. Explain how these limitations will not create the
potential for undue harm to the environment and the Spring
Creek watershed when the site is developed.
(13) The following guidelines are provided relative to the use of
subsurface exfiltration BMPs (often incorrectly referred to as
"engineered infiltration BMPs"):
(a) Soils should have a minimum percolation rate of 50 min/cm
(0.47 in/hr) for effective operation of subsurface exfiltration
BMPs. If no site soils have percolation rates of 50 min/cm,
subsurface exfiltration BMPs should not be used.
(b) A minimum of 30 inches of soil must be maintained between
the bottom of a subsurface exfiltration BMP and the top of
bedrock or seasonally high groundwater table. This
requirement may be modified, subject to the recommendation
of a qualified geotechnical professional.
(c) If the minimum percolation rate is not met and/or the minimum
soil depth cannot be maintained on a site, recharge should be
accommodated by directing shallow sheet flow from
impervious areas across surface filter strips and/or
undisturbed natural areas, or some other innovative surface
infiltration feature should be used. Limiting subsurface
percolation rates and/or depth to bedrock shall not by
themselves warrant a recharge waiver.
(14) In addition, since recharge is intended as a volume control,
innovative or new methods that address the significant increase in
the volume of runoff from sites having large impervious areas are
encouraged. These volume-control alternatives can be used only if
they can be shown to function with the original intent through
sound engineering and science.
D. Storm drain conveyance system design. Storm drainage conveyance
systems consist of storm sewer pipes, swales and open channels.
Computational methods for design of storm drain conveyance systems
shall be as follows.
(1) Recommended computational methods (models) for storm drain
design are based on site or watershed drainage area as follows:
(a) Up to 200 acres in size: Rational Method.
(b) Between 200 acres and 1.5 square miles: HEC-1, PSRM, and
TR-20.
(c) Over 1.5 square miles in size: PSU-IV with the carbonate
adjustment factor, at the discretion of the Municipal Engineer.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:304
(d) Other methods as approved by the Municipal Engineer such as
SWMM, SWIRM-ROUTE, etc.
(2) Rational coefficients used are to be from Rawls et al. (1981),
PennDOT Design Manual 2-10, or using the Aron curves to convert
CNs to C. If the Aron curves are used, all CNs must be applicable to
the HSG as identified by the NRCS. The design engineer may
choose to use the following rational C coefficients without regard to
soil HSG for small sites. However, it is recommended that they be
used only for storm drains up to 24 inches in diameter. The use of
these conservative values shall fully be the choice of the design
engineer.
(a) All impervious areas: C = 0.95.
(b) All pervious areas: C = 0.30.
(3) Storm drains shall be designed at a minimum using a ten-year
runoff event without surcharging inlets. Storm drains tributary to a
multiple-site SWM facility across municipal roads or crossing other
properties must convey, at a minimum, a twenty-five-year runoff
event without surcharging inlets. Runoff events in excess of the
indicated design event must be conveyed safely downstream.
(4) Inlets on grade cannot assume a sumped condition for hydraulic
modeling (i.e., top-of-inlet casting set below pavement surface in
parking areas).
(5) The Municipal Engineer may require the analysis of the onehundred-
year peak runoff rates for conveyance purposes in some
instances where regional SWM facilities are employed.
(6) Any storm drain within state or federal rights-of-ways or that falls
under the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(7) The time of concentration (Tc) can be computed by any method
which best represents the subject watershed. However, the NRCS's
Segmental Method is not recommended for use with drainage
areas that are predominately undeveloped and are greater than
100 acres in size. The NRCS Lag Equation or another more
appropriate method should be used under these conditions.
(8) For any drainage area smaller than five acres in size, a Tc of five
minutes may always be assumed at the discretion of the design
engineer (for the post-development condition), without needing to
provide supporting documentation.
(9) Precipitation values applicable to the entire Spring Creek Drainage
Basin are those reflected in the PennDOT's IDF curves for Region 2,
regardless if the area was formerly considered in Region 3.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:305
(10) Storm drain conveyance system stability (swales, open channels,
and pipe discharge aprons) shall be computed using a ten-year
return period peak runoff rate.
(11) Storm sewers, where required by zoning and land use densities,
shall be placed under or immediately adjacent to the roadway side
of the curb, or as directed by the municipality, when parallel to the
street within the right-of-way.
(12) When located in undedicated land outside a public right-of-way,
they shall be placed within a drainage easement not less than 20
feet wide, as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(13) The use of properly designed, graded and turfed drainage swales is
encouraged in lieu of storm sewers in commercial and industrial
areas and, where approved by the Municipal Engineer, in
residential areas. Such swales shall be designed not only to carry
the required discharge without excessive erosion, but also to
increase the time of concentration, reduce the peak discharge and
velocity, and permit the water to percolate into the soil, where
appropriate.
(a) Swales shall be designed to carry the ten-year storm discharge
with one foot of freeboard without erosion to the floor and side
channels of the swale.
(b) The maximum velocity of vegetated channels, as determined by
Manning's Equation, shall not exceed the allowable velocities
for specific types of vegetative material, as specified in Table
A-7 of Appendix A.60
(c) The side slope for any vegetated channel shall not exceed three
horizontal to one vertical.
(d) All swale design shall conform to the design standards
contained in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual, latest edition, published by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(14) Inlet types and inlet assemblies.
(a) Inlet types and inlet assemblies shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Standards for
Roadway Construction as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
[1] Inlets shall, at a minimum, be located at the lowest point of
street intersections to intercept the stormwater before it
reaches pedestrian crossing or at sag points of vertical
curves in the street alignment which provide a natural
point of ponding of surface stormwater.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file and available in the Borough's offices.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:306
[2] Where the municipality deems it necessary because of
special land requirements, special inlets may be approved.
[3] The interval between inlets collecting stormwater runoff
shall be determined in accordance with DM-2, Chapter 10,
Section 5, "Capacity of Waterway Areas."
(b) In curbed sections, the maximum encroachment of water on
the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a through traffic
lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during the ten-year
design storm of five-minute duration. Inlets shall be provided
to control the encroachment of water on the pavement. When
inlets are used in a storm system within the right-of-way limits
of a street in lieu of manholes, the spacing of such inlets shall
not exceed the maximum distance of 450 feet.
(15) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on a continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all points
of convergence of two or more influent storm sewer mains. The
construction locations of accessible drainage structures shall be as
indicated on the land development stormwater management plan
or area drainage plan approved by the municipality.
(16) When evidence available to the municipality indicates that existing
storm sewers have sufficient capacity, as determined by
hydrograph summation, and are accessible, the subdivider may
connect its stormwater facilities to the existing storm sewers so
long as the peak rate of discharge does not exceed the amount
permitted by this chapter.
(17) All other storm drain design methods are to be the same as
specified in existing local ordinances.
(18) Computational procedures other than those indicated here should
follow the methods of the Federal Highway Administration's Urban
Drainage Design Manual [Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 22
(HEC-22)].
(19) Culvert design criteria.
(a) Culvert design and construction shall be in accordance with
PennDOT specifications and standards except where more
stringent standards are contained within this chapter.
(b) Minimum grade of storm sewer invert shall be 0.5%.
(c) Minimum pipe diameter shall be 18 inches, or the pipe shall
have a cross-sectional area at least 254 square inches, except
that culvert pipes located under more than 25 feet of fill shall
have a minimum diameter of 24 inches or a cross-sectional
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:307
area at least 453 square inches and shall be reinforced
concrete.
(d) Where storm sewers discharge into existing drainage channels
at an angle greater than 30° from parallel to the downstream
channel flow, the far-side bank shall be stabilized by the use of
riprap or concrete walls. The stabilization shall be designed to
prevent erosion and frost heave under and behind the
stabilizing materials.
E. Water quality standards.
(1) Water quality performance standards. To minimize adverse impacts
to stream health resulting from stormwater non-point-source (NPS)
pollution, standards are provided for the implementation of water
quality best management practices (BMPs) to reduce NPS pollutant
loadings resulting from land development activities. The following
performance standards and guidelines shall be addressed at all
sites where stormwater management is required:
(a) Site designs shall minimize the generation of stormwater
runoff through the use of low-impact design techniques.
(b) Stormwater runoff from all land development activities should
be treated through the use of nonstructural and structural
BMPs to effectively treat the adverse impacts of stormwater
runoff including NPS pollutants.
(c) Water quality BMPs shall be incorporated into site designs to
treat the required water quality volume as defined below.
(d) The use of nonstructural BMPs shall always take priority over
the use of structural BMPs. The use of innovative BMPs and
low-impact site planning is encouraged to reduce the
generation of stormwater runoff and effectively treat
pollutants transported in stormwater from the site.
(e) The use of multiple nonstructural water quality techniques
along with new, emerging and innovative techniques is
encouraged to improve the quality of stormwater runoff to
receiving areas and reduce and/or eliminate the need for
structural BMPs. The Municipal Engineer should be consulted
to clarify the design concept for meeting or exceeding the
intent of this section
(f) Where nonstructural BMPs are unable to effectively treat all of
the stormwater runoff generated from land development
activities, structural BMPs shall be designed to capture and
treat the computed water quality volume (WQv).
(g) The priority pollutant source areas to be treated with BMPs are
streets, parking lots, driveways and roof areas.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:308
(h) Due to the karst nature of the watershed, stormwater
discharges from water-quality-sensitive developments and
discharges to sensitive wellhead protection areas (defined in
Appendix B, Exhibit 161) will require special consideration. In
these instances, the applicant shall provide water quality
pretreatment (use of a filtering BMP and/or special structural
design features) to prevent the discharge of stormwater
contaminants to groundwater resources. In addition,
hydrogeologic studies may be required to document potential
karst-related impacts.
(i) Prior to stormwater management and water quality design,
applicants should consult with the Municipal Engineer to verify
stormwater quality criteria and present proposed features and
concepts for the treatment of stormwater runoff. Following this
meeting, the Municipal Engineer shall define any needed
support studies or documentation.
(2) Water quality volume (WQv).
(a) For Bellefonte, the required water quality volume that must be
treated for nonsensitive areas underlain by carbonate rock
within the Spring Creek Basin shall be computed as:
WQdepth = 0.25+(0.012)2.9[0.044(SIA)]
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious area
SIA = percent of site impervious area (all paved
areas and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = total of all paved areas and asphalt-based
roofs on site in acres
(b) The required water quality volume that must be treated for any
WQS development, on sites in sensitive areas underlain by
carbonate rock and all areas not underlain by carbonate rock
(the entire Borough of Bellefonte is underlain by carbonate
rock) is to be computed within the entire Spring Creek Basin
as:
WQdepth = the larger of 0.5 inches or 0.25+(0.012)2.9[0.044(SIA)]
WQv = WQdepth(A)/12
Where:
61.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file and available in the Borough's offices.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:309
WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
WQdepth = depth in inches that must be captured for
impervious areas
SIA = percent of site impervious area (all paved
areas and roof with asphalt-based roofs)
A = total of all paved areas and asphalt-based
roofs on site in acres
(c) For designs in which the final roof material is unknown, the
design engineer must assume an asphalt-based roof.
(d) The water quality volume must be captured and treated
through a water quality BMP over an extended period of time
as per the specific requirements of each structure. Credits to
reduce the effective impervious area are applicable as
presented in Chapter 4 of the Stormwater Management Plan.
(3) Water quality credits. Due to the karst nature of the Spring Creek
Basin, the nonstructural water quality credits and techniques
identified below may be limited for suitability and use based on
development type and location. These limitations for use are
specified in the restrictions section for each credit. The Municipal
Engineer may require additional documentation or investigation
prior to use of each specific credit to reduce the risks of sinkhole
development or groundwater contamination for sensitive areas and
development types. No area may be double counted for use with
credits. The combined credits of natural area conservation and
vegetated filter strips is limited to 50% of the site's impervious
area. The drainageway credit is limited to 50% of the site's
impervious area. The drainageway protection credit is limited to
50% of the site's impervious area. The maximum total water quality
credit for any site may therefore be 100% of the site's impervious
area.
Nonstructural
Technique Water Quality Credit
Drainageway protection
(DWP)
Subtract drainageway protection
areas from impervious site area in
WQv computation
Natural area conservation
(NAC)
Subtract conserved natural areas
from impervious site area in WQv
computation
Filter/buffer area Subtract impervious areas discharged
over pervious areas from impervious
site area in WQv computation
(4) Drainageway protection.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:310
(a) A water quality credit is given for the protection of natural
drainageways on a development site. Natural karst
drainageways within the Spring Creek watershed often do not
exhibit a defined channel bed and banks. More often, these
drainageways appear as wide, shallow parabolic swales. These
drainageways are an integral part of the natural drainage
system and often exhibit significant infiltration capacity.
Protection of these drainageways is critically important to the
health of the watershed.
(b) The drainageway protection (DWP) area is defined as an area
centered on the drainageway and having a minimum width of
300 feet. The Municipal Engineer may modify the defined
minimum width in cases where natural land forms define an
appropriate alternate width.
(c) The impervious area used in the WQv equation for the
development site may be reduced by twice the area of the
preserved drainageway (2:1 ratio).
[1] Restrictions on the credit:
[a] Drainageway protection areas must remain in an
undisturbed condition during and after construction
activities. There can be no construction activity within
these areas including temporary access roads or
storage of equipment or materials. Temporary access
for the construction of utilities crossing this protection
area may be permitted, at the Municipal Engineer's
discretion. However, the alignment of any such
crossing must be perpendicular to the drainageway.
[b] These areas should be placed in a conservation
easement or be permanently preserved through a
similarly enforceable agreement with the municipality.
[c] The limits of the undisturbed DWP area and
conservation easement must be shown on all
construction plans.
[d] The DWP area must be located on the development
site.
[e] The maximum total DWPA credit is 100% of the site
impervious area.
[f] Water quality credits are not permitted for waterquality-
sensitive (WQS) developments.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions:
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:311
[a] DWP areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across
the area as sheet flow.
[b] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development
types may not be directed to DWP areas without
pretreatment.
(5) Natural area conservation. A water quality credit is given for
natural areas that are conserved at the development site, thereby
maintaining predevelopment water quality characteristics. The
impervious area used in the WQv equation for the development site
may be reduced by the natural area conserved in the water quality
volume computations. Natural area conservation is different than
vegetated filter strip/recharge area and drainageway protection in
that in some cases surface runoff may never be directed over the
natural area (i.e., if upslope wooded areas are conserved).
(a) Restrictions on the credit:
[1] Natural areas must remain in an undisturbed condition
during and after construction activities. Temporary
incidental land disturbance activities associated with
utility construction may be permitted within the
conservation area.
[2] These areas should be placed in a conservation easement
or similarly enforceable agreement with the municipality.
[3] The limits of the undisturbed area and conservation
easement must be shown on all construction plans.
[4] The area must be located on the development site.
[5] Water quality credits are not permitted for water-qualitysensitive
(WQS) developments.
[6] The maximum total NAC credit is 50% of the site
impervious area. However, the combination of NAC VFRS
is also 50%.
(b) Sensitive area and development restrictions:
[1] NAC areas may not be counted as a credit in sensitive
areas unless the impervious area actually flows across the
area as sheet flow.
[2] Untreated urban runoff from sensitive development types
may not be directed to natural areas without
pretreatment.
(6) Filter/buffer area.
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-16
1:312
(a) A water quality credit is given when stormwater runoff is
effectively treated via a filter/buffer area or strip. A filter/buffer
area is a vegetated boundary characterized by uniform mild
slopes. Filter strips may be forested or vegetated with turf
grass. Effective treatment is achieved when impervious area
runoff is directed as sheet flow across vegetative filter or buffer
areas (i.e., concentrated flow discharged to a filter strip does
not meet water quality reduction criteria).
(b) The area draining via overland sheet flow to an undisturbed,
natural, vegetated filter strip (natural unmaintained meadow
or forested area) can be subtracted from the site impervious
area (IA) on a 1:1 area ratio in the water quality volume
computation. Impervious areas draining across constructed
(disturbed or regarded) pervious areas can be subtracted from
the site impervious area (IA) on a 1:1/2 area ratio in the water
quality volume computation.
[1] Restrictions on the credit.
[a] The maximum impervious area that can be included in
this credit shall be computed as follows:
IAc = WIA LIA
Where:
IAc = impervious area recharge credit (L2)
LIA = length of impervious area measured
perpendicular to the sheet flow
direction (L)
WIA = width of impervious area (L); maximum
width permitted for credit is the smaller
of 100 feet or twice the width of the
vegetated filter strip
[b] To qualify for a water quality credit, natural and
constructed filter areas or strips must meet the same
restrictions identified for natural or constructed
recharge areas with regard to width, length, slope,
tributary drainage length, and construction. These
restrictions are presented in Chapter 3 of the
Stormwater Management Plan.
[c] Runoff shall enter the filter/buffer strip as overland
sheet flow.
[d] Filter/buffer areas shall remain undisturbed/
unmanaged other than to remove accumulated trash
and debris.
§ 490-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-16
1:313
§ 490-17. Erosion and sedimentation requirements.
[e] Water quality credits are not permitted for waterquality-
sensitive (WQS) developments.
[f] The maximum total water quality credit for vegetative
filter/buffer areas is 50% of the site impervious area.
However, the combination of NAC and filter/buffer
areas is also 50%.
[2] Sensitive area and development restrictions:
[a] Untreated urban runoff from WQS developments may
not be directed to filter/buffer areas without
pretreatment.
(7) Comments related to water quality credits.
(a) Concurrence of the Municipal Engineer is required prior to the
use of all water quality credits for the reduction of the water
quality treatment volume. The Municipal Engineer may
approve the use of additional credits based upon sufficient
documentation regarding suitability for sensitive development
types and areas, pollutant removal effectiveness, and
maintenance criteria. Multiple water quality credits cannot be
claimed for the identical area of the site (i.e., a stream buffer
credit and disconnecting roof recharge area cannot both be
claimed for the same area).
(b) Additional impervious coverage reduction using low-impact
development techniques (development practices which reduce
the impact of urban runoff, such as narrower residential road
sections, smaller culs-de-sac, smaller parking stalls, smaller
building setbacks to reduce driveway lengths, etc.) will also
reduce the required water quality treatment volume. Many of
these techniques require prior approval by the municipality
before implementation into land development design.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Title 25, Rules and Regulations,
Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources, Article II,
Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," and in accordance
with the Centre County Conservation District and the standards and
specifications of the appropriate municipal government. The Centre
County Conservation District has been delegated the authority by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to administer
the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program in Centre County.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit the erosion and
sediment pollution control plan and all applicable materials and fees to
the Centre County Conservation District. Applicant must provide proof
§ 490-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-17
1:314
§ 490-18. Sinkhole protection.
The use of sinkholes for stormwater management must be carefully
planned, because discharging runoff directly into existing sinkholes is not
an engineered stormwater solution. Aside from potential water quality
effects, cover collapse sinkholes that exist throughout the watershed can be
unstable, and it should be assumed that they could stop taking water at any
time. Numerous sinkholes throughout the region already flood during larger
runoff events. Nonetheless, in the watershed there are large drainage areas
that completely drain to existing sinkholes and all upslope development
tributary to them cannot be realistically stopped. Therefore, the following
sections have been developed.
of approval of the erosion and sediment pollution control plan prior to
stormwater plan approval.
B. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be or are recommended to be applied where recharge
or water quality BMPs are proposed and include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for these BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) These BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the
entire contributory drainage area to the BMP has received final
stabilization.
C. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
A. Stormwater from roadways, parking lots, storm sewers, roof drains, or
other concentrated runoff paths shall not be discharged directly into
sinkholes without prior filtration in accordance with § 490-18B below.
B. Filter paths.
(1) Sinkholes capable of absorbing substantial amounts of stormwater
shall be protected by diverting such runoff around the sinkhole
(refer to Subsection F) or, upon recommended approval of the
Municipal Engineer, by planting and maintaining a dense filter path
of suitable vegetative material in such a manner and location to
disperse and slow the runoff to a sheet flow condition to promote
the maximum possible filtration and sedimentation of impurities.
(2) The filter path must be at least 100 feet in length and 20 feet in
width. Ten-foot-wide filter paths are acceptable if land slope is less
than 2%.
(3) Filter paths shall be designed and installed so that they filter sheet
flow rather than concentrated flow. If concentrated flow occurs,
§ 490-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-18
1:315
§ 490-19. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
Materials, workmanship and methods: All materials, workmanship and
methods of work shall comply at a minimum with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408 specifications, as accepted
and commonly used by the respective municipality, and shall be considered
to be incorporated into this article as if copied in full. In the event a conflict
grading and shaping or the use of best management practices such
as grass waterways or drop structures may be required.
(4) Sedimentation basins designed to DEP Chapter 102 Standards or
permanent stormwater storage criteria, whichever is larger, and
proposed vegetative filter paths, in conjunction with temporary
stone filter check dams, shall be installed prior to subdivision or
land development construction activities where sinkholes are used
to accept stormwater discharges.
C. If increased runoff is to be discharged into a sinkhole, even in filtered
conditions, a hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of such runoff on
the increased risk of land subsidence and adverse impacts to existing
sinkhole floodplains and groundwater quality shall be made by a
qualified professional and submitted with the stormwater management
plan. Such discharge shall be prohibited if the Municipal Engineer
determines that such poses a hazard to life, property or groundwater
resources.
D. All sinkholes shall be posted by permanent on-site notices clearly visible
at the sinkhole, prohibiting any disposal of refuse, rubbish, hazardous
wastes, organic matter or soil into the sinkhole. Rock fill may be
permitted in the sinkhole for the purpose of preventing dumping of said
materials.
E. To protect sensitive karst areas, the Municipal Engineer may require
basins to contain an impervious liner. The liner may be of the
impervious membrane type, placed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, or may be constructed by mixing
bentonite, or an approved alternative, with existing soil available at the
site, as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
F. If it is determined that runoff from upslope developing areas should be
diverted around a sinkhole due to existing problems, the Municipal
Engineer may require additional upstream volume controls as required
to protect downstream areas.
G. If a sinkhole is to be utilized as part of the volume control of a
stormwater management plan a note must be added to the plan stating:
"If the sinkhole that is a component of this stormwater management
plan closes or does not accept water, all owners of the stormwater
management plan tributary to the closed sinkhole shall install volumecontrol
BMPs or provide safe conveyance to a suitable discharge point."
§ 490-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-19
1:316
arises between the requirements of this article and the Publication 408
specifications, the Municipal Engineer shall resolve the difference, and his
opinion shall be binding.
A. General.
(1) Facilities in state rights-of-way. Any stormwater facility located on
state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT). Any
stormwater facility that discharges directly onto state highway
rights-of-way shall be subject to review by the PennDOT.
(2) Water obstructions. Any facilities that constitute water
obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls or stream enclosures)
and any work involving wetlands as directed in PADEP Chapter 105
regulations (as amended or replaced from time to time by PADEP)
shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and will require
a permit from PADEP. Any other drainage conveyance facility that
does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey,
without damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from
the twenty-five-year design storm with a minimum of one foot of
freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of the
roadway. Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain
areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year
design storm with a minimum of one foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of roadway. Any facility that
constitutes a dam, as defined in PADEP Chapter 105 regulations,
may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility
located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
(3) Conveyance facilities. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or
channel that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations must be
able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the return period design storm as specified in
Subsection A(2). Conveyance facilities to or exiting from
stormwater management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be
designed to convey the design flow to or from that structure.
Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas must
be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm.
Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet
PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements.
B. Stormwater basin design considerations. Stormwater management
basins for the control of stormwater peak discharges shall meet the
following minimum requirements.
(1) The design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include
measures to prevent groundwater contamination and, where
required, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the construction of
§ 490-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-19
1:317
basins shall have moderate to low erodibility factors (i.e., "K"
factors of 0.32 or less). Any basin greater than four feet in height,
measured from the top of berm to the downslope toe of the
abutment, must also contain:
(a) Berm soil specifications;
(b) A determination if site soils are available for the construction
of the berm or cutoff trench;
(c) An impervious cutoff trench which extends the full length of
the downstream berm located in fill.
(2) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Generally, outlet pipes designed to carry the predevelopment, oneyear
storm flow will be permitted to discharge to a stream with only
an energy dissipator. Discharges to drainage swales shall be spread
with a level spreader or piped to an acceptable point.
(3) Outlet structures.
(a) Outlet structures within detention/retention basins shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete or an approved alternate.
With the exception of those openings designed to carry
perennial stream flows, design openings shall have
nonclogging trash racks over all openings six inches or smaller
in any dimension. Design openings 12 inches or greater in any
dimension shall be child-proofed. Outlet aprons shall be
designed and shall extend at a minimum to the toe of the basin
slope. Where spillways will be used to control peak discharges
in excess of the ten-year storm, the control weirs shall be
constructed to withstand the pressures of impounded waters
and convey flows at computed outlet velocities without erosion.
(b) All metal risers, where approved for use, shall be suitably
coated to prevent corrosion. A trash rack or similar
appurtenance shall be provided to prevent debris from
entering the riser. All metal risers shall have a concrete base
attached with a watertight connection. The base shall be
sufficient weight to prevent flotation of the riser. An anti-vortex
device, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to the basin
berm, shall be provided on the top of all metal risers.
(4) Emergency spillway.
(a) Stormwater management facilities.
[1] Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
designed to store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen
embankment required or regulated by this chapter shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow
§ 490-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-19
1:318
up to and including the one-hundred-year postdevelopment
conditions. The height of embankment must
be set as to provide a minimum 0.5 foot of freeboard above
the elevation required to safely pass the one-hundredyear
post-development inflow. Should any stormwater
management facility require a dam safety permit under
PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations
of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety, which may be
required to pass storms larger than a one-hundred-year
event.
[2] Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows
higher than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year
post-development inflow) without structural failure or
causing downstream harm or safety risks.
[3] Any stormwater management facility that has a paved
roadway as the lower berm, and therefore cannot provide
a traditional berm emergency spillway, is not required to
provide 0.5 feet of freeboard above the elevation required
to safely pass the one-hundred-year post-development
inflow, but is required to show that the design is stable and
no significant undermining, scour or erosion will occur.
(b) Emergency spillways shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete, vegetated earth, or riprap in accordance with
generally accepted engineering practices. All emergency
spillways shall be constructed so that the detention basin berm
is protected against erosion. The minimum capacity of all
emergency spillways shall be the peak flow rate from the onehundred-
year design storm. The dimensions of the emergency
spillways can be determined from the Centre County Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook. Emergency spillways shall
extend along the upstream and downstream berm
embankment slopes. Protection should be provided on the
upstream embankment a minimum of three feet below the
spillway crest elevation. Protection at the downstream slope of
the spillway shall, as a minimum, extend to the toe of the berm
embankment. The emergency spillway shall not be located on
or discharge over uncompacted earthen fill and/or easily
erodible material.
(c) Rock-filled gabions may be used where combination berm and
emergency spillway structures are required to prevent
concentrated flows. The Municipal Engineer may require the
use of open concrete lattice blocks, stone riprap, or concrete
spillways when slopes would exceed four feet horizontal to one
foot vertical and spillway velocities might exceed County
§ 490-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-19
1:319
Conservation District standards for the particular soils
involved.
(5) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. The antiseep collars and their connections
to the pipe barrel shall be watertight. The antiseep collars shall
extend a minimum of two feet beyond the outside of the principal
pipe barrel. The maximum spacing between collars shall be 14
times the minimum projection of the collar measured perpendicular
to the pipe.
(6) Slope of detention basin embankment. The top or toe of any slope
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Straight side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(a) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical and may be further reduced if
the soil has unstable characteristics.
(b) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, except with approval of the
municipality.
(c) Where concrete, stone, brick walls are used with side slopes
proposed to be steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, a fence or railing constructed of durable materials, at
least 42 inches high, shall be installed above the wall.
(7) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin berms
shall be 10 feet.
(8) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of the
detention basin, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for all
basins used exclusively for peak runoff control. Water quality or
recharge basins with filtration systems incorporated into them may
have a minimum grade of 1/2% (0.5).
(9) Basins designed for use as recreational facilities shall have a
collecting swale or low-flow channel and/or underdrain. The floor
slope of the basin may be reduced to 1%.
(10) The lowest floor elevation of any structure constructed adjacent to
a detention basin or other stormwater facility shall be two feet
above the detention basin berm. The distance between any
structure and any stormwater facility shall be a minimum of 50
feet.
§ 490-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-19
1:320
(11) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(12) The maximum water depth shall not exceed three feet.
(13) Basins should be lined with impervious liners only in areas with a
high risk of sinkhole formation or potential groundwater
contamination, as determined by a geotechnical engineer.
However, where a liner is deemed necessary or appropriate, the
use of controlled, compacted natural clay liners for SWM basins
should be considered. Locally available clay, when properly
installed, can provide near impervious conditions (approximately
E-6 cm/s or less). Some of the advantages of using controlled,
compacted, natural clay soil liners are:
(a) Can offer better long-term solution as a basin liner versus
geosynthetics because of greater thickness and the ability to
withstand settlement;
(b) Can be constructed to allow relatively uniform leakage rates to
facilitate groundwater recharge but not to an excessive degree
that overloads karst bedrock;
(c) When properly constructed in two or more eight-inch-to teninch-
thick lifts, rapid movement of surface water through the
clay liner is eliminated (rapid leaks can occur in geosyntheticlined
basins due to poor seaming, punctures or other factors);
(d) Cleaning/maintenance of clay-lined stormwater basins will be
easier/safer versus geosynthetic liners which could easily be
damaged during maintenance operations; and
(e) The abundance of clayey soils (derived from limestone
residuum) within the Spring Creek watershed can provide
adequate, cost-effective soil resources for construction of clay
liner systems at most development projects. However, the
installation of any low-permeability clay liner system needs to
be carefully controlled, and the designer needs to ensure that
specifications meet standards to ensure integrity.
C. Construction of basins.
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to or concurrent with any
earthmoving or land disturbances which they will serve. The
phasing of their construction shall be noted in the narrative and on
the plan. Basins that include water quality or recharge components
shall have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
§ 490-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-19
1:321
(2) Construction specifications in accordance with the minimum
criteria of the municipality must be provided for all embankments
pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
(3) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times with copies being forwarded to the
Municipal Engineer upon request.
(4) When rock is encountered during the excavation of a pond, it shall
be removed to an elevation of at least 12 inches below the proposed
basin floor (for a manufactured liner, 24 to 30 inches). All exposed
cracks and fissures are to be structurally filled.
(5) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall
be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins within 15
days of construction.
(6) A quality control program is critical for embankment fills.
Therefore, whenever embankment fill material in excess of three
feet is to be used, each layer of compacted fill shall be tested to
determine its density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM 3017. The density of
each layer shall be 98% of a Standard Proctor Density analysis per
ASTM 698.
D. Construction inspection. Inspections may be conducted by the
Municipal Engineer during the construction of the stormwater
management basin and facilities. Such inspections do not constitute
approval of construction methods or materials.
E. Special use basins.
(1) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Provision for parking facilities within basins and permanent
wet ponds with stormwater management capabilities may also be
appropriate. Prior approval and consultation with the municipality
are required before design. Multiple-use basins should be
constructed so that potentially dangerous conditions are not
created. Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed
for a slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas are
clearly separated and secure.
(2) Multiple-development basins. Stormwater management facilities
designed to serve more than one property or development in the
same watershed are encouraged. Staged construction of existing or
proposed multiple-use detention facilities by several developers in
conjunction with watershed development is encouraged. Each
developer shall be responsible for the incremental increase in
runoff generated by the respective development and incremental
§ 490-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-19
1:322
construction improvements necessary for the overall detention
facility. Prior approval and consultation with the municipality is
required before design of such facilities.
(3) Alternative detention facilities. Alternative stormwater detention
facilities, including rooftop, subsurface basins or tanks, and in-pipe
detention storage, or other approved alternative designs, are
permitted as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
F. Design of seepage pits and seepage trenches for infiltration of roof
drainage.
(1) Criteria.
(a) These structures shall be designed to assimilate, in 72 hours, a
volume of water equal to 0.20 cubic feet per square foot of roof
coverage.
(b) The soils on which a seepage pit or trench are located shall
have a minimum infiltration rate of 0.27 inches per hour based
upon soils data obtained by direct testing methods in
accordance with procedures outlined in the Technical Manual
for Sewage Enforcement Officers. Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(c) The porosity of the gravel or rock to be used in seepage pits
must be specified in the plan. The rock or gravel shall be
covered with a ground-stabilization fabric [trade names: Mirafi
500 (Monsanto), Typer (DuPont), Bidim (trade name), and
Supac (trade name)] or equivalent.
(d) Seepage pits or seepage trenches shall not be installed on
slopes greater than 20%.
(e) Seepage pits or the drains to them must contain a sediment
trap which can be maintained regularly. All downspouts should
have leaf strains to prevent leaves from clogging the seepage
pit.
(f) Seepage pits connected to roof drains shall be located at least
10 feet from basement walls and downhill from the building.
(g) The bottom of a seepage pit shall be at least two feet above
seasonal high-water table and bedrock or be shown to be
otherwise capable of handling required design volumes.
(2) Guidelines.
(a) Runoff control capacity may be distributed among several
seepage pits, trenches or runoff control berms so long as total
assimilative capacity of all structures equals the required
volume.
§ 490-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-19
1:323
§ 490-20. Easements.
Stormwater management facilities located outside of existing or proposed
rights-of-way shall be located within and accessible by easements as
follows:
(b) Where adequate seepage pit capacity is difficult to achieve
with a rock-filled pit, a concrete (or equivalent material)
culvert pipe with a lid may be placed vertically over a stone bed
to provide storage capacity; alternatively, a septic-tank-type
structure operating as a cistern with discharge to the seepage
pit may be used.
(c) The longer dimension of seepage pits or seepage trenches
should parallel the slope where slopes exceed 5%.
(d) The use of a perforated or porous pipe leading to the seepage
pit is encouraged.
(e) In all cases, an overflow system should be provided to
accommodate heavy rains in excess of the design criteria.
A. Drainage easements. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement paralleling the line of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream. The width of the drainage easement will be
adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the
one-hundred-year floodplain, in accordance with computed top widths
for water surface elevations determined under § 490-16 of this article.
B. Access easements. Where proposed stormwater management facilities
are not adjacent to proposed or existing public rights-of-way or are not
accessible due to physical constraints, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, a twenty-foot-wide passable access easement specifying
rights of entry shall be provided. Access easements shall provide for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities. A note shall be added to the plan
indicating right of entry of the Borough and its representatives for the
purpose of inspection of the stormwater facilities.
C. Maintenance easements. A maintenance easement shall be provided
which encompasses the stormwater facility and appurtenances and
provides for access for maintenance purposes. The maintenance
easement must be located outside of the one-hundred-year surface
elevation and the stormwater facility and appurtenances.
D. Easements shall stipulate that no trees, shrubs, structures, excavation
or fill be placed and no regrading be performed within the area of the
easement without written approval from the municipality. Upon
approval of the municipality, such landscaping may be placed in
maintenance easements, provided it does not impede access.
§ 490-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-20
1:324
E. Whenever practicable, easements shall be parallel with and conjunctive
to property lines of the subdivision.
F. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the
municipality in consultation with the Municipal Engineer and Solicitor.
G. When stormwater conveyance pipes or channels are located in
undedicated land, they shall be placed within a drainage easement not
less than 20 feet wide, as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 490-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-20
1:325

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§ 490-21. General requirements.
§ 490-22. Stormwater management plan contents.
The stormwater management plan shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps and plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the
associated computations and erosion and sediment pollution control plan
by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and
sediment pollution control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title
and date. All stormwater management plan materials shall be submitted
to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat and
well organized; otherwise, the stormwater management plan shall be
disapproved and returned to the applicant. Said plan shall be prepared
by a registered professional land surveyor, qualified geologist, landscape
A. From and after the date of enactment of this chapter, a stormwater
management plan and other information specified herein shall be
submitted to the municipality for all lands subdivided or for which land
development plans are prepared after the enactment of this chapter. A
stormwater management plan and other information specified herein
shall be submitted at the same time and together with submission of a
preliminary subdivision or land development plan, along with a
completed checklist supplied by the municipality indicating the items
contained within the submission.
B. Such plans and information shall be considered part of said zoning and
subdivision documents and shall be reviewed in accordance with
procedures established thereunder. Preliminary approval or final
approval of a subdivision or land development plan or the issuance of a
zoning permit shall be contingent upon submission of a stormwater
management plan and other materials specified herein and approval of
the stormwater management plan in accordance with provisions of this
chapter.
C. All stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for review and comment. Such review shall include a
statement by the Municipal Engineer specifying the provisions of this
chapter which have not been met by the plan as submitted.
D. Once a stormwater management plan has been approved together with
a subdivision or land development plan approval or together with the
issuance of a zoning permit, said stormwater management plan shall be
valid only for the subdivision, land development, or zoning permit
approved. Any further development on the lot or lots requiring a
revision of the approved plan or other construction or activities as
defined by municipal zoning regulations shall require the submission of
a new, amended or revised stormwater management plan and other
information specified herein.
§ 490-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-22
1:327
architect, architect or engineer licensed in the State of Pennsylvania, with
said preparer's seal and registration number affixed to the plan. The
following items shall be included in the stormwater management plan:
A. Stormwater management report.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and materials to
be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features, including
detention facilities and other stormwater management elements.
(5) Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility for all
permanent stormwater management facilities.
(6) The stormwater management report must include a narrative
which clearly discusses the project and summary tables which, at a
minimum, provides the following information.
(a) Narrative.
[1] The overall stormwater management concept.
[2] The expected project schedule.
[3] Location map.
[4] Total site area — pre and post, which must be equal or
have an explanation as to why they are not.
[5] Total site impervious area.
[6] Total off-site areas.
[7] Number of stormwater management facilities (ponds), if
applicable.
[8] Type of development.
[9] Predevelopment land use.
[10] Whether site is underlain by carbonate geology.
[11] Whether site is a water-quality-sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
§ 490-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-22
1:328
[14] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables.
[1] Predevelopment.
[a] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[b] Computation of average slope, hydraulic length,
computed time of concentration.
[c] Required peak rate of runoff.
[2] Post development.
[a] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[b] Land use for each subarea.
[c] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve
numbers (CN).
[d] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[e] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds
and out.
[f] Pond maximum return period design data, including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation,
and emergency spillway elevation.
[g] Water quality depth and volume requirements.
[h] Recharge volume requirements.
[i] Morphology requirements.
[j] Capture volumes required.
(c) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may
be rejected for review by the municipality's Engineer or
representative and will be returned to the applicant.
B. Plan requirements. Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn
at a scale of one inch equals no more than 50 feet; for tracts of 20 acres
or more, plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals no more than
100 feet. Plans shall be submitted on the following sheet sizes: 18
inches by 24 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches, or 36 inches by 42 inches.
All lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are
reduced to half size. All sheets comprising a submission shall be on one
size. The following information, unless specifically exempted in writing
by the Municipal Engineer, must be shown on the plans, prepared in a
form which meets the requirements for recording in the office of the
§ 490-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-22
1:329
Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, Pennsylvania. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(2) The date of submission and revision.
(3) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(4) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(5) Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(6) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, closed depressions, wetlands, streams, existing
drainagecourses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and
the total extent of the upstream area draining through the site. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(7) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and waterlines within 20 feet of property lines.
(8) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries, including rock
outcrops.
(9) Total area of impervious surfaces proposed.
(10) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(11) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(12) A graphic and written scale.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project and the
extent of the watershed or subarea that drains through the project
site.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
§ 490-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-22
1:330
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) Access easements around all stormwater management facilities
that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
(22) Complete drainage systems for the site, including details for
construction. All existing drainage features which are to be
incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the site is to be
developed in stages, a general stormwater management plan for
the entire site shall be presented, with the first stage and
appropriate development stages for the drainage system indicated.
(23) Location and selected plant material used for vegetative filter
paths to sinkholes and the location of all notices to be posted.
(24) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system is to be maintained in accordance
with the approved ownership and maintenance program and
remain a permanent fixture that can be altered or removed only
after approval of a revised plan by the municipality.
(25) A note indicating that as-built drawings will be provided by the
developer for all stormwater facilities prior to occupancy or the
release of the surety bond.
(26) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________, hereby certify that the stormwater management
plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Bellefonte
Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(27) The following signature block for the Borough Engineer reviewing
the stormwater management plan:
"I, __________, have reviewed this stormwater management plan
in accordance with the design standards and criteria of the
Bellefonte Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(28) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
C. Supplemental information.
§ 490-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-22
1:331
(1) A soil erosion and sediment pollution control plan, where
applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as required by
PADEP.
(2) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(3) Karst features identification and analysis reports and a
hydrogeologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
(6) All permits required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and Army Corps of Engineers and other
regulatory agencies.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods, such as seepage pits, beds
or trenches, are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
(a) A sketch of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment side
slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel dimensions
and dimensions and spacing of antiseep collars.
(b) Design computations for the pipe barrel and riser.
(c) A plot or table of the stage-storage (acre-feet vs. elevation) and
all supporting computations.
(d) Flood routing computations.
(e) A detailed plan of the trash rack and anti-vortex device.
(4) Record set (as-built) plans. At the completion of the project, and as
a prerequisite for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an
occupancy permit, the owner or his representative shall:
§ 490-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-22
1:332
§ 490-23. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a PADEP joint permit
application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PADEP's Rules
and Regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s)
shall be part of the plan.
§ 490-24. Stormwater management plan review.
(a) Provide certification of completion from a registered
professional verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto; and
(b) Provide a set of approved stormwater management plan
drawings showing all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes and stormwater control
facilities.
A. The stormwater management plan shall be submitted by the developer
as part of the preliminary plan submission for the regulated activity.
B. Four copies of the stormwater management plan and stormwater
management report shall be submitted.
C. Distribution of the stormwater management plan will be as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineers.
(3) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for consistency with the adopted Spring Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan. The municipality shall require receipt of
a complete plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the stormwater management plan
for any submission or land development against the municipal
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance provisions not
superseded by this chapter.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the municipality in writing, within 30 calendar days, whether the
stormwater management plan is consistent with the stormwater
management plan ordinance. Should the stormwater management plan
be determined to be consistent with this chapter, the municipality will
§ 490-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-24
1:333
forward an approval letter to the developer with a copy to the Municipal
Engineer.
D. Should the stormwater management plan be determined to be
inconsistent with this chapter, the municipality will forward a
disapproval letter to the developer with a copy to the Municipal
Engineer citing the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any disapproved
stormwater management plans may be revised by the developer and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 490-5C of this chapter, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify the municipal building permit officer in
writing, within a time frame consistent with the municipal building code
and/or municipal subdivision ordinance, whether the stormwater
management plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of
the review letter to the municipality, who will issue an approval/
disapproval letter to the developer. Any disapproved stormwater
management plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted
consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities requiring a PADEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify PADEP whether the stormwater
management plan is consistent with this chapter and forward a copy of
the review letter to the municipality and the developer. PADEP may
consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
G. The Municipal Engineer shall not approve any subdivision or land
development for regulated activities specified in § 490-5 of this chapter
if the stormwater management plan has been found to be inconsistent
with the chapter. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to approval. Plans shall be subject to review by the Borough
Planning Commission as provided by the Bellefonte Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
H. Unless otherwise directed by the municipality, the municipal building
permit office shall not issue a building permit for any regulated activity
specified in § 490-5 of this chapter if the stormwater management plan
has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by
the Municipal Engineer, or without considering the comments of the
Municipal Engineer. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The developer shall be responsible for completing an "as-built survey"
of all stormwater management facilities included in the approved
stormwater management plan. The as-built survey and an explanation
of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the municipality
approve the as-built survey until the municipality receives a copy of an
approved declaration of adequacy, highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office, and any applicable permits from PADEP.
§ 490-24 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-24
1:334
§ 490-25. Modification of plans.
§ 490-26. Resubmission of disapproved stormwater management
plans.
A disapproved stormwater management plan may be resubmitted, with
the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented
in writing, to the Municipal Engineer in accordance with § 490-23 of this
chapter and be subject to review as specified in § 490-24 of this chapter.
The applicable municipality review fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved stormwater management plan.
J. The municipality's approval of a stormwater management plan shall be
valid for a period not to exceed five years. This five-year time period
shall commence on the date that the municipality signs the approved
stormwater management plan. If stormwater management facilities
included in the approved stormwater management plan have not been
constructed or if an as-built survey of these facilities has not been
approved within this five-year time period, then the municipality may
consider the stormwater management plan disapproved and may
revoke any and all permits. Stormwater management plans that are
considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 490-26 of this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted stormwater management plan for a
development site that involves a change in stormwater management
facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
stormwater management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the stormwater management plan
as determined by the Municipal Engineer, shall require a resubmission
of the modified stormwater management plan consistent with § 490-23
of this chapter and be subject to review as specified in § 490-24 of this
chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved stormwater
management plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied
by the applicable review. A modification to a stormwater management
plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the municipality
shall be submitted to the municipality accompanied by the applicable
municipality review fee.
§ 490-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-26
1:335

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 490-27. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his municipal assignee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the contractor and developer
of the deviation from the approved stormwater management plan.
C. The contractor shall immediately notify the Municipal Engineer if,
during any stage of the work, the contractor determines that the
permanent stormwater management facilities cannot be installed in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. In such
case, the developer will be responsible for preparing plans and
calculations, for municipal approval, detailing any required changes.
The developer will also be responsible for obtaining any revised or new
permits that may be required. Any delays or additional expenses caused
by plan revisions will solely be the responsibility of the applicant/
developer. The applicant/developer will be responsible for any
additional cost incurred by the municipality, including but not limited to
review and inspection fees.
§ 490-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-27
1:337

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 490-28. General.
The fees required by this chapter are the municipal review fee and the
municipality review fee. The municipal review fee shall be established by
the municipality to defray review costs incurred by the municipality and the
Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 490-29. Municipality stormwater management plan review fee.
The municipality shall establish a review fee schedule by resolution of the
municipal governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and/
or any rate schedule established by the municipality for in-house services
and services of outside consultants. The municipality shall periodically
update the review fee schedule to ensure that review costs are adequately
reimbursed.
§ 490-30. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the stormwater management plan by the municipality, the
Municipal Engineer, and outside consultants.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the stormwater
management plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 490-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-30
1:339

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 490-31. Stormwater management controls and facilities.
Stormwater management controls and facilities, as defined here, include
all structural and nonstructural stormwater conveyance and management
controls including water quantity and quality best management practices.
§ 490-32. Performance guarantee.
The applicant should provide a financial guarantee to the municipality
for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved stormwater plan and this
chapter equal to the full construction cost of the required controls.
§ 490-33. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The stormwater management plan for the development site shall
contain an operation and maintenance plan prepared by the developer
and approved by the municipality, in consultation with the Municipal
Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline required
routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper
operation and function of the facility(ies).
B. The responsible party or entity responsible for the maintenance must
also be identified. The stormwater management plan for the
development site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all proposed stormwater control facilities
and temporary permanent erosion control facilities, consistent with the
following principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
control facilities within public rights-of-way may also be dedicated
to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner
or private management entity.
(a) Facilities may be incorporated within individual lots so that the
respective lot owners will own and be responsible for
maintenance in accordance with recorded deed restrictions. A
description of the facility or system and the terms of the
required maintenance shall be incorporated as part of the deed
to the property.
§ 490-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-33
1:341
§ 490-34. Post-construction maintenance inspections.
(b) Ownership and maintenance may be the responsibility of a
property owners' association. The stated responsibilities of the
property owners' association in terms of owning and
maintaining the stormwater management facilities shall be
submitted with final plans for determination of their adequacy,
and upon their approval shall be recorded with the approved
subdivision plan among the deed records of Centre County,
Pennsylvania. In addition, the approved subdivision plan and
any deed written from said plan for a lot or lots shown herein
shall contain a condition that it shall be mandatory for the
owner or owners of said lot to be members of said property
owners' association.
(c) For stormwater management facilities that are proposed as
part of the site development plan, the developer will be
required to execute a developer agreement and a maintenance
agreement with the municipality for the construction and
continued maintenance of the facilities prior to the signature
approval on the final plan. Access for inspection by the
municipality of all such facilities deemed critical to the public
welfare at any reasonable time shall be provided.
C. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater management
plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the ownership
and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater
management controls.
A. Stormwater facilities should be inspected by the landowner/developer
or responsible entity (including the Municipal Engineer for dedicated
facilities) on the following basis:
(1) Annually.
(2) During or immediately after every ten-year or greater storm event.
B. The entity conducting the inspection should be required to submit a
report to the municipality regarding the condition of the facility and
recommending necessary repairs, if needed.
C. Maintenance inspections may be performed by the municipality to
ensure proper functioning of all stormwater facilities. These inspections
may, at a minimum, be performed annually and/or following major
storm events. If the municipality determines at any time that any
permanent stormwater facility has been eliminated, altered or
improperly maintained, the owner of the property shall be notified.
Terms of the notification are detailed in § 490-36, Notification.
§ 490-33 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-34
1:342
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 490-35. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the municipality may enter, at reasonable times, upon any property within
the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 490-36. Notification.
§ 490-37. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the stormwater management plan shall be the responsibility of the
Municipal Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the
municipality.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. The notice will direct the responsible party to comply with all
the terms of this chapter within seven days or such additional period,
not to exceed 30 days, as the designated municipal representative shall
deem reasonable. A time extension may be granted if, in the opinion of
the Municipal Engineer or municipality, the owner has established an
acceptable timetable for compliance. In addition, the designated
municipal representative shall give notice to the owner, applicant,
developer, property manager or other person responsible for the
property or the violation that, if the violation is not corrected, the
municipality may correct the same and charge the landowner or other
person responsible the cost thereof plus penalties as specified herein
for failure to comply.
B. Such notice may be delivered by the United States mail, first class,
postage prepaid, or by certified or registered mail, or by personal
service, or if the property is occupied, by posting the notice at a
conspicuous place upon the affected property.
C. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to
comply within the time specified shall subject such person to the
penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed
cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from pursuing any
and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is
occurring, or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
§ 490-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-37
1:343
§ 490-38. Violations and penalties.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 490-5 on any
property except as provided for in the approved stormwater
management plan and pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It
shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by
the stormwater management plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow
the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to the
approved stormwater management plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the governing body or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
E. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued until all
stormwater issues have been addressed to the municipality's
satisfaction. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner
and/or developer for all subdivisions and land development in the
municipality.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor, in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $1,000
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant nether pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge determining that there is a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
§ 490-37 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-38
1:344
§ 490-39. Appeals.
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge,
and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem fine pending final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
E. In the event that the owner, developer, occupant, applicant, property
manager, or other person responsible fails to comply with the terms of
this chapter within the time specified by the municipal representative,
the municipality may take any actions necessary to remove the
violation. The costs of removal of the violation shall be in addition to any
penalties for violations for failure to comply.
F. In addition to any other enforcement powers or remedies provided by
this chapter, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
G. The cost to the municipality for removal of any violation, as well as fines
and penalties hereinabove mentioned, as assessed against the
applicant, and the municipality's legal expenses incurred to achieve
compliance may be entered by the municipality as a lien against such
property or properties of individual members of a property owners'
association in accordance with the existing provisions of the law.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality, its Municipal
Engineer, or its designee relevant to the provisions of this chapter may
appeal to the municipal Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days of that
action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipal Zoning Hearing
Board relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Court
of Common Pleas of Centre County, Pennsylvania, within 30 days of the
Zoning Hearing Board's decision.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality relevant to
the review of the stormwater management facilities pursuant to the
§ 490-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-39
1:345
Bellefonte Borough Land Development and Subdivision Ordinance,
Chapter 500 of this Code, shall have rights of appeal as provided by
that ordinance.
§ 490-39 BELLEFONTE CODE § 490-39
1:346
Chapter 495
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Historical Architectural Review Board — See
Ch. 62.
Historic District — See Ch. 330.
Market — See Ch. 355.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 410.
Property maintenance and safety
standards — See Ch. 425.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
500.
Trees — See Ch. 520.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 490-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-39
1:347

ARTICLE I
Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted as Ch. 1022 of the 1979 Codified Ordinances; amended in
its entirety 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 040411-02.]
§ 495-1. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in
effect. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force
and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there
is any conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the more
restrictive shall apply.
§ 495-2. Sidewalk inspections and repair program.
§ 495-3. Sidewalk repairs.
A. The Borough requires all property owners having sidewalks adjacent to
their property to maintain those sidewalks, including the repair and
replacement when they do not meet the standards as specified herein.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK — Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street located outside the roadway and
may include paved/concrete footways, curbs and gutters.
Walk has sunken or risen to a height difference of one inch or more
between sections.
(1)
(2) Walk is broken or separated into three or more pieces.
Spalling over 50% or a single square of the sidewalk with one or
more depressions equal to one inch or more.
(3)
(4) A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
C. The Borough will conduct inspections of sidewalks, with roughly 1/4 of
the Borough being inspected prior to June of each year. A list of
defective sidewalks will be presented to the Streets Committee for
recommendation to Council for notification to property owners. The
property owner will have 120 days from the date of notification. A single
appeal for extension can be made to the Borough's Building Code
Official. If granted, the extension cannot exceed an additional 120 days.
A. In order to guarantee competitive pricing, uniformity in quality and
composition, the Borough will publicly bid sidewalk repair work in the
spring of each year so that a list of qualified contractors can be
available to the property owner.
§ 495-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-3
1:349
§ 495-4. Permit application.
The application required by § 495-3 shall be freely available to the public
upon request.
§ 495-5. Construction materials and specifications.
All sidewalks curbs and gutters shall be constructed, reconstructed and
repaired of portland cement concrete only, according to the specifications
determined from time to time by the Borough.
§ 495-6. Support over coal cellars and other excavations.
In all cases where sidewalks, curbs and gutters are constructed,
reconstructed or repaired over coal cellars or other excavations under such
sidewalks, curbs or gutters, such sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be
supported by iron or steel beams or reinforced portland cement concrete
only. In no case shall any support of wood or perishable material be used.
§ 495-7. Grades; responsibility of property owner.
All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired to meet the
grade of the neighboring property owner's sidewalk. The grading thereof is
the responsibility of the property owner.
§ 495-8. Property owner doing own repairs.
The property owner is permitted to undertake sidewalk repair/replacement
work as long as the work meets the minimum standards for quality, color
and appearance as set forth herein. The property owner must complete an
application for repair through the Borough office so that the work can be
inspected when complete. If work does not meet the standards set forth
herein, the property owner will be responsible for the cost of having the
work redone and any additional expenses incurred by the Borough.
§ 495-9. Responsibility of property owner to construct or
reconstruct sidewalk, curb or gutter.
B. If no action is taken by the property owner within the time period
specified, then the Borough will take steps to have a contractor
complete the work and bill the property owner for the work and any
additional costs incurred.
C. In the Historic District of the Borough, the HARB is to have a
predetermined sidewalk color for replacement work so that
applications are not warranted. If the applicant desires to change the
color, composition, width or type of construction material to be used in
the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of such sidewalk,
curb or gutter, then the HARB review and certificate of appropriateness
process is necessary.
§ 495-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-9
1:350
§ 495-10. Noncompliance; remedy of Borough.
In the event of noncompliance by the property owner, the Borough may
proceed with having the required work completed. The Borough may file a
municipal claim or lien if all costs and expenses incurred are not paid by the
property owner.
§ 495-11. Specifications.
§ 495-12. Violations and penalties.
A person in violation of this article shall be subject to the penalty provided
for in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Each street in the Borough wherein 60% or more of the block-face or
street has sidewalks constructed thereon shall have sidewalks
constructed to the remainder of the street to bring the sidewalk
coverage up to 100% or as close to 100% as is reasonably possible.
Measurements shall be made along a single side of the block-face of the
street by measuring the total front footage of a single side of the street
upon which sidewalks are constructed. "Block," as used in this
subsection, means the total front footage of the street measured
between any two intersections of such street with two other ordained
streets of the Borough, whether such intersections are "T" intersections
or whether such street intersects the street to be measured at an angle
other than 90°.
B. For the purpose of this article, sidewalks may exist on one side of a
street for part of a block and then continue on the other side of a street.
In such cases where a sidewalk is divided in part on both sides of a
street, a sidewalk should end at the curb to lead pedestrians in the
direction where the sidewalk is then continued on the other side of the
street.
A. There shall be a minimum of four inches of well-compacted PennDOT
grade 2RC or 2A stone base for the sidewalk.
B. New and reconstructed sidewalks, curbs and gutters, whether laid by
the adjoining landowner or by the Borough, shall be a single layer with
a minimum thickness of four inches and constructed of air-entrained
portland cement concrete with a minimum twenty-eight-day
compressive strength of 3,000 psi. Sidewalks existing of brick or slate
are an exception to this section.
C. Sidewalks existing of brick or slate are permitted to be releveled or
realigned as an acceptable repair.
§ 495-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-12
1:351

ARTICLE II
Pathways, Passageways and Paths Maintenance and Obstructions
[Adopted 12-24-1963 by Ord. No. 481; amended in its entirety
5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 808 (Ch. 1020 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 495-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PATHWAY, PASSAGEWAY and PATH — Any area of ground adjacent to an
ordained street of the Borough which is common ground or part of a rightof-
way of any ordained street of the Borough open to public use for foot
traffic.
§ 495-14. Coasting and sledding on public ways and in parks.
[Amended 7-23-1990 by Ord. No. 103462]
No person shall coast, ride or sled upon any roller skates, skateboard,
scooter, sled or similar conveyance or device upon any sidewalk, street,
alley or trafficway, or within the confines of any park in or belonging to
the Borough, unless such sidewalk, street, alley or trafficway has been set
apart and designated by the Mayor as a "play highway" in accordance with
§ 530-11 of Chapter 530, Vehicles and Traffic, and has been blocked off
or adequately guarded from vehicular traffic, or unless certain designated
portions of any park within the Borough or belonging to the Borough
have been set aside by Council for the purpose of coasting, riding or
sledding within such designated areas. However, the use of skateboards,
roller skates and scooters shall be permitted on the sidewalks in those areas
of the Borough zoned R-1, R-2 and R-4, provided the person using such
device or conveyance yields the right-of-way to pedestrians.
§ 495-15. Display of merchandise on sidewalks. [Amended 5-4-1998
by Ord. No. 1133]
No person shall store, display or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise or place temporary signs upon any portion of any sidewalk in
the Borough except as follows:
A. The same are permitted in the area designated as a curb market on
days and at times designated for the holding of the market, and then
only in strict conformity with the provisions of Chapter 355, Market;
B. In the area directly in front of the store premises only, and in such a
manner as to maintain an open pathway at least 1/2 the width of the
sidewalk measured from the curb to the building line, but in no event to
exceed a distance of five feet.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 495-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-15
1:353
§ 495-16. Encroachments by cellarways, steps, porches and
porticos.
No person shall construct, install or maintain any cellar door or entrance
to a basement or cellar of a building which extends into and occupies
more than the innermost 1/4 of the width of a sidewalk or more than three
feet into an alley. Entrances to cellars and basements, where the steps
extend at right angles to the building line, shall be covered with metal
doors, closing flush with the surface of the sidewalk or alley. Such doors
shall be kept closed at all times except when goods, wares or merchandise
are being taken into or removed from the cellar or basement to which
such cellarway leads, and under no circumstances may any such door be
open between sunset and sunrise unless a person is present at all times
on the adjacent sidewalk to warn passersby of the danger. Entrances to
cellars and basements, where the steps extend parallel to the building line,
shall be surrounded on two sides by a metal barrier or railing, at least
three feet in height. No person shall construct any step, porch or portico
extending into any sidewalk, which step, porch or portico occupies more
than the innermost 2/5 of the width of the sidewalk. However, any entrance
to a cellar or basement, step, porch or portico heretofore constructed
and occupying a greater part of the sidewalk than herein permitted may
continue to be maintained but, in the case of entrances to cellars and
basements, all requirements of this section as to safety measures and
precautions shall apply to such entrances as well as to all others heretofore
or hereafter constructed.
§ 495-17. Removal or modification of obstructions or
encroachments.
Any person who places or maintains any sidewalk display contrary to
§ 495-15 or who constructs or maintains any entrance to a cellar or
basement or any step, porch or portico contrary to § 495-16 shall remove
the same or make any changes necessary to bring the same into conformity
with the applicable requirements, upon notice to do so from Council or
its duly authorized agent, within the time limit set forth in the notice, in
default of which the Borough shall have authority to cause such obstruction
C. Goods, wares and merchandise must be directly associated with the
business occupying the storefront.
D. Goods, wares and merchandise or temporary signs must be removed
completely from the sidewalk area at dusk each business day.
E. Businesses are limited to one freestanding double-faced sign, not to
exceed 30 inches in width and 36 inches in height.
F. Cords, hoses and lines of any kind are prohibited from crossing the
sidewalk area.
G. Soda machines, coolers and refrigerators are prohibited from being
displayed on any portion of the public sidewalk area.
§ 495-15 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-17
1:354
or encroachment to be removed or the unlawful condition remedied and to
collect the cost of such removal or remedy, with an additional amount of
10%, from the person to whom such notice was given.
§ 495-18. Maintenance of paths, pathways, passageways and
common ground.
After the effective date of this article (Ordinance No. 808, adopted May 15,
1978), paths, pathways, passageways or common ground shall be free of
any or all obstructions of any kind and shall be maintained by the owner of
the adjacent premises in the same manner and subject to the same penalties
for failure to maintain as sidewalks are presently treated under this article.
§ 495-19. Obstruction of paths, pathways, passageways and
common ground. [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06152015-02]
§ 495-20. Excavations in pathways, passageways, paths and common
ground.
No person shall make any opening or excavation in any pathway,
passageway, path or common ground except in strict conformity with the
provisions of this article.
§ 495-21. Application of certain sections to pathways, passageways,
paths and common ground.
Sections 495-14 through 495-17, including the penalties prescribed for
violations thereof, shall be applicable to all pathways, passageways, paths
and common grounds of the Borough, subject only to the provisions of
§§ 495-18 through 495-20.
A. No person shall obstruct in any manner the free and open use of
common ground, pathways, paths or passageways so as to inhibit public
use of the same.
B. No hedge, shrub, bush or small tree shall encroach upon or overhang
the clear width of a public sidewalk, common ground, pathways, paths,
passageways or public street in such a manner as it diminishes the
clear width of said sidewalk or street from ground level a distance of
eight feet above the sidewalk or 14 feet above the street.
C. All trees on or adjacent to sidewalk, common ground, pathways, paths,
passageways or public street in the Borough of Bellefonte shall not
extend any lower than 14 feet above the public street or lower than
eight feet above a public sidewalk.
§ 495-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-21
1:355

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 5-15-1978 by Ord. No. 808 (Ch. 680, Secs. 680.01,
680.015, 680.03 and 680.99, of the 1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 495-22. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or
alongside of any street in the Borough is hereby required to remove or
cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside of
such property all snow and/or ice thereon fallen or formed within 24
hours after the same has ceased to fall or to be formed. All persons
subject to this section shall, in areas of the Borough where new
concrete has been poured for gutters, curbs or sidewalks within six
months of the first snowfall in the Borough, in lieu of clearing such
newly concreted areas of snow and ice, deposit sand or ashes on such
areas, provided that such sand and/or ashes are evenly and well
distributed over all snowy and icy patches existing on such newly
concreted areas. Property owners, occupants or tenants, in cases of
exceptional ice or snow storms, shall not be required to clear all snow
and ice from the sidewalks in front of or alongside of their respective
properties, but instead shall be permitted to well and evenly distribute
anti-skid material, sand and/or ash over the surface of such sidewalk,
provided that such materials are well and evenly distributed over the
surface of the sidewalk and that such anti-skid materials, sand and/or
ashes are repeatedly applied throughout the course of the storm over
the surface of such sidewalk so as to provide a safe and convenient
passageway for pedestrians using such sidewalk. Such anti-skid
materials, sand and/or ashes shall be applied not less than eight hours
after the commencement of any such exceptional ice and snow storm
and shall continue to be applied throughout the course of such storm.
Exceptional ice and/or snow storms shall be declared by the Mayor or
the Borough Manager in the same manner as snow emergencies are
presently declared in the Borough. [Amended 1-7-1985 by Ord. No.
924; 2-16-2004 by Ord. No. 1184]
B. In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as provided in
Subsection A hereof, fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions of Subsection A hereof within the time limit prescribed
therein, the Borough authorities may proceed immediately to clear all
snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of such delinquent and to collect the
expenses thereof, with 10% added thereto, from such owner, occupant
or tenant, as the case may be, in addition to any fine or penalty imposed
under § 495-25. Properties that are exempt from this provision and the
penalty provided in § 495-25A must meet the sixty-percent rule
provided in § 495-9. The Police Department is empowered to serve the
property owner or tenant with a summons (ticket) on site without
previous written warning following the time limits prescribed in
Subsection A hereof after the Borough has made a general onetime
announcement that it will begin enforcing the clearing-of-walks
§ 495-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-22
1:357
§ 495-23. Unauthorized deposit of snow on Borough property.
[Amended 5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1120]
§ 495-24. Violations; issuance of tickets; appeals. [Amended
5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1120]
§ 495-25. Violations and penalties [Amended 5-19-1997 by Ord. No.
1120; 3-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1144; 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1177]
provision at the beginning of the winter season. [Amended 6-16-1994
by Ord. No. 1087]
C. This section, including the penalties prescribed for violation thereof,
shall be applicable to all pathways, passageways, paths and common
grounds of the Borough, as the same are defined in § 495-13, subject
only to the provisions of §§ 495-18 through 495-20.
A. No business or property owner or property occupant, whether
personally or by hire, shall clear his or her parking area, driveway,
sidewalk or lot of snow by blowing, plowing, pushing or dumping such
snow onto a Borough right-of-way or street or other public property.
B. Whoever is charged with a violation of this section shall be issued a
ticket at the time the violation is discovered.
A. It shall be the duty of a police officer or designated Borough employee
to report any violation of § 495-22 or 495-23 by issuing a ticket
containing the following information:
(1) The address of the premises where the violation was discovered;
(2) The time at which the violation was discovered;
(3) The date upon which the violation was discovered; and
(4) Any other relevant facts attending upon the discovery of the
violation.
B. Upon finding a property to be in violation of § 495-22 or 495-23, a police
officer or other Borough official shall fill out and deliver a ticket to the
address where the violation occurred, either by serving such notice on a
resident or by posting the ticket in a prominent place at the entry door
to the building where the violation occurred. [Amended 10-15-2012
by Ord. No. 10152012-001]
C. Any person wishing to appeal a ticket issued for a violation of § 495-22
or 495-23 may, within 48 hours of receiving a dated ticket, request in
writing a hearing before the Mayor. An appeal of the Mayor's decision
may be made to the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction in the
Borough.
A. Whoever violates or fails to comply with § 495-22 and § 495-23 shall be
fined $25 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
§ 495-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-25
1:358
committed each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply
occurs or continues. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No.
03162015-01]
B. Any person charged with a violation of § 495-22 or § 495-23, for which
payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the
manner prescribed on the issued ticket. Such payment shall be deemed
a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of
conviction of the alleged offense, and may be accepted in full
satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for such alleged violation.
Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when laws
prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall require a court
appearance. Any person who fails to pay the prescribed fine within 72
hours will have his or her violation referred to the Magisterial District
Judge for appropriate legal action and collection. [Amended
3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 03162015-01]
C. Any person charged with a violation of § 495-22 or 495-23, for which
payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the
manner prescribed on the issued ticket. Such payment shall be deemed
a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of
conviction of the alleged offense, and may be accepted in full
satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for such alleged violation.
Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when laws
prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall require a court
appearance. Any person who fails to pay the prescribed fine within 72
hours will have his or her violation referred to the Magisterial District
Judge for appropriate legal action and collection.
§ 495-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-25
1:359

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 1212 (Ch. 1024 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 495-26. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BOROUGH — Borough of Bellefonte.
EMERGENCY ACTION — Any event which may threaten public health or
safety, including but not limited to leaking water- or gas-conduit systems;
damaged, plugged or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems;
damaged underground electrical and communication facilities; or downed
overhead pole structures.
EXCAVATION — Any opening/cut in the surface of a public right-of-way
made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening in a lawful structure
below the surface of a public right-of-way, the top of which is flush with
the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings
without injury or damage to the public right-of-way.
FACILITY — Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, or any material, structure or object of any kind or
character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or
over any public place.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED, RECONSTRUCTED OR REPAVED STREETS —
Any street that has been newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved
within the last 10 years.
PERMITTEE — A person who has obtained a permit as required by this
article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, trust
or governmental authority, partnership, public or private corporation or
authority, trust, estate, governmental entity, or agency or political
subdivision of a municipality, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or other
legal entity, or their representatives, agents or assigns. The singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any public street, way, place, sidewalk, park,
square, plaza or any other similar public property owned or controlled by
the Borough and dedicated to public use, and any dedicated but unordained
street or way.
UTILITY — A private company, corporation or quasi-municipal corporation
under the direction and control of the Public Utility Commission, as defined
in 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 102, as it may hereinafter be amended.63
§ 495-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-27
1:361
§ 495-27. Permit required.
§ 495-28. Emergency action.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such
emergency excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or
property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe or for making
emergency repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall
apply to the Borough for such a permit on the first working day after such
work is commenced. Before any excavation work is started, the person
or utility excavating must contact all utilities for on-the-spot locations in
accordance with PA One Call System.65
§ 495-29. Permit application.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cut or dig open the paved roadway
of any public right-of-way within the Borough without first obtaining a
permit therefore from the Borough. Street opening permits will be valid
for up to six months from the date of issue. All permitted work shall be
completed within those six months. A time-extension permit
supplement will be issued to extend the completion time an additional
six months. The cost for each supplement is as established by resolution
of the Borough Council.64
B. All fees related to the street opening permit shall be established by
resolution of Borough Council and may be changed from time to time by
the same procedure.
C. A permit is invalid until it is paid in full by check or money order,
payable to "Bellefonte Borough," at the receipt of the completed permit
or within 30 days of monthly invoice date, if applicable.
A. Application for a street opening permit shall be made in writing on the
forms prescribed by the Borough. The application shall indicate the
property street address, location and description of the area for which
such cut(s) or opening is to be made; the name and address of the
applicant; dimensions; purpose of the proposed cut or opening;
approximate time required to complete the work, and a copy of an
approved Work Zone Traffic Control figure (Pub. 203).
B. Application for a supplemental street-opening-permit time extension
shall be made in writing on the forms prescribed by the Borough. The
application shall indicate the original permit number, expiration date,
and a written explanation as to the reason for the supplement.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 for definition.
§ 495-27 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-29
1:362
§ 495-30. Bond conditions and amount.
§ 495-31. Insurance.
For purposes of this article, every permittee shall maintain at all times
a minimum of $1,000,000 public liability insurance coverage protecting
himself, his agents and the Borough from all such claims for damages or
injuries and naming the Borough as an additional insured. Evidence of
such coverage shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit
hereunder and shall be submitted in a form satisfactory to the Borough.
§ 495-32. Street closure and no parking.
C. To avoid work delays, submit your application to the Borough at least
five working days in advance of the anticipated date work is to
commence.
A. Before the issuance of a street opening permit, the applicant therefor,
as principal, shall execute and file with the Borough a street opening
bond conditioned that the applicant shall fully and completely perform
all acts and requirements with respect to the restoration and
maintenance of the highway and the payment of the cost of such
restoration and maintenance. A reputable surety company licensed to
do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall execute such
bond.
B. All persons desiring to open a street shall submit to the Borough a bond
properly executed which will be filed. Such bond shall be in the amount
of $50,000 and shall cover street opening work performed in one
calendar year and shall be for the same amount each year thereafter,
unless otherwise adjusted by the Borough.
A. Borough regulations do not permit closure of Borough streets as a
matter of course with issuance of a street opening permit. Specific
approval to close a street or to materially alter traffic patterns must be
obtained from the Borough Council. In an emergency, the Borough
Manager or Police Chief may grant approval. In every case, the
permittee's request to close or alter traffic must include precise
location, reason, work methods, time and date, and what alternatives
were considered.
B. The Borough reserves the right to require work hours of 9:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. in heavily traveled streets.
Permittees will be required to place steel plates, pinned in place, to
maintain traffic flow during nonworking hours in such areas (also see
§ 495-42). Such authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power
to require that work be done on a continuous, around-the-clock, twentyfour-
hour basis. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to notify the
Police Department two days prior for no parking and/or parking meters
to be bagged within work area. The cost of meter bagging and loss of
§ 495-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-32
1:363
§ 495-33. Traffic accommodation and control; public notification.
§ 495-34. Street opening/cut excavations, trenching and Borough
notification.
§ 495-35. Street restoration.
revenue is to be paid by the permittee in addition to the base permit
fee.
A. All permittees are responsible to notify businesses and residences that
will be affected by street opening work that blocks, restricts traffic flow
or prevents the usual parking in the area affected by the work. This
notification shall be given by "door-to-door" notices in the work site
area at least 48 hours prior to commencing work.
B. All permittees shall furnish material and traffic control devices
necessary for the maintenance and protection of traffic and
pedestrians, conforming to PennDOT Work Zone Traffic Control, 67 Pa.
Code, Chapter 203, until the roadway is restored to the condition as
required. If at any time a detour may be required, the permittee shall
first contact the Borough.66
A. All existing pavements shall be saw cut. Cut shall be full depth of the
concrete or base thickness, and care shall be taken in removing the
concrete to ensure that the slab breaks on the next line produced by the
concrete saw. Asphalt concrete pavement and all excavated material
shall be removed from the site. There shall be no storage of any
material on the street surface.
B. All excavation, trenching and shoring, and the like, shall be performed
in a manner that meets with OSHA Department of Labor, Safety and
Health regulations for construction. It is the responsibility of the
permittee, therefore, to understand and abide by all OSHA regulations
concerning trenching and shoring, as outlined in the OSHA Technical
Manual, Section V, Chapter 2.
C. All permittees are responsible to notify the Borough in advance of all
excavations within the Borough right-of-way.
D. All permittees are responsible to notify the Borough with 24 hours'
advance notice prior to any concrete and/or final restorations in order
to schedule the inspection visit to each location/site.
A. Under the six-month street opening permit, from the time street
opening/cut excavations are completed or filled with temporary cold
patch, it shall be the duty of the permittee, in the manner set forth in
this article, to cause within the period of 30 days such public rights-of-
66.Editor's Note: See PennDOT Publications 46 and 213. 67 Pa. Code, Chapter 203, is now
"reserved;" see 67 Pa. Code, Chapter 212, Official Traffic Control Devices, for temporary
traffic control provisions.
§ 495-32 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-35
1:364
§ 495-36. Compaction and backfill.
way to be permanently restored in the manner specified as outlined
under § 495-36 for asphalt base and § 495-40 for concrete base. For
asphalt base work, time extensions may be granted only for emergency
action performed when asphalt plants are closed.
B. Permittee is to maintain such portion of the highway for a period of two
years from the date of such final restoration, subject at all times to the
approval of the Borough. In the event the permittee fails to maintain
such restoration, after having received written notice from the
Borough, the Borough will instruct the permittee's bonding agent to
cause the proper restoration to be performed and maintained for the
period required herein.
C. When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider than three
feet is made in the highway pavement, the permittee shall overlay the
entire width of the traffic lanes in which the opening was made for the
entire length of highway that was opened.
D. When two or more transverse trench openings are made in the highway
pavements less than 100 feet apart, the permittee shall overlay the
traffic lanes in which the openings were made for the entire length of
the highway between such openings.
E. When four or more openings are made by the same permittee in the
highway pavement less than 100 feet apart, the Borough shall require
the permittee to overlay the entire disturbed area.
F. When the opening is to be closer than three feet from the edge of the
existing pavement, the opening shall be extended to the edge of the
pavement.
G. When the permitted opening is to be closer than five feet from the edge
of an existing patch or patches in the pavement, the restoration shall be
extended to include said patch.
H. All permittees test boring, or drilling into any Borough highway for
location of leaks or venting of leaks will be required to backfill holes
with 1-B stone to one inch below highway surface and fill and compact
holes with ID-2 and seal with AC-20.
I. Pavement markings. It is the permittee's responsibility to replace all
pavement markings that are removed or damaged. All material shall
meet with the approval of the Borough.
A. Do not commence with backfilling of any part of the excavation until a
Borough representative has inspected such part.
B. Backfill each material at optimum moisture content and compact to a
modified proctor density of not less than 95%.
§ 495-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-36
1:365
§ 495-37. Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris.
§ 495-38. Preservation of monuments.
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of
any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or
a permanent survey bench mark within the Borough shall not be removed
or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the Borough to do so. Permission to remove
or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall be
granted only when no alternative route for the proposed substructure or
conduit is available. If the Borough is satisfied that no alternative route is
available, permission shall be granted only upon condition, by an agreement
in writing, that the person or utility applying for such permission shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the
permittee.
§ 495-39. Granite and bituminous curb.
No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away or cause misalignment
of any bituminous curb, granite curbing, including radius curb and catch
basin stones, for any reason whatsoever without first receiving written
permission from the Borough. The replacement or realignment shall be
done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by the Borough and
subject to inspection by the Town and shall be completed within a period
of 30 days after such authorization to complete such work. The permittee
shall, for a period of two years thereafter, be fully liable for all defects in
materials and workmanship relating to such work and shall promptly repair
or replace the same upon notice.
C. Compaction to be performed using vibrating compaction equipment or
mechanical tampers. Hand tamp around facilities, if necessary.
D. Backfill trenches to contours and elevations with unfrozen materials.
E. All backfill material shall be either No. 57 coarse aggregate or select
granular material as specified by PennDOT Form 408, Sections 703.2
and 703.3, and placed in six-inch lifts to one foot below the subgrade
elevation for streets or poured surfaces. Flowable fill may be used for
backfill of utility cuts under the street pavement with permission from
the Borough and must meet the following PennDOT specifications:
Maximum allowable compressive strength at 28 days of 200 psi.
Mix design: 90 pounds cement; 400 pounds fly ash; 2,652 pounds sand;
480 pounds water. (57.6 gallons) 7-inch to 8-inch slump.
§ 495-36 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-40
1:366
§ 495-40. Asphaltic concrete base paving.
For streets with existing bituminous base or concrete which are in poor
condition, as verified by the Borough, final street cut restoration must
consist of eight inches minimum of bituminous concrete base course
(BCBC). Place 1 1/2 inches minimum ID-2 wearing course to match the
existing street surface. Seal all edges with AC 20 asphalt sealer.
§ 495-41. Temporary restoration.
The uses of temporary cold patch and/or steel plates, weather permitting,
are permitted for street openings/cuts. Plates must be secured to the
pavement to prevent movement and noise by the use of pins and cold patch
under and around the edges. Under no circumstances will the Borough
permit a street cut to remain stone filled without a cover as mentioned in
this section.
§ 495-42. Weather limitations.
§ 495-43. Materials.
Asphalt cement: AC-20 asphalt cement or Emulsion E-1 conforming to
PDT Bulletin 25. Bituminous concrete base course (BCBC): Conforming to
PennDOT Publication 408, Section 305. Wearing course mix: Hot-mixed,
hot-laid bituminous wearing course ID-2 conforming to PennDOT
Publication 408, Section 420.
§ 495-44. Cement concrete base paving.
A. Do not place asphalt or apply bituminous coatings when base surface
temperature is less than 40° or surface is wet or frozen.
B. Utilize a temporary surface of cold patch, four inches in depth, if final
restoration cannot occur due to weather limitations.
C. Permittee will not be allowed to place steel plates on Borough streets
between October 31 and April 1.
A. Streets with existing concrete base with an opening exceeding four feet
in width: The permittee will be required to dowel. Epoxy-coated dowel
bars 1 1/4 inches by 18 inches shall be installed in the concrete base,
placed at twelve-inch centers, measured longitudinally in the direction
of the traffic flow; place dowel bars to center line and surface of the slab
in conformance with PennDOT specifications, Publication 408.
B. Where bituminous wearing course is to be used as the surface course, a
minimum of 1 1/2 inches of ID-2 binder and a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
of wearing course is to be applied. Concrete base must match the
existing concrete base, and the depth of the bituminous areas must
compensate to match the existing surface.
§ 495-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-44
1:367
§ 495-45. Bituminous concrete curb.
This section will only be used in limited conditions where approved by
the Borough. Perform work in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408,
Section 636.
§ 495-46. Trees.
No trees are to be removed, cut, trimmed or pruned without first obtaining
the approval of the property owner and the Borough.
§ 495-47. Protection of Borough sewer system/stormwater inlets.
§ 495-48. Restoration of adjacent surfaces.
It is the permittee's responsibility to properly restore any and all adjacent
surfaces disturbed by the action of work in the right-of-way to equal or
better condition than existed prior to start of work. Sidewalks, driveways,
curbs, lawn or grass areas will be restored in accordance with Borough
details. All work is to be done at the contractor's cost and expense to the
satisfaction of the Borough and the property owner in a timely manner.
§ 495-49. Liability.
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the Borough or any
official or employee of the Borough any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by the performance of an excavation work
for which an excavation permit is required under this article, nor shall the
Borough or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed
any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized
C. Apply tack coat in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section
460, over existing surface prior to spreading of new bituminous course.
Do not apply after sunset or on a wet surface.
D. Cement concrete shall be Class AA 3,500-psi mix, as per PennDOT 408
standards.
E. Reinforcing welded steel wire fabric, plain type. ANSI/ASTM A185
uncoated finish may be required.
F. The Borough shall be notified 24 hours prior to placement of concrete.
A. No contractor may allow dirt or debris to enter the Borough sewer
system. All stormwater inlets within the drainage area of the excavation
must be protected by a filter system that will prohibit water from
carrying silt or other debris into the sewer. Acceptable means of
protection are the use of a filter material insertion into each inlet.
B. Any contractor who does not provide protection as described herein will
be required to clean and flush each inlet that the Borough determines
has been contaminated.
§ 495-44 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-49
1:368
hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any excavation
work. In the case of a dedicated but unaccepted street or way, this article
shall not be construed as authorizing any action that is inconsistent with
any private rights in said street or way by the Borough for highway or any
other purposes.
§ 495-50. Borough work excluded.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to excavation work authorized
by the Borough Superintendent, by Borough employees or contractors
performing work under contract with the Borough necessitating openings
or excavations in Borough streets.
§ 495-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-50
1:369
Chapter 500
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commissions — See Ch. 103.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 490.
Zoning — See Ch. 575.
§ 495-50 BELLEFONTE CODE § 495-50
1:370
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 500-1. Title.
An ordinance of the Borough of Bellefonte, Centre County, Pennsylvania,
establishing rules, regulations and standards governing subdivision and
land development pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code,67 establishing the procedure to be followed by the Planning
Commission and the Council of the Borough of Bellefonte, and providing
remedies for the violation of the ordinance.
§ 500-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bellefonte Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-2
1:371

ARTICLE II
Authority
§ 500-3. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of power by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in Section 501 of
the Municipalities Planning Code.68
§ 500-4. Effect.
The effect of this chapter shall be that specified in Section 507 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.69
§ 500-5. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and greater welfare. Where provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance,
restriction or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of a statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation
imposes greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, resolution, ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10507.
§ 500-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-5
1:373

ARTICLE III
Purpose and Objectives
§ 500-6. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purposes for which subdivision and land
development ordinances may be enacted pursuant to Article V of the
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 500-7. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are the goals, objectives and policies stated
in the Bellefonte Borough Comprehensive Plan.
§ 500-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-7
1:375

ARTICLE IV
Approval Requirements
§ 500-8. Subdivision and land development approval required.
All subdivision and land development within the Borough of Bellefonte must
be approved in accordance with the requirements and procedures specified
within this chapter. Land development, as defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code, shall include the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
§ 500-9. Excluded land development.
The following activities shall not constitute "land development" as specified
by the Municipalities Planning Code and, therefore, shall be excluded from
the provisions of this chapter:
A. A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on
a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
B. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.
A. The conversion of an existing single-family dwelling or duplex into not
more than two residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an existing enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plats for the expanded area have been
approved by proper authorities.
§ 500-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-9
1:377

ARTICLE V
Plat Requirements
§ 500-10. Sketch plats.
The sketch plat shall consist of the following:
§ 500-11. Preliminary plats.
The preliminary plat of proposed subdivision and/or land development shall
be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, except
that larger scales may be used for tracts in excess of 20 acres. All original
drawings and prints shall be prepared on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches.
A. An approximate key map showing the generalized location of the tract.
B. The tract boundaries with approximate dimensions.
C. North point, physical features, and date.
D. Proposed street layout, approximate lot layout, and owner of tract.
A. Minimum requirements. The preliminary plat shall show:
(1) Name of the proposed subdivision or land development.
(2) North point, graphic scale, written scale, date — including the
month, day and year that the original drawing was completed and
the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for
each revision, if any.
(3) The name of all municipalities in which the plat is located.
(4) Name of record owner and developer, if applicable.
(5) Name and address of registered surveyor and (where applicable)
the name and address of the registered engineer or land planner
responsible for the plat.
(6) Names of all abutting property owners, if any, with the book and
page numbers where recorded.
(7) A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being
subdivided, showing the relationship to adjoining property and to
all streets, roads and municipal boundaries.
(8) Total tract boundaries of the property, showing bearings and
distances, and a statement of the total acreage of the property.
(9) Zoning data, including any changes in the existing zoning to be
requested by the developer.
§ 500-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-11
1:379
(10) Contour lines at vertical intervals of two feet for land with average
natural slope of 4% or less, and at intervals of five feet for land with
average natural slopes exceeding 4%.
(11) Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations
refer; where reasonably practicable, datum used shall be a known,
established bench mark.
(12) All existing sewer lines, waterlines, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, watercourses, and
other significant man-made or natural features within the proposed
subdivision or land development and within 50 feet from the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision or land development,
noting material types and sizes (where applicable).
(13) All existing buildings or other structures, natural features, and the
approximate location of all existing tree masses within the
proposed subdivision or land development.
(14) All existing streets, including streets of record, on or abutting the
tract, including names, right-of-way widths, cartway widths,
material type, and approximate grades.
(15) The full plat of proposed development, including:
(a) Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a
statement of any conditions governing their use.
(b) Suggested street names and utility easement locations.
(c) Proposed building setback lines along each street and side and
rear property lines.
(d) Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(e) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(f) Lot and/or unit numbers and a statement of the total number of
lots, units and parcels, and proposed address numbers, if
feasible.
(g) Approximate location and labeling of all proposed sanitary and/
or storm sewers and other drainage facilities, with the size and
material of each indicated, and any proposed connections with
existing facilities.
(h) Approximate location of parks, playgrounds, and other areas
dedicated or reserved for public use, with any conditions
governing such use.
(16) Location of soil log test pits, as may be required.
§ 500-11 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-11
1:380
(17) A map showing the location of the proposed development plan with
respect to any identified floodplain area or district, including
information on the one-hundred-year flood elevations, per FEMA
mapping or other recognized source.
(18) A statement regarding the presence of wetlands. The statement
should note that no development is proposed within wetlands or
that the necessary approvals for the disturbance of wetlands have
been obtained from the appropriate federal or state regulation
agencies. Disturbance of wetlands shall include, but not be limited
to filling, draining or building structures. Also, delineate wetlands.
(19) Certification of ownership and dedicatory statement (where
applicable) signed by owner.
(20) Notary public and recording statement.
(21) Approval blocks to be signed by the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council.
B. Supplemental data. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the
following supplementary data, as applicable:
(1) Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets.
Cross-section drawings may be shown on either the preliminary
plat or the profile sheets.
(2) Tentative profiles along top of cartway edges or along the top of
curb for both sides of each proposed street shown on the
preliminary plat. Such profiles shall show natural and finished
grades at a scale of one inch equals 10 feet horizontal and one inch
equals one foot vertical, or a ratio thereof.
(3) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required. Such designs shall meet all applicable federal, state and
local requirements.
(4) If necessary, a completed "Sewage Plan Revision Module for Land
Development" to comply with the planning requirements of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.70
(5) A preliminary erosion and sedimentation control plan, together
with a report of the County Conservation District indicating
whether a permit for earthmoving activity is required from the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Where the proposed subdivision abuts a state highway, evidence in
writing from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
indicating the Department's concurrence with the proposed design
for driveway access and drainage required for issuance of the
Department's highway occupancy permits.
70.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 500-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-11
1:381
§ 500-12. Final plats.
In addition to the requirements listed in Subsections A and B below, all final
plats shall exhibit final designs for all data required for preliminary plats, as
established in § 500-11B above.
(7) Evidence in writing, where 100 or more dwelling units are
proposed in a subdivision or land development, from the school
district in which the development is located, containing the review
and comments of the school district on the proposed development.
(8) A copy of a report, where deemed necessary by the Borough
Council or Borough Engineer, indicating an estimated volume of
vehicular traffic movement and the adequacy of the proposed and
existing streets and highways to carry the traffic both within and
beyond the proposed development including possible solutions to
such problems as may be thereby identified.
(9) A copy of a report, where deemed necessary by the Borough
Council or Borough Engineer, indicating the general arrangement
for stormwater drainage, the estimated volume of water to be
generated, and the effect of such volumes on the drainageways or
streams within the development and that projected volumes can be
accommodated by the existing drainage facilities or streams
beyond the proposed development.
(10) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Borough Council that the development is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
the Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
A. Minimum requirements. The final plat shall show:
(1) The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed with
accurate distances to 1/100 of a foot and bearings to one minute.
These boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the
field, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure
not to exceed one foot in 2,000 feet; provided, however, that the
boundary(s) adjoining additional unplatted land of the developer
(for example, between separately submitted final plat sections) are
not required to be based upon field surveys and may be calculated.
The location and elevation of all boundary line monuments shall be
indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the tract. In
addition, the engineer or surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of
the survey, the drawn plat, and the placement of monuments.
§ 500-11 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-12
1:382
(2) All final dimensions and bearings of street and lot lines and other
right-of-way and property lines, including radii of curves and arcs,
and delta angles of all curves.
(3) All final lot numbers and house numbers as assigned by the
Borough and reviewed by the local post office.
(4) All final easements and rights-of-way, with accurate bearings and
distances.
(5) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and/or storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts, where
required. Such information may be submitted as a separate plan.
(6) A certification of ownership, acknowledgement of plat and offer of
dedication shall be lettered on the plat and shall be duly
acknowledged and signed by the owner(s) of the property before an
officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds.
(7) A blank space measuring 3.5 inches square shall be left along the
lower edge of the sheet in order that the Recorder of Deeds may
acknowledge receipt and recording of the plat when it is presented.
B. Supplemental data. The final plat shall be accompanied by the following
supplementary data, as applicable:
(1) All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Borough Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency.
(2) Such private deed restrictions, including anti-lot-reduction clauses
and building setback agreements, as may be imposed upon the
property as a condition to sale, together with a statement of any
restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to the
land being developed.
(3) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication to public use, the Borough Planning
Commission may require the developer to submit and also to record
with the plat a copy of an agreement made with the Borough
Council on behalf of the developer's heirs, successors and assigns,
and signed by the Borough Solicitor, which shall establish the
conditions under which the street may later be offered for
dedication and shall stipulate, among other things:
(a) That the street shall conform to the municipal specifications or
that the owners of the abutting lots shall include with the offer
of dedication sufficient money, as estimated by the Borough
Engineer, to restore the street to conformance with the
municipal specifications in effect on the date of dedication;
§ 500-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-12
1:383
(b) That any offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole;
(c) That the method of assessing repair costs be as stipulated; and
(d) That agreement by the owners of 60% of the front footage
thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
(4) A final stormwater management/erosion and sedimentation control
plan pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and evidence that any
required erosion and sedimentation control permit has been
issued. If an erosion and sedimentation control permit is not
required, the applicant shall provide evidence that the stormwater
management/erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
reviewed and approved by the County Conservation District office.
However, if the district office does not desire to review the plan, the
Borough Council may, at its discretion, have the plan reviewed by
the Borough Engineer. The cost of the review shall be paid by the
applicant.
(5) Prior to the final approval of the plat, where the proposed
subdivision and land development abuts a state highway, the
applicant shall provide written evidence that the plat will be
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for its
review and concurrence with the proposed design for driveway
access and drainage required for issuance of the Department's
highway occupancy permits. Written evidence will be a note on the
plat, which should read: "No plat which will require access to a
highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation
shall be finally approved unless the plat contains a notice that a
highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to the State
Highway Law, P.L. 1242, No. 428, before driveway access to a state
highway is permitted."
(6) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required by the Borough Council in the enforcement of
these regulations.
§ 500-12 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-12
1:384
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 500-13. Application.
§ 500-14. Streets.
A. All subdivision and land development approved under the provisions of
this chapter shall be in accordance with the design standard contained
herein and with the intent of the 1992 Bellefonte Borough
Comprehensive Plan, as may be hereafter amended.
B. The standards and requirements contained herein are intended as the
minimum necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare, and shall be applied as such by the Borough Planning
Commission and Council in reviewing all development plans.
C. Whenever other Borough regulations impose more restrictive
standards and requirements than those contained herein, such other
regulations shall be observed.
D. Subdivision and land development plans shall give due consideration to
the official plans of the Borough of Bellefonte and Centre County or to
such parts thereof as may be adopted pursuant to statute.
E. Proposed land uses shall conform to the provisions of the Bellefonte
Borough Zoning Ordinance, as adopted and amended.
F. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, flood, disease or other causes, shall not be platted for
development unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless the
plat shall show adequate safeguards against them which shall be
approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
A. General standards. All new streets in the Borough shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) The location and width of all streets shall conform to the Official
Map and Comprehensive Plan or to such parts of the Official Map
and Comprehensive Plan as may have been adopted by the
Borough.
(2) The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded
streets at the same width but in no case at less than the required
minimum width.
(3) Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of improper width or
alignment, the Borough Council may require the dedication of land
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment.
(4) Private streets are prohibited, unless they meet the design
standards of these regulations or conform to § 500-12B(3).
§ 500-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-14
1:385
(5) Insofar as possible, streets on which structures utilizing solar
access are proposed to front upon shall be oriented along an eastwest
axis with maximum deviations permitted up to 25°, provided
that such orientations are feasible based on soil and slope
conditions and are a practical means of providing safe and
convenient access and circulation.
B. Partial and half streets. Half and partial streets will not be permitted,
except where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining
part of the street can be obtained in writing by the developer.
C. Street classification. Five street classifications are established by the
1992 Bellefonte Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended (see
Section 5, Transportation System), and are defined as follows:
(1) Principal arterial. A highway, normally a freeway, that serves
corridor movements having a trip length and travel density
characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate
travel.
(2) Minor arterial. A major highway or road that serves urban areas
and other traffic generators and, when integrated with principal
arterials, forms a network providing interstate and intercounty
service.
(3) Major collector. A road serving established communities not
adequately served by the arterial system, a major collector
provides service to all developed areas within a reasonable
distance.
(4) Local street. A service street not conducive to through traffic that
provides access to adjacent land and connection to the collector
and arterial systems.
(5) Alley. A service street, usually to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street, used primarily for limited vehicular
service access.
D. Street widths and construction requirements.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths and construction
materials shall be as follows:
§ 500-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-14
1:386
Street
Type
R/W
Width
(feet)
Shoulder
Width*
(feet)
With Curbs
(feet)
Without
Curbs
(feet)
Base
Materials
(inches in
depth)
Paving
(inches in
depth)
Service
drive
N/A N/A 20 20 8 of #3A
crushed
aggregate
1.5 of ID-2
binder,
1 of ID-2
wearing
course
Turnaround
of cul-desac
100 4 80 80 Same as
local street
(general)
Same as
local street
(general)
6 of #4
crushed
aggregate
1.5 of ID-2
binder,
1 of ID-2
wearing
course
Local
street
(general
use)
35 4 22 25
6 of 2A
subbase
and
5 of BCBC
1.5 of ID-2
wearing
course
8 of #4
crushed
aggregate
1.5 of ID-2
binder,
1 of ID-2
wearing
course
Local
street
(industrial/
commercial
use)
45 6 26 29
6 of 2A
subbase
and
5 of BCBC
1.5 of ID-2
wearing
course
10 of #4
crushed
aggregate
1.5 of ID-2
binder,
1 of ID-2
wearing
course
Major
collector
50 6 28 34
6 of 2A
subbase
and
7 of BCBC
1.5 of ID-2
wearing
course
§ 500-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-14
1:387
Street
Type
R/W
Width
(feet)
Shoulder
Width*
(feet)
With Curbs
(feet)
Without
Curbs
(feet)
Base
Materials
(inches in
depth)
Paving
(inches in
depth)
Arterials As determined by the governing body and Planning Commission after
consultation with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
NOTE:
* Required in absence of curbing; width is indicated for each of two shoulders.
(2) Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Borough Planning Commission for the purpose of promoting the
public safety and convenience or to provide parking in commercial
and industrial areas and in areas of residential development.
E. Street grades.
(1) There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 0.75%. Center-line
grades shall not exceed the following standards:
(a) Local street: 10%.
(b) Collector street: 8%.
(c) Any street intersection: 4%.
(2) Grades up to 14% may be permitted for distances of less than 500
feet on a through local street where access to the street is possible
over streets with grades of 10% or less. Exceptions to the above
grades may be made by the Borough Planning Commission or
where the physical topography of the area requires such exceptions
in the opinion of the Borough Planning Commission.
F. Horizontal curves. In order to provide adequate sight distance and
ensure proper alignment of streets, whenever street lines are deflected
in excess of 5°, connection shall be made by horizontal curves.
G. Vertical curves. All changes of street grades where the algebraic
difference exceeds 1%, vertical curves shall be provided to permit the
following minimum sight distances:
(1) Local streets: 100 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 200 feet.
H. Sight distance at intersections. Clear sight triangles shall be provided
at all street intersections. Within such triangles, no object shall be
permitted which obscures between the heights of three and eight feet
measured from the center-line grade of intersecting streets. Such
triangles shall be established from a distance of 25 feet from a vertex at
the intersection of the street lines.
§ 500-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-14
1:388
I. Intersections. All intersections shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75°.
(2) Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are
prohibited.
(3) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other or shall be separated by at least 150 feet
between center lines, measured along the center line of the street
being intersected.
(4) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 5% within 60 feet of the
intersection of the nearest right-of-way lines.
(5) Intersections with major streets shall be located not less than 800
feet apart, measured from center line to center line, along the
center line of the major street.
(6) At intersections of streets, the curb or edge of pavement radii shall
not be less than the following:
Intersection
Minimum Simple Curve
Radii of Curb or Edge of
Pavement
(feet)
Local street with local street 20
Collector street with local street 25
Collector street with collector
street
35
(7) Radius corners or diagonal cutoffs must be provided on the
property lines substantially concentric with or parallel to the chord
of the curb radius corners.
J. Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets are permitted when meeting the
following requirements:
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as permanent culde-
sac streets or for future access to adjoining properties.
(2) Any street dead end for access to an adjoining property or because
of authorized stage development shall be provided with a
temporary, all-weather turnaround, and the use of such turnaround
shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is
extended.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets serving residential uses, permanently designed
as such, shall not exceed 750 feet in length.
§ 500-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-14
1:389
(4) Cul-de-sac streets serving commercial and/or industrial uses shall
be adequate for the type of use to be serviced as approved by the
Borough Engineer, but in no case shall exceed 750 feet in length.
(5) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end it shall be conducted away
in an underground storm sewer.
(6) The center-line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%,
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed
5%.
K. Access roads and drives. Direct access from residential lots to arterial
and collector streets shall be avoided whenever possible. Where such
direct access cannot be avoided, adequate turnaround space shall be
provided behind the right-of-way line. In addition, all access roads and
drives shall meet the following requirements:
(1) A valid highway occupancy permit shall be obtained from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Driveways serving
single-family residences shall intersect streets at angles of no less
than 60°. All other driveways or access roads shall intersect streets
at right angles, where possible, and in no instance shall such
intersection be less than 75°.
(2) The width of access roads or driveways shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
(a) For multifamily residential and all nonresidential development,
access roads shall be no less than 22 feet in width at the street
line and shall clearly be defined by the use of curbing.
(b) For single-family development, driveways shall be not less than
10 feet in width and no greater than 20 feet in width at the
street line.
(3) In order to provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress
points, access roads and driveway entrances shall be rounded at
the following minimum radius
(a) For multifamily residential and all nonresidential development,
access road entrances shall be rounded at minimum radius of
10 feet.
(b) For single-family residential development, driveway entrances
shall be rounded at a minimum radius of five feet.
(4) The grades on access roads shall not exceed the following:
(a) Eight percent when access is to an arterial street; and
(b) Ten percent when access is to a collector or minor street.
§ 500-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-14
1:390
§ 500-15. Street names and house numbers.
Naming and number of streets shall meet the following requirements:
§ 500-16. Blocks.
Fitting imaginative design shall be encouraged by allowing the developer
to submit original development designs not in strict conformance with the
standards set forth in this section. Such original designs may comprise
industrial or commercial development or residential development of five or
more lots. Nothing in this section shall relieve the developer from strict
conformity with the regulations unless the developer can show that the
proposal for original design observes the spirit of the chapter if not the
exact content.
L. Service streets. Service streets are prohibited in developments for
single-family detached residences, except where required to avoid
direct driveway access to arterial or collector streets. Except where
other adequate provision is made for off-street loading and parking
consistent with the proposed uses, service streets shall be required in
commercial and industrial districts and shall have a minimum paved
width of 22 feet.
A. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets.
B. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Borough or in the postal district. The developer shall
submit proposed street names to the local post office prior to filing a
preliminary plat.
C. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Planning Commission.
A. Layout. The length, width and shape of the blocks shall be determined
with due regard to provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, to the land use or zoning requirements, and to the
topography of the land being developed, and to the requirements for
safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
B. Length. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 300 feet. In the design of
blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration shall be given to
the requirements of satisfactory fire protection. Where practicable,
blocks along arterial and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000
feet long.
C. Crosswalks. Crosswalks may be required between streets wherever
necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and to give access to
community facilities. Such crosswalks shall have a width of not less
than 10 feet.
§ 500-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-16
1:391
§ 500-17. Lots and parcels.
Fitting imaginative design shall be encouraged by allowing the developer
to submit original development designs not in strict conformance with the
standards set forth in this section. Such original designs may comprise
industrial or commercial development or residential subdivision of five or
more lots. Nothing in this section shall relieve the developer from strict
conformity with the regulations unless the developer can show that the
proposal for original design observes the spirit of the chapter, if not the
exact content.
D. Depth. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate
two tiers of lots, except:
(1) Where reverse frontage lots are required along a major traffic
street; or
(2) Where prevented by the size, topographical conditions and other
inherent conditions of property; in which case single-tier lots may
be approved.
E. Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial and industrial
areas may vary from the elements of design detailed above, if required
by the nature of the use. In all cases, however, adequate provisions shall
be made for off-street parking and loading areas as well as for traffic
circulation and parking for employees and customers. Space for offstreet
loading shall also be provided with limited access to the street
system. Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way and utilities
shall be provided as necessary.
A. General standards:
(1) The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
type of development and use contemplated.
(2) Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines, insofar as possible.
(3) Lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them
in order to avoid jurisdictional problems, where feasible.
(4) The depth of residential lots shall be not less than one nor more
than 2.5 times their width, where feasible.
(5) If after development there exists remnants of land, they shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots or legally dedicated to
public use, if acceptable to the municipality.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All lots shall have direct access to a public street or to a private
street if it meets the requirements of these regulations.
§ 500-16 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-17
1:392
§ 500-18. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(2) Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
required to provide separation of residential uses from major
streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or
orientation.
(3) No residential lots shall be created which front upon a limited
access highway. Furthermore, no major development shall be
created which fronts upon an arterial street.
C. Driveways and off-street parking.
(1) Residential, commercial, and industrial developments shall provide
parking in accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.71
(2) Private driveways on corner lots shall be located in accordance
with the requirements of the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(3) In order to provide a safe and convenient means of access, grades
on private driveways must not exceed 15%. In addition, driveways
should be paved where grades exceed 7%.
(4) Private driveway entrances should be rounded at a minimum radius
of five feet or should have a flare constructed that is equivalent to
this radius at a point of intersection with the cartway edge.
D. Lot size. Lot dimensions and areas shall be not less than specified by
the provisions of the Borough Zoning Ordinance or as determined by
the provisions contained in this chapter.
E. Building setback.
(1) Front, side and rear setbacks shall be in conformance with the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Buildings shall be oriented such that their longest axis faces within
25° of true South whenever lot size, street orientations, soil and
slope conditions make this practical.
A. Permits required. In the event that any person shall intend to make
changes in the contour of any land or engage in earthmoving activity,
whether for subdivision, land development or any other purpose, such
person who is required to obtain a permit shall obtain such a permit
from the Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Notification. Bellefonte Borough shall notify the Department of
Environmental Protection immediately upon receipt of an application
for a building permit involving earthmoving activity that affects five
acres or more of land.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 575, Zoning.
§ 500-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-18
1:393
§ 500-19. Sanitary sewage disposal.
All development plans must meet the requirements of the Borough Sewage
Facilities Plan, the Borough's Code of ordinances, and any other local, state
or federal regulations or laws relating to sanitary disposal of sewage.
§ 500-20. Water supply.
If proposed development cannot be tied with an approved public water
supply, the individual source well or spring must be installed and/or set
up in full compliance with the latest local, state and federal specifications
covering such facilities.
§ 500-21. Stormwater management.
C. Building permits. The Borough shall not issue a building permit to those
engaged in earthmoving activities requiring a Department of
Environmental Protection permit until the Department has issued the
permit.
D. Erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation
control plan must be prepared for a single lot or more where
subdivision, land development, or other earthmoving activity is
proposed. The plan must be submitted:
(1) As required by the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection; and
(2) As required by the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 222, July
31, 1970, as amended.72
E. Plan review. Such erosion and sedimentation plan shall be submitted to
the Borough Engineer and the County Conservation District for review,
and a copy of the plan and review comments shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission as part of the preliminary and final plat
applications.
F. Plan standards. In the preparation of erosion and sedimentation control
plans, the person preparing such plans shall consult the County
Conservation District to determine the measures needed to control
erosion and sedimentation.
A. Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. Post-development
flows shall not exceed predevelopment flows off site, as per
Pennsylvania Act 167 of 1978, the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Management Act.73 The system shall ensure drainage at all points along
streets and provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site
water disposal sites.
72.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001.
73.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 500-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-21
1:394
B. Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council upon
review by the Borough Engineer. The Borough may require a primarily
underground system to accommodate frequent floods and secondary
surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage
plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The
facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff
onto adjacent properties.
C. The design and construction of the stormwater management system
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The minimum design criteria shall be a ten-year storm with a
twenty-minute duration. Higher frequency conditions shall be used
where an overflow would endanger public or private property.
(2) Drainage calculations shall be made by the Rational Method or
other standard method, as approved by the Borough Engineer.
(3) Street drainage will not be permitted to cross intersections or the
crown of the road.
(4) Maximum spacing of street inlets shall not exceed 600 feet.
(5) All culvert ends shall be provided with either reinforced concrete
headwalls or pipe end sections.
(6) Minimum pipe size shall be eighteen-inch diameter.
(7) All street inlets shall be the combination type following PennDOT
standard for the four-foot special inlet. Inlet tops shall be cast-inplace
reinforced concrete or precast concrete.
(8) All springs and sump pump discharges shall be collected so as not
to flow in the streets.
(9) When material for storm drain systems is not specified, PennDOT
specifications will govern.
D. All rain conductors shall be piped to storm sewer or a natural
watercourse and all multifamily-unit constructions shall follow the
same plan. Storm drains shall be installed as per the following
schedule:
Diameter
(inches)
Square Foot Fall
(1.25 inches per
foot)
Drainage Area Foot
(0.5 inch per foot)
4 1,800 2,500
5 3,000 4,500
6 5,000 7,500
8 9,100 13,600
§ 500-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-21
1:395
§ 500-22. Natural features preservation.
The design of all development plans shall preserve, whenever possible,
natural features which will aid in providing open space for recreation and
conditions generally favorable to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough. These natural features include: the natural terrain
of the site, woodland areas, large trees, natural watercourses and bodies of
water, wetlands, rock outcroppings, scenic views, and historic resources.
Diameter
(inches)
Square Foot Fall
(1.25 inches per
foot)
Drainage Area Foot
(0.5 inch per foot)
10 14,000 20,000
A. Tree preservation and planting.
(1) Trees with a caliper of six inches or more as measured at a height
of 4.5 feet above existing grade shall not be removed unless they
are located within the proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of the
street right-of-way or within 15 feet of the foundation area of a
proposed building. In areas where trees are retained, the original
grade level shall be maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the
trees.
(2) Where existing trees are removed along the street right-of-way,
supplemental planting, in the form of appropriate street trees, shall
be introduced. Such trees shall be planted at intervals of between
50 feet and 100 feet, preferably in random patterns.
(3) When five or more acres are proposed for development, a
landscape plan may be required. Such plan shall indicate the
vegetation or plant cover which exists and, on the same or separate
sheet, the vegetation or plat cover which will exist when
landscaping is completed. In addition, landscaping shall be
designed, installed and maintained with the aim of allowing as
great a portion of the site to remain or become wooded without
adversely affecting the availability of solar access to the south.
(4) The location and species of trees and other landscaping elements
shall be such that, when grown to full maturity, shall not impede
solar access to neighboring structures.
B. Stream frontage preservation.
(1) A maintenance easement for the Borough or its designee, with a
minimum width of 25 feet, shall be provided along all stream banks.
Such easement, in all cases, shall be of sufficient width to provide
proper maintenance.
(2) Stream frontage shall be preserved as open space wherever
possible.
§ 500-21 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-22
1:396
§ 500-23. Recreation and open space.
All residential subdivisions or land development plats submitted after the
effective date of this chapter shall provide for suitable and adequate
recreation in order to ensure adequate recreation areas and facilities to
serve the future residents of the Borough; maintain compliance with
recreational standards as developed by the National Recreation and Parks
Association; reduce increasing usage pressure on existing recreational
areas and facilities; ensure that all present and future residents have the
opportunity to engage in many and varied recreational pursuits; and reduce
the possibility of the Borough becoming overburdened with the
development and maintenance of many very small, randomly planned and
widely separated recreation areas.
(3) Access shall be provided to the water and maintenance easement
area. The width of such access points shall not be less than 50 feet.
C. Topography. All existing natural terrain of the proposed subdivision
tract shall be retained whenever possible. Cut and fill operations shall
be kept to a minimum.
A. Exemptions and requirements.
(1) The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(a) Any single-family and/or multifamily residential subdivision or
land development plan in a residential zone classification for
which a preliminary plan has been submitted prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
(b) Any residential subdivision or land development plan, whether
single-family and/or multifamily, that contains less than 30
dwelling units may be exempted by the Borough Council from
dedicating land for recreational purposes, but shall pay the fee
in lieu of dedication as provided by this chapter. Yard
extensions shall be excluded from this requirement.
(2) The amount of land required to be provided for recreational
purposes for residential subdivisions or land development plans not
exempted from the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family developments. In the case of single-family
development, the developer shall provide a minimum of 1,500
square feet of recreation area per lot.
(b) Multifamily developments. In multiple-family developments, a
minimum contiguous area of 10% of the total area shall be
provided for recreation, exclusive of roadways of the land
being developed.
§ 500-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-23
1:397
(3) A maximum of 25% of the total land area to be provided for
recreation as required by this chapter may consist of floodplain
areas.
(4) Such land set aside shall be suitable to serve the purpose of active
and/or passive recreation by reason of its size, shape, location and
topography and shall be subject to the approval of the Borough
Council.
(5) The developer shall satisfy the Borough Council that there are
adequate provisions to assure retention and all future maintenance
of such recreation areas by maintaining ownership or by providing
for and establishing an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of the recreation area, and such organization shall not
be dissolved nor shall it dispose of the recreation area by sale or
otherwise except to an organization conceived and established to
own and maintain the recreation area without first offering to
dedicate the same to the Borough.
B. Recreation area location criteria. The Planning Commission and the
Borough Council, in exercising their duties regarding the approval of
subdivision and land development plans, shall consider the following
criteria in determining whether to approve the proposed location of
recreation areas in the developer's subdivision and land development
plans:
(1) Site or sites should be easily and safely accessible from all areas of
the development to be served, have good ingress and egress and
have access to a public road; however, no public road shall traverse
the site or sites.
(2) Site or sites should have suitable topography and soil conditions for
use and development as a recreation area.
(3) Size and shape for the site or sites should be suitable for
development as a particular type of park. Sites will be categorized
by the Borough using the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association.
(4) When designing and developing these recreation areas, it shall be
done according to the standards established by the National
Recreation and Parks Association.
(5) Site or sites should, to the greatest extent practical, be easily
accessible to the essential utilities, such as water, sewer and
electric.
(6) Site or sites should meet minimum size requirements for usable
acreage with respect to the National Recreation and Parks
Association standards, with 75% of such area having a maximum
slope of 7%.
§ 500-23 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-23
1:398
(7) Recreation sites shall be located in such a manner which allows
maximum practical solar access to neighboring structures.
(8) Where open space is being provided, it shall be located, wherever
possible, to provide a buffer from the shading effects of taller
structures or obstructions on existing or proposed shorter
buildings.
C. Dedication to municipality.
(1) In the case where the developer does not wish to retain the
required recreation area, such area may be offered for dedication
to the Borough for public use.
(2) In addition to approving the recreation site areas to be dedicated to
the Borough, the Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation to Borough Council as to whether the dedication
should be accepted by the Borough.
(3) Such areas dedicated to the Borough for public use shall be
suitable for recreational purposes by reason of size, shape,
location, topography and access.
(4) The Planning Commission may find dedication to be impractical
because of the size, shape, location, access, topography, drainage
or other physical features of the land and that such dedication
would adversely affect the subdivision or land development and its
future residents or occupants, or that there is no land area within
the proposed subdivision which is practical for dedication to the
public because of size, access, topography or other physical
characteristics.
(5) When the Borough Council deems it to be in the public interest to
accept dedicated land, such acceptance shall be by means of a
signed resolution to which the property description of the
dedicated recreation area shall be attached.
D. Fee in lieu of dedication.
(1) Where the Borough Council agrees with the developer that,
because of size, shape, location, access, topography or other
physical features of the land, it is impractical to dedicate land to
the Borough or set aside a recreation areas as required by this
section, the Borough Council shall require a payment of a fee in lieu
of dedication of such land, which shall be payable to the Borough
prior to approval of each final section of the overall plan by the
Borough Council.
(2) The amount of the fee shall be set at 10% of the current appraised
value of the tract.
(3) All monies paid to the Borough Council pursuant to this section
shall be used only for the acquisition of and or capital
§ 500-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-23
1:399
§ 500-24. Other public use and service areas.
In reviewing development plans, the Borough Planning Commission shall
consider whether community facilities, especially schools, in the area are
adequate to serve the needs of the additional dwellings proposed by the
subdivision and shall make such report thereon as it deems necessary in
the public interest to the area school board. Developers shall give earnest
consideration to the desirability of providing or reserving areas for facilities
normally required in residential neighborhoods, including churches,
libraries, schools and other public buildings. Areas provided for such
community facilities should be adequate to provide for building sites,
landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed. Prior
to the preparation of plans, developers of large tracts should review with
the staff of the Borough and County Planning Commissions the minimum
standards for various community facilities applicable to the tract being
developed.
§ 500-25. Utility easements.
Utility easements shall be provided for drainage facilities, overhead or
underground public utility facilities in consultation with the Borough
Engineer, the electrical, telephone, water and gas utilities, the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and the municipal authority, and shall
conform to the following standards:
improvements for park and recreation purposes, as provided in
Section 503(11) of the Municipalities Planning Code.74
A. No structures or trees shall be placed within easements with a
minimum width of 15 feet that are provided for poles, wires, conduits,
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains, and other utility
lines intended to service abutting lots.
B. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
C. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured in the shortest
distance, between any proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum,
petroleum products, or natural gas transmission line which traverses
the subdivision.
D. Where development is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement width,
to be determined by the Borough Engineer, conforming substantially
with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, and
such width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of
natural drainage or for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating,
improving or protecting such drainage facilities or for the purpose of
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(11).
§ 500-23 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-25
1:400
installing a stormwater sewer. Under no circumstances shall the
easement be less than 25 feet.
E. Where a subdivision or land development involves the use of solar
access, solar sky-space easements will be provided, shall be in writing,
and shall be subject to the same conveyancing and instrument
recording requirements as other easements. Any such easements shall
be appurtenant; shall run with the land benefitted and burdened; and
shall be defined and limited by conditions stated in the instrument of
conveyance, which shall be submitted to and approved by the Borough
Solicitor. Instruments creating a solar sky-space easement shall include
but not be limited to:
(1) A permanently identifiable description of the sky space above the
burdened land into which trees, buildings and/or other
obstructions as specified by the easement shall not be permitted to
encroach;
(2) Any terms or conditions under which the solar sky-space easement
is granted or will be terminated; and
(3) Any provision for compensation by the owner of the land
benefitting from the solar sky-space easement or compensation of
the owner of the land burdened by the solar sky-space easement for
maintaining the easement.
F. Where necessary for access to public or common lands, a pedestrian
easement shall be provided with a width of no less than 10 feet.
Additional width may be required by the Planning Commission and
Borough Council, depending on the purpose and use of the easement.
§ 500-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-25
1:401

ARTICLE VII
Improvements and Construction Specifications
§ 500-26. Improvements required.
The developer shall provide all improvements required by these regulations.
The specifications for the improvements contained herein shall apply.
§ 500-27. Monuments and markers.
§ 500-28. Street construction.
Pavement and construction. Streets shall be designed in accordance with
Article VI herein and shall be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn
on the plans, profiles and cross sections submitted by the applicant and
A. Monument placement. Monuments must be set at:
(1) The intersection of all street and right-of-way lines;
(2) The intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the
subdivision and land development; and
(3) Such intermediate points as may be required by the Borough
Engineer.
B. Marker placement. Markers must be set:
(1) At all corners except those monumented; and
(2) By the time the property is offered for sale.
C. Size and material. Monuments and markers shall be the following sizes
and made of the following materials:
(1) Monuments shall be six inches square or four inches in diameter
and shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of concrete,
stone or by setting a four-inch cast iron or steel pipe filled with
concrete.
(2) Markers shall be 3/4 inch square or 3/4 inch in diameter and 30
inches long. Markers shall be made of iron pipes or iron or steel
bars.
D. Placement. Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored
or marked point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the
lines being monumented. They must be set so that the top of the
monument or marker is level with the finished grade of the surrounding
ground. Monuments must be marked on top with a copper or brass
plate or dowel set in the concrete.
E. Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be
replaced by a registered engineer or surveyor at the expense of the
person removing them.
§ 500-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-28
1:403
approved by the Borough Council. Before paving the street surface, the
developer shall install the required utilities and provide, where necessary,
adequate underdrains and stormwater drainage for the streets, as
acceptable to the Borough Council. The pavement base and wearing surface
must be constructed according to the following specifications and as
outlined in § 500-14D above.
A. Subgrade.
(1) No base course shall be placed on wet, frozen or unsuitable
material. Unsuitable material is defined by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408, as amended.
(2) Subgrade in fill area shall be compacted in not more than twelveinch
layers with a minimum roller weight of 10 tons or equivalent
compaction.
(3) Subgrade that has been distributed by trenching shall be backfilled
and compacted in eight-inch layers and inspected by the Borough
Engineer or a designated agent.
(4) Unsuitable material in subgrade shall be removed and replaced
with material acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
(5) The moisture content at the time of compaction and density of the
finished subgrade shall be in accordance with the specifications as
set forth by Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication
408, as amended.
(6) Any springs or spongy areas shall be provided with a proper
underdrain system which is connected to the storm sewer system.
(7) Subgrade shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or a
designated agent prior to the placement of the base course.
B. Base course.
(1) Minor streets. Base course shall be consistent with the
requirements of § 500-14D contained herein, in accordance with
the specifications as set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(2) Collector streets. Base course shall be consistent with the
requirements of § 500-14D contained herein, in accordance with
the specifications as set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(3) Arterial streets. For the construction of arterial roads or highways,
the applicant shall consult the Planning Commission and Borough
Council and be governed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for the method of construction to be used.
§ 500-28 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-28
1:404
(4) Base course shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent prior to the placing of binder course.
(5) Base shall have binder applied as soon as possible to avoid damage
to the base.
(6) All foreign material shall be removed from base course prior to
placing binder course.
(7) Base shall be compacted with a vibrating tamper or vibrating roller.
(8) The Borough Council shall decide if a collector or arterial street is
required as a direct result of the subdivision or land development,
in which case the developer is responsible for paving the additional
width required.
C. Surface course.
(1) Minor and collector streets. Surface course shall be consistent with
the requirements of § 500-14D contained herein, in accordance
with the specifications as set forth by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation.
(2) Surface course shall be sealed wherever it comes in contact with
another surface (i.e., curb, manhole, inlet, etc.). This work shall be
done in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation specifications.
(3) Surface course shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent after completion of all work.
D. Shoulders. The base course shall consist of six inches of compacted
stone, gravel or slag constructed in accordance with the specifications
as set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The
bituminous seal coat shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
E. Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances or aprons within the street
right-of-way shall be surfaced to their full width, and in no case shall be
less than 12 feet wide for residential developments and 18 feet wide for
commercial or industrial developments. In no case shall the driveway
entrance be more than two feet wider than the driveway. The type of
surface to be either plain cement concrete, minimum depth of four
inches, or the same as specified above. Where sidewalks are installed,
the required driveway surfacing shall end at the street side of the
sidewalk.
(1) Driveway entrances along streets where curbs are not required
shall be constructed to provide proper drainage along the streets
and from the streets by the continuation of gutters, swales or
ditches. Such continuation may be provided by having an approved
§ 500-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-28
1:405
pipe of not less than 15 inches in diameter across such driveway
entrances.
(2) Driveway entrances along streets where curbs are not required
shall be constructed so that the driveway meets that edge of the
cartway as a continuation of at least the slope from the crown of the
street for not less than five feet.
(3) Where proposed driveways provide access onto a state highway
(Pennsylvania or United States route), the design of such driveway
access and drainage shall be prepared in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and shall be subject to
the approval and issuance of permits by the Department. A note
shall be placed on the plan stating "that a Highway Occupancy
Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the State Highway
Law before driveway access to a state highway is permitted." The
Borough Council may issue a final plat approval if a permit has
been secured or the notice of requirement for such a permit is
placed on the plan. No building permit will be issued for affected
lots until such a highway occupancy permit has been secured.
(4) The curb height at driveway entrances may be reduced to a
minimum of 1.5 inches for driveway entrances along streets where
curbs are required. The maximum width of reduced curb height
shall be 20 feet for residential driveways and 35 feet for
commercial or industrial driveways. Sidewalks across driveway
entrances, where required, shall be constructed in accordance with
Borough standards.
F. Underdrain.
(1) Underdrain shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(2) Combination of storm sewer and underdrain shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
(3) Underdrain pipe shall be six-inch perforated corrugated galvanized
metal pipe (C.M.P.), helical in design, unless otherwise specified.
(4) Underdrains or combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be
constructed where required by the Borough Engineer or the
Borough Council.
(5) Underdrain shall be installed and inspected by the Borough
Engineer or his designated agent after completion of the all work,
just prior to the base course application.
G. Handicapped accessibility. When deemed necessary by the Borough
Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission,
§ 500-28 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-28
1:406
§ 500-29. Sewer and water systems.
or when required under state or federal law, intersection curb cuts shall
be provided where sidewalks and curbs are required.
A. Sewers.
(1) Where a public sanitary sewerage system is located within 1,000
feet of, or where plans approved by the Borough Council provide
for the installation of such public sewer facilities to within 1,000
feet of, a proposed subdivision or land development the developer
shall provide the subdivision or land development with a complete
sanitary sewerage system to be connected to the existing or
proposed sanitary sewerage system in accordance with the
municipal authority and Borough specifications. If such a system is
not available but will, in the opinion of the Borough Council become
available within a reasonable time, then the developer shall install
a complete sanitary sewerage system including a collector main
installed in the street bed or approved right-of-way; lateral
installations shall be to the right-of-way lines of streets, lot or
parcel property lines or sewer easement right-of-way lines,
whichever pertains to individual situations. All termini shall be
capped in a manner which shall ensure that all collector mains,
laterals and house connections shall be watertight pending
connections with a public sanitary sewerage system. The system
shall be designed by a registered engineer and approved by the
Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer shall also inspect
construction of all sanitary sewers to ensure that said sewers will
coordinate and have sewage pumping stations, interceptors and
treatment plants to be installed by the developer.
(2) Design, approval of design, supervision and inspection fees for
services rendered on behalf of the developer by the Borough
Engineer shall be paid by the developer in accordance with the fee
schedule submitted to Council by the Borough Engineer, which
schedule shall be available for review in the Borough office by any
developer.
(3) Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal systems shall not be
combined with stormwater sewers and shall not be constructed to
receive effluent from any storm collection system.
B. Water. If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Borough Council that the subdivision or development is to be supplied
by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
§ 500-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-29
1:407
§ 500-30. Storm sewers.
Whenever the evidence available to the Borough Council indicates that
natural surface drainage is inadequate, the developer shall install a
stormwater sewer system in accordance with approved plans and profiles.
The system shall be designed by a registered engineer and be approved by
the Borough Engineer. The developer shall submit engineering calculations
upon which the size of conduits, culverts and other portions of the proposed
storm sewer system has been based.
agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in
question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
(1) Where a water main supply system is within 1,000 feet of, or where
plans approved by the Borough Council provide for the installation
of such public water facilities to within 1,000 feet of, a proposed
subdivision or land development, the developer shall provide the
subdivision or land development with a complete water main
supply system to be connected to the existing or proposed water
main supply system in accordance with Borough and/or utility
specifications.
A. Pipe.
(1) Pipes shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(2) Pipes shall be corrugated galvanized metal pipe (C.M.P.), helical in
design, unless otherwise specified.
(3) All pipe joints shall be connected with metal bands.
(4) Pipes shall be placed on class B bedding.
(5) Pipe gauge shall be in accordance with approved engineering
calculations. Minimum pipe gauge for C.M.P. shall be 16 gauge.
(6) Pipe sizes shall be in a accordance with that shown on approved
drawings. Minimum pipe size shall be 15 inches in diameter.
(7) Pipe shall be constructed and set to line and grade as shown on
approved drawings.
(8) Pipes shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his agent prior
to backfilling.
B. Inlets.
(1) Inlets shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as
set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(2) Inlet tops shall be precast concrete top units with a ten-inch hood
or equivalent in order to place inlet in a two-inch sump condition
and shall be compatible with type of curbing installed.
§ 500-29 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-30
1:408
§ 500-31. Curbs.
Curbs shall be required for all subdivisions and land development. The
Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Engineer, may waive the requirements of this
section through the alteration requirements procedure set forth in § 500-38
of this chapter.
(3) Inlet boxes shall be either precast concrete box units, cast-in-place
cement concrete, or constructed out of concrete blocks.
(4) All inlets shall have weep holes placed at the appropriate elevations
to completely drain the subgrade prior to placing the base course
and surface course.
(5) Size of concrete block shall be solid four inches by eight inches by
16 inches, unless otherwise specified.
(6) Inlets shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after completion of all work.
C. Manholes.
(1) Manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(2) Manholes shall be precast concrete units.
(3) Manholes shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his
designated agent after completion of all work.
A. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications set
forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Rolled asphalt or macadam curbs will not be acceptable.
C. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the cross-section details
shown on the approved drawings.
D. Curbs shall be set and finished to the line and grade as shown on the
approved drawings.
E. Backfill must be placed within 48 hours after form removal, and this
backfill shall be compacted in place along the rear face to within six
inches of the top of the curb.
F. When curbing is to be removed to construct a driveway, the removal
shall be done on the complete curb section. The length of curbing to be
removed shall be carried to the nearest expansion joint or saw cut if the
joint is located more than five feet from the end of the curb removal.
Curb replacement shall be formed and shaped to the required driveway
width. The driveway shall be depressed to a height of 1.5 inches above
the finished paving grade.
§ 500-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-31
1:409
§ 500-32. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required as specified in the Bellefonte Borough Zoning
Ordinance.75
§ 500-33. Fire hydrants.
Wherever a public or community water supply system is provided, fire
hydrants shall be installed within 600 feet of all existing and proposed
structures, measured by way of accessible streets.
§ 500-34. Trees.
Reasonable effort must be made by the applicant to preserve existing
shade trees and, in addition, deciduous hardwood trees with a minimum
caliper of 1.5 inches should be provided in accordance with conditions
as recommended by the Planning Commission and agreed upon by the
Borough Council and, if necessary, appropriate public utilities. Where
provided, such trees should be planted between the sidewalk and the
building setback line at least five feet from the sidewalk, provided the
planting strip is a minimum of six feet wide.
G. No partial breaking out of the curb shall be permitted without approval
by the Borough Engineer or his designated agent.
H. Curbs shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after the forms have been placed, just prior to the pouring of
concrete and after completion of all work.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications set
forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the Code
of Bellefonte Borough.
B. Sidewalks shall be located within the right-of-way of the street and shall
extend in width from the right-of-way line toward the curbline.
C. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide, unless otherwise specified.
D. Where a sidewalk abuts a curb, wall, building or any other structure, a
premolded expansion joint 0.25 inch in thickness shall be placed
between the sidewalk and said structure for the full length of said
structure.
E. Sidewalks shall be boxed out around light standards, fire hydrants, etc.,
with a premolded expansion joint 0.25 inch in thickness.
F. Sidewalks shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer or his designated
agent after the forms have been placed, just prior to the pouring of
concrete and after completion of all work.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 575, Zoning.
§ 500-31 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-35
1:410
§ 500-35. Street signs.
The subdivision or land development shall be provided with street signs,
to include but not be limited to street name signs at all intersections,
directional and informational signs. Such signs shall conform to
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and Borough specifications and
shall be installed by the developer in a manner specified by the Borough
Engineer.
§ 500-36. Streetlights.
§ 500-37. Electric, cable television, telephone and other utility
lines.
All electric and telephone service lines, including streetlighting, shall be
placed underground within any subdivision or land development of five or
more lots and/or dwelling units.
A. Streetlights shall be provided with the construction of all new streets. A
plan for streetlights, approved by the local utility company, shall be
provided by the applicant upon submission of final subdivision or land
development plans.
B. Streetlights shall be provided at locations designated by the local utility
company, consistent with current policy, at all street intersections and
all other locations considered necessary for safety reasons as approved
by Borough Council.
§ 500-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-37
1:411

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 500-38. General.
All subdivision and land development plats shall be reviewed by the
Borough Planning Commission and shall be approved or disapproved by
the Borough Council in accordance with the procedure specified in this
chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code. Any plans not processed as
required hereafter shall be null and void, unless made prior to the adoption
of these regulations. Whenever there is a difference between the minimum
standards specified herein and those included in other Borough regulations
or ordinances, the most stringent requirements shall apply.
§ 500-39. Review procedures.
A. Sketch plat.
(1) An informational sketch plat for all proposed development of land
located within the Borough may be submitted to the Borough
Planning Commission for review.
(2) Such sketch plats shall be considered as submitted for
informational and informal discussion between the developer and
the Planning Commission. Submission of a sketch plat shall not
constitute official submission of a development plan to the
Borough.
(3) For informational purposes, six copies of the sketch plat shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission.
(4) At a regularly scheduled meeting, the Borough Planning
Commission shall review the informal sketch plat and shall
recommend such changes and modifications as it shall deem
necessary or advisable in the public interest, which shall be based
on the requirements contained herein.
B. Preliminary plat.
(1) Fifteen business days prior to the meeting of the Borough Planning
Commission, the applicant shall file 10 copies of a preliminary plat
of the proposed subdivision or land development and other
required data and maps with the Zoning Officer. The applicant shall
submit five copies of the "Sewage Plan Revision Module for
Development" concurrently with the preliminary plat, if applicable.
[Amended 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 10192015-01]
(2) The Commission shall submit copies to the County Planning
Commission and the Borough Engineer and may submit copies to
the public utilities, the school board, the Centre County
Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and any other public agency. The
§ 500-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-39
1:413
Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, shall act on any such preliminary plat not later than
90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the Borough
Council or the Planning Commission (whichever first reviews the
application) following the date the application is filed, provided
that, should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30
days following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application was filed. In the event that any alteration of
requirements from this chapter is requested by the applicant or is
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for approval, the
alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered in the
records of the Planning Commission.
(3) The Centre County Planning Commission shall review the
preliminary plat and data and shall return one copy of a written
report stating its suggestions for modifications and design changes
to the Borough within 30 days of its receipt of same or forfeit its
right to review.
(4) The Borough Council shall determine whether the preliminary plat
shall be approved or disapproved and shall notify the applicant in
writing thereof, including, if approved with conditions or
disapproved, a statement of reasons for such action, not later than
15 days following the decision.
(5) Before acting on any land development plat, the Borough Council
may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
(6) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of this or other Borough ordinances.
(7) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(8) Approval of the preliminary plat constitutes approval of the
proposed subdivision or land development with respect to the
general design, the approximate dimensions, and other planned
features. Preliminary approval binds the developer to the general
scheme of the plat as approved. Preliminary approval does not
authorize the recording, sale or transfer of lots or the installation of
improvements.
§ 500-39 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-39
1:414
(9) Preliminary approval shall expire within five years after being
granted. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant
and approved by the Borough Council in accordance with Section
508(4) of the Municipalities Planning Code.76
C. Final plat.
(1) Not later than five years after the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the Borough Zoning
Officer a final plat for that portion intended to be developed. As
part of the formal submission, such filing shall include all the
material and other data required under the final plat specifications
as listed herein. Failure to comply with the time limitation herein
shall make the approval for the preliminary plat null and void
unless an extension of time is granted in accordance with the
provisions herein.
(2) The final plat shall incorporate all the changes and modifications
required by the Borough Council; otherwise it shall conform to the
approved preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which the applicant proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided that such portion
conforms with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(3) One reproducible copy of the final plat and 10 prints shall be filed
by the applicant with the Borough Zoning Officer seven days prior
to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which meeting
consideration is desired.
(4) Completion of improvements, or guarantee thereof, prerequisite to
final plat approval. No plat shall be approved unless in accordance
with the terms of this chapter and Section 509 of the Municipalities
Planning Code.77
(5) Release from improvement bond. The release of the developer from
a required improvement bond shall be instituted in accordance
with the requirements of Section 510 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.78
(6) Before acting on any land development plat, the Borough Council
may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
(7) The Commission shall submit copies to the County Planning
Commission and the Borough Engineer and may submit copies to
the public utilities, the school board, the Centre County
Conservation District, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and any other public agency. The
Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 500-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-39
1:415
Commission, shall act on any such preliminary plat not later than
90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the Borough
Council or the Planning Commission (whichever first reviews the
application) following the date the application is filed, provided
that, should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30
days following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day
the application was filed. In the event that any alteration of
requirements from this chapter is requested by the applicant or is
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for approval, the
alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered in the
records of the Planning Commission.
(8) The Centre County Planning Commission shall review the final plat
and data and shall return one copy of the plat and any written
comments to the Borough within 30 days of its receipt of same or
forfeit its right to review. Borough Council shall not approve such
applications until the county report is received or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the county.
(9) The Borough Council shall determine whether the final plat shall be
approved or disapproved and shall notify the applicant in writing
thereof, including, if approved with conditions or disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action, not later than 15 days
following the decision. All applications for the approval of a plat
shall be acted upon by the Borough Council and Planning
Commission in accordance with the requirements of Section 508 of
the Municipalities Planning Code.79
(10) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of this or other Borough ordinances.
(11) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to
an extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(12)No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on
any final plat of a subdivision or land development after approval
has been given by the Borough Council and endorsed in writing on
the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the Borough Council.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 500-39 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-39
1:416
§ 500-40. Fees.
At the time of filing, all plats shall be accompanied by a check payable
to Bellefonte Borough in the amount specified herein to defray the cost of
reviewing the proposed plats and required data.
(13) Upon approval of the final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days
of such final approval, record such plat in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Centre County in accordance with the terms of Section
513 of the Municipalities Planning Code.80
(14) Final approval shall expire within five years after being granted. An
extension of time may be requested by the applicant and approved
by the Borough Council in accordance with Section 508(4) of the
Municipalities Planning Code.81
A. Submission fee.
(1) A submission fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the
Borough Council.82
(2) No plat shall be considered as officially submitted until the
required submission fee is paid in full.
(3) The submission fee schedule shall be posted in the office of the
Borough Zoning Officer and in such other places as the Borough
may designate.
B. Engineering fee.
(1) Prior to the final approval of any final plan, the applicant shall pay
by check payable to Bellefonte Borough an amount determined or
approved by the Borough Engineer as sufficient to cover the costs
of reviewing the engineering details of the plat; inspecting the site
layout for conformance with the plat; preparing cost estimates of
required improvements; inspecting required improvements during
installation; final inspection on completion of installation of
required improvements; and other engineering verifications
required by this or other Borough ordinances.
(2) Such fee shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary
and customary charges by the Borough Engineer for similar service
in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or
cost charged by the Engineer to the Borough when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(3) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-40
1:417
§ 500-41. Development plans exempted from standard procedures.
The following development activities may submit for preliminary and final
plat approval in one application:
§ 500-42. Modifications.
The provisions of these regulations are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Recognizing that
standards change and new standards may arise, the Planning Commission
reserves the right to modify standards or extend reasonable conditions
in individual cases as may be necessary for the public interest. Such
modifications and conditions shall be recorded and transmitted to the
the Borough Secretary, in writing, that such fees are disputed. In
which case, the Borough shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision
or land development application due to the applicant's request over
disputed fees.
(4) In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
such dispute shall be resolved in accordance with the procedures
established in Section 510(g) of the Municipalities Planning Code.83
C. Other fees.
(1) Fees for all other permits required for and by the Borough for
opening of roads, connecting to municipal sewers, building
construction, etc., shall also be paid to the Borough, as specified.
(2) The applicant at the time of application shall agree to cover the
cost of advertising the ordinance accepting the deed of dedication
of applicable required improvements and its recording costs.
(3) At the time of filing, all plats shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the Centre County Planning Commission in the amount
specified by the County for the review and report by the County
Planning Commission.
A. In the case of any new development that does not involve the provision
of new streets or easements for access (i.e., one in which all proposed
lots will have frontage on an existing public street or road);
B. When five or fewer lots are proposed to be subdivided from a tract of
land or where land is being transferred to be combined with an existing
lot; and
C. When the new development involves the conversion of an existing
building into three or more units.
83.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510(g).
§ 500-40 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-42
1:418
Borough Council for approval. Upon approval by Council, said modifications
and conditions shall be defined and entered on the final plat for recording.
§ 500-43. Waivers.
Waivers to the literal terms of this chapter may be granted in accordance
with the provisions of Section 512.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.84
§ 500-44. Enforcement remedies.
The Borough Council, acting through its designated official, shall have
the exclusive right to enforce this chapter, pursuant to Section 515.3 of
the Municipalities Planning Code.85 In addition, the following requirements
shall apply:
§ 500-45. Appeals.
Any appeal from a decision or action of the Borough Council or of any officer
or agency of the Borough in matters pertaining to this chapter shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code.
A. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. Remedies to effect
completion of improvements which may be required but have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accordance with the approved
final plat are specified in Section 511 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.86
B. Preventative remedies. Preventative remedies to restrain, correct or
abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages,
and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises
are specified in Section 515.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code.87
84.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10512.1.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.3.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10511.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10515.1.
§ 500-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-45
1:419

ARTICLE IX
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 500-46. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of these regulations, have the meanings indicated:
§ 500-47. Definitions
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
AMUSEMENT PARK — A tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides.
APPLICANT — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.88
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — This term is defined by the
Municipalities Planning Code.
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Municipal Engineer.
BOUNDARY — A line marking the limit, or border, of a lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot defining required minimum
setback distance between any structure and the adjacent street line.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street designed or intended for vehicular use.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — This term is defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
A. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include
the singular.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The words "person," "developer" and "owner" include a corporation,
unincorporated associations, and a partnership or other legal entity, as
well as an individual.
D. The word "building" includes structure and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
E. The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run, spring,
stream, and river.
F. The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 500-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-47
1:421
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The officially adopted Comprehensive Plan of
Bellefonte Borough.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
COUNTY — This term is defined by Municipalities Planning Code. The
County of Centre, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the
County of Centre.
CROSSWALK — A publicly or privately owned right-of-way intended for
pedestrian use.
CULVERT — A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, railroad, pedestrian
walk, or public way.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the
roadway or paved area.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and designated point of lower elevation of the final grade. Also, the
material removed in excavation.
DEVELOPER — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
DEVELOPMENT — Subdivision or land development, as defined by the
Municipalities Planning Code.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — This term is defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer, or other
structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-ofway,
parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
A. Surface water runoff; or
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
B.
§ 500-47 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-47
1:422
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or part thereof, designed to be occupied
as living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the
right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the
rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of a
municipality regulating the installation of any required improvements or for
any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments or the
wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed.
FLOODPLAIN — The physical limits of the Floodplain Conservation
Regulations; areas subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters or runoff
as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for municipalities,
as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or on maps
pertaining to Bellefonte Borough Floodplain Ordinance, or the Soil Survey
of Centre County, Pennsylvania, August 1981, published by the United
States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service89 in
cooperation with the Pennsylvania State University College of Agriculture
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection State
Conservation Commission.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area that is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse, and/or any area subject to unusual and rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made immovable item which becomes part of,
is placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — This term is defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
LANDOWNER — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
LOT — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot, excluding
space within all streets and within all permanent drainage easements, but
including the areas of all other easements.
89.Editor's Note: Now Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 500-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-47
1:423
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — This term is defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 167 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, as further
amended by Act 209 of 1990 and Act 131 of 1992, and as may be further
reenacted or amended hereafter.
OFFICIAL MAP — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
ON-LOT SEWER SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank
used for the on-site decomposition of domestic wastes.
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
the building, not including parking lots.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site, and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Bellefonte
Borough, Centre County, Pennsylvania.
PLAT — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL USE — The basic purpose for which a
building or land area is occupied or intended to be occupied as opposed to
accessory or incidental uses.
PUBLIC HEARING — This term is defined by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
PUBLIC NOTICE — This term is defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
or under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements and
interests which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land
though not described in the contract of sale or instrument of conveyance.
Real estate includes parcels with or without upper or lower boundaries and
spaces that may be filled with air or water.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to control
access to the street from an adjacent property.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on two generally parallel streets, with vehicular access solely from one
street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by
a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
waterline, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses; generally, the right
to pass over the property of another.
§ 500-47 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-47
1:424
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SANITARY SEWER — A sanitary sewage collection method in which sewage
is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a central treatment and
disposal plant.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter
is deposited or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, parallel to and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SITE DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil
to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its engineering
properties.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy received from the sun at wave lengths
suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — Any device, structure or part of a device
or structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal,
chemical or electrical energy, including any space or structural component
specifically designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility, and components for the
distribution of transformed energy to the extent that they cannot be used
jointly with a conventional energy system. Passive solar energy systems
which use the natural properties of materials and architectural components
to collect and store solar energy without using any external mechanical
power are included in this definition if they do not fulfill structural or other
functions.
SOLAR SKY SPACE — The space between a solar energy collector and the
sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent
which precludes its cost-effective operation.
SOLAR SKY-SPACE EASEMENT — A right, expressed as an easement,
covenant or condition, or other property interest in any deed or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of any property owner, which protects
the solar sky space of an actual, propose, or designated solar energy
§ 500-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-47
1:425
collector at a described location by forbidding or limiting activities or land
uses that interfere with access to solar energy.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that retards
or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks and
channel through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET — This term is defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS — Street classifications are established by the
1992 Bellefonte Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended (see Section 5,
Transportation System), and are defined as follows:
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of other streets upon
which the lot abuts at the midpoint of frontage of the lot thereon. If there
is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at such
midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot; includes rightof-
way line and front lot line.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating the
right-of-way of a street.
STRUCTURE — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
SUBDIVISION — This term is defined by the Municipalities Planning Code.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — This term is defined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL — A highway, normally a freeway, that serves
corridor movements having a trip length and travel density
characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate travel.
A.
MINOR ARTERIAL — A major highway or road that serves urban areas
and other traffic generators and, when integrated with principal
arterials, forms a network providing interstate and intercounty service.
B.
MAJOR COLLECTOR — A road serving established communities not
adequately served by the arterial system; a major collector provides
service to all developed areas within a reasonable distance.
C.
LOCAL STREET — A service street not conducive to through traffic that
provides access to adjacent land and connection to the collector and
arterial systems.
D.
ALLEY — A street, usually to the rear or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street, used primarily for limited vehicular service access.
E.
§ 500-47 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-47
1:426
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the practice
of land surveying.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the "A Horizon."
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground by
contours or elevations.
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of the surface area showing relative
elevations.
UTILITY —
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WETLANDS — Areas that are periodically or permanently inundated by
surface water or groundwater and support vegetation adapted for life in
saturated soil. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs and areas shown
on the National Wetlands Inventory Maps, as prepared by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service of the U.S. Department of the Interior.
Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water,
sewage collection, or other similar service; or
A.
A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for
providing a public service.
B.
§ 500-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-47
1:427
Chapter 508
TAXATION
§ 500-47 BELLEFONTE CODE § 500-47
1:428
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 811 (Ch. 840 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances); amended in its entirety 11-21-2011 by Ord. No.
112111-002]
§ 508-1. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act90 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — Person, entity or authorized representative of the tax officer
appointed as tax officer pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect
the tax.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This ordinance.
GOVERNING BODY — Borough of Bellefonte.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the political
subdivision levying the tax.
RESIDENT — A person domiciled in the political subdivision levying the tax.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
90.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 508-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-1
1:429
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Bellefonte Borough.
§ 508-2. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.6% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Combined tax rate applicable to residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1.65%.
E. Municipal tax rate applicable to nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The Tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: (1) all applicable laws
and regulations; and (2) regulations, policies and procedures adopted
by the TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies,
and procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed
by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 508-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-3
1:430
§ 508-3. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 508-4. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act. Individuals who are no longer employed or whose tax is
withheld in full must file an informational tax return, notifying the Tax Office
that there is no payment due for the specific tax year.
§ 508-5. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 508-6. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 508-7. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 508-8. Purpose; amendment and restatement; repeal.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and
restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by
Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits
of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in this
article. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior enactment conflicting
with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the conflict exists.
To the extent the same as any enactment in force immediately prior to
adoption of this article, the provisions of this article are intended as a
continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
article is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall
remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
article. If any part of this article is declared invalid, the similar part of any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this article. The provisions of this article shall not
affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any
suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty
or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to
adoption of this article. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section,
this article shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
§ 508-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-8
1:431
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.
§ 508-9. Adoption date.
This article is adopted and enacted November 21, 2011.
§ 508-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-9
1:432
ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-16-1987 by Ord. No. 97191 (Ch. 872 of the 1979 Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 508-10. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance of the Borough of Bellefonte" or just the "realty transfer tax."
§ 508-11. Authority to tax. [Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord. No. 121992]
The Borough of Bellefonte reenacts a realty transfer tax, originally
approved by Ordinance No. 571, dated May 29, 1967, and by subsequent
ordinances thereof, and hereby adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the
Reform Code of 1971 which imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at the rate of 1/2% of the amount of the
consideration or sales prices involved in the transaction of transferring title
to real property lying within the Borough of Bellefonte.
§ 508-12. Definitions.93
As used in this article, the words and phrases defined in 72 P.S. § 8101-C
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in said section.
§ 508-13. Imposition of tax; interest. [Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 1219]
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1/2% of the amount of the consideration or sales
price involved in the transaction, which tax shall be payable at the
earlier of the time the document is presented for recording, or within
30 days of acceptance of such document, or within 30 days of becoming
an acquired company.94
B. The payment of the tax imposed in this article shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, the amount of the tax and
the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of such tax on a
person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the
91.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 971 was reenacted 2-18-2008 by Ord. No. 1219.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-13
1:433
§ 508-14. Exception for governmental bodies.
The United States, the commonwealth and all of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the
tax imposed by this article. However, the exemption of such governmental
bodies shall not relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 508-15. Excluded transactions.
Local Tax Enabling Act, being the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq., as amended, so
that if any other political subdivision has imposed or hereafter imposes
such tax on the same person or transfer, then the tax levied by the
Borough under the authority of such Act shall, during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided,
be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without
any action on the part of the Borough. However, the Borough and
any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose, respectively,
different rates, the total of which rates shall not exceed the maximum
rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any tax imposed under this section that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923, (P.L. 207, No. 153), 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929, (P.L. 343, No. 176), 72 P.S. § 806, as
amended, known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
A. The tax imposed in § 508-13 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or by deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided that such reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation;
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States;
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
§ 508-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-15
1:434
district or county of a tax delinquent property at a sheriff sale or
tax claim bureau sale;
(4) A transfer, for no actual consideration or for nominal actual
consideration, which corrects or confirms a transfer previously
recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal
title or interest;
(5) A transfer or division in kind, for no actual consideration or for
nominal actual consideration, of property passed by testate or
intestate succession and held by covenants; provided, however,
that if any party takes shares greater in value than his or her
undivided interest, tax is due on the excess;
(6) A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or by the husband
or wife prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between
parent and child or the spouse of such child; between brother or
sister or the spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or
the spouse of a brother or sister; and between grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild; except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer;
(7) A transfer, for no actual consideration or for nominal actual
consideration, of property passing by testate or intestate
succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the
decedent's devisee or heir;
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor, as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession, shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this clause. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries;95
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.96
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-15
1:435
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
considered, for the purposes of this article, as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee;97
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed;98
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor;99
(13) A transfer, for no actual consideration or for nominal actual
consideration, from a trustee to a successor trustee;
(14) A transfer, for no actual consideration or for nominal actual
consideration, between a principal and agent or straw party or
from or to an agent or straw party, where, if the agent or straw
party were his or her principal, no tax would be imposed under this
article, provided that, where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his or her principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his or her individual
capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under
this subsection;
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Borough reasonably determines that the primary
intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the
tax imposed by this article;
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association, where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his or her interest in or
ownership of the real estate being conveyed, and where the stock
96.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
99.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508-15 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-15
1:436
of the corporation or the interest in the association has been held
by the grantee for more than two years;
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority;
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee directly uses such real estate for the primary purpose of
manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing,
research and development, transportation, energy conversion,
energy production, pollution control, warehousing or agriculture,
and if the agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred;
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure, or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person;
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes;
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth, or to
any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or
any transfer from such a conservancy where the real estate is
encumbered by a perpetual agricultural conservation easement as
defined by the act of June 30, 1981, (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law," and such conservancy has owned
the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to the
transfer;100
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof;
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.101
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-15
1:437
§ 508-16. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 508-17, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 508-17. Acquired companies.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate;102
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less; and
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and if the change, by itself
or together with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or
indirectly, 90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company
within three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
(1) A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because
of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests
or because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to
the business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum
requirements of a family farm partnership under this article.103
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 508-15 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-17
1:438
§ 508-18. Tax credits.
§ 508-19. Extensions of leases.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 508-20. Disposition of proceeds of judicial sales.
The tax imposed in this article shall be fully paid and shall have priority
out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before payment of any
other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or cost of the sale, and of the
writ upon which the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax. The
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, such company
shall present a declaration of acquisition to the recorder of each county
in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps
and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county, A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him or her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him or her shall be given to him or her toward the amount of
the tax due upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property, which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
to the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given to the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 508-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-20
1:439
Sheriff or other officer conducting such sale shall pay the tax out of the first
moneys paid to him or her in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax, the purchaser shall be liable for
the remaining tax.
§ 508-21. Collection of tax; duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 508-22. Statements of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction,
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. This section shall not apply to any
excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on
family relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of each document and a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article.
§ 508-23. Underpayments; failure to record declarations.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983,
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Borough based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
commonwealth of the state realty transfer tax, without compensation
from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept a deed for recording unless it is accompanied by a statement of
value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
the Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of
the County, together with a report containing the information as is
required by the commonwealth in reporting collections of the state
realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be paid to the
County.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
commonwealth, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed or record the
additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state and local
amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been tendered.
§ 508-20 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-23
1:440
§ 508-24. Unpaid taxes as liens.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or situated,
wholly or in part, within the Borough, which lands, tenements or
hereditaments or interests therein are described in, conveyed by or
transferred by the document which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article. Such lien shall begin at the time the
tax under this article is due and payable and shall continue until discharge
by payment or in accordance with law. The Solicitor is hereby authorized
to file a municipal or tax claim in the County Court of Common Pleas, in
accordance with the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101
et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 508-25. Recoverability of tax.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed in this article, shall be recoverable as other debts of like
character are recovered.
§ 508-26. Enforcement; regulations. [Amended 2-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 1219]
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. The duly appointed and acting agent or designee of Council appointed
to collect and credit the realty transfer tax is hereby charged with the
enforcement and collection of the tax and is hereby authorized to
promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations for the enforcement
and collection of the tax. All regulations, parts of regulations or
requirements, together with their amendments and supplements, which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue
(72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.), are hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this article by reference as if fully set out herein. At any proceeding,
trial or other hearing brought by the Borough or its agent or designee
to enforce this article, such agent or designee need only provide a
certified copy of his or her written appointment as agent or designee of
Council to collect such tax and to enforce the regulations enacted
hereunder. Presentation of such certified copy of his or her appointment
shall be prima facie evidence of the capacity of such agent or designee
to act for the Borough in any such proceeding.
§ 508-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-26
1:441
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax imposed under this article and
all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered, collected
and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965, (P.L. 1257, No. 511,
as amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if
the correct amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for
timely payment, the Borough of Bellefonte, pursuant to Section 1102-D
of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and
directs the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and
penalties.
§ 508-26 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-26
1:442
ARTICLE III
Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights
[Adopted 2-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1141]
§ 508-27. Rules and regulations.
The Rules and Regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.104
§ 508-28. Disclosure statement.
The Disclosure Statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.105
§ 508-29. Petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.106
§ 508-30. Administrative appeal procedures.
The governing body hereby determines that the administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
an eligible tax under the LTBR shall be undertaken by Bellefonte Borough
Council in executive session.107
§ 508-31. Applicability.
This article shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of law
and shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
104. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is on file in the Borough's office.
105. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is on file in the Borough's office.
106. Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is on file in the Borough's office.
107. Editor's Note: A copy of the Administrative Appeal Procedures is on file in the Borough's
office.
§ 508-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-31
1:443

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 1214 (Ch. 856 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 508-32. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 508-33. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act 511 of 1965, as
supplemented and amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act,"
approved December 31, 1965, and effective January 1, 1966.108
§ 508-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular number, and the masculine shall
include the feminine. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed by the municipal governing
body of the Borough of Bellefonte to collect and administer the local
services tax.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Bellefonte.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation," as this term is defined under Section
13 (in the definition of "earned income") of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended. The
amount of any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy shall
not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — The natural person, firm, partnership association,
corporation, company, trust, estate or organization of any kind employing
one or more individuals on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE — An exemption certificate substantially in the
form of the uniform certificate prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Community and Economic Development affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality of less than $12,000 in the calendar year
for which the exemption certificate is filed, which exemption certificate has
attached to it a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the municipality for the year prior to the calendar
year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 508-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-34
1:445
In addition to the income exemptions, provision has been made for certain
military exemptions.
FISCAL YEAR — The calendar year or normal fiscal year of the municipality.
INDIVIDUAL — Any natural person engaged in an occupation, trade or
profession within the corporate limits of the municipality.
LOCAL SERVICES — Emergency services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes, and property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL — The Borough of Bellefonte.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended. The term
does not include income which is not paid for services provided and which
is in the nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in
the business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the municipality.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or otherwise, carried
on or performed within the corporate limits of the municipality for which
earned income is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any county, city, borough, incorporated town,
township, school district, vocational school district and county institutional
district.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
TAX — The local services tax imposed by § 508-35.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by § 508-35.
§ 508-35. Levy of tax.
The municipality hereby levies and imposes on every individual engaging
in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the municipality a tax
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm (definition
amended December 9, 2002, P.L. 1364, No. 166).
D.
§ 508-34 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-35
1:446
in the amount of $47 per annum, beginning the first day of January 2008
and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter until modified or
repealed by a subsequent ordinance. An additional amount of $5 is currently
levied by the Bellefonte Area School District, bringing the total amount of
the tax to $52. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore levied by the municipality.
§ 508-36. Exemptions.
The tax levied by § 508-35 shall not be imposed upon the following persons:
§ 508-37. Collector of tax.
The Borough hereby appoints the Bellefonte Area School District to collect
the local services tax.
§ 508-38. Collection through employers.
A. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the United
States was engaged and is honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstance from active service if, as a result of military
service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double or quadruple
amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United
States Veterans' Administration or its successor to be a total onehundred-
percent permanent disability.
B. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
calendar year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of
the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United
States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United
States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National
Guard.
C. Any person whose total earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality is less than $12,000 for the calendar
year in which the local services tax is levied.
A. Every employer shall, within 15 days after first becoming an employer,
register with the Collector the employer's name, address and such
other information as the Collector may require. Failure to register in a
timely manner does not relieve the employer of the requirements of this
article.
B. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time during any payroll
period of an employer during the calendar year, each employer shall
deduct a pro rata share of the tax from the earned income payable to
the taxpayer with respect to such payroll period. The pro rata share of
the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a payroll period shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax ($52) levied for the calendar year by the
§ 508-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-38
1:447
number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar
year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share of the tax, an
employer shall round down the amount of tax deducted for each payroll
period to the nearest 1/100 of a dollar.
C. Each employer shall file a return on a form prescribed by the Collector
and pay the Collector the full amount of all such taxes deducted during
a calendar quarter within 30 days after the end of the calendar quarter.
A tax return must be filed for each calendar quarter, regardless of
whether withholdings were completed or any tax liability exists. Each
employer, in filing his return and making payment by deduction from
salary, wages, commissions or other compensation payable to him by
his employees, shall be entitled to retain a commission calculated at 2%
on the gross tax due and payable by each individual, provided that such
tax is collected and paid over by the employer in accordance with the
schedule set forth herein. It is further provided that, if the employer
fails to file said return and impose said tax, but makes collection thereof
from the salary, wages or commissions paid to him, said employer shall
be responsible for payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
originally been levied against him.
D. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation during the
calendar year shall, within 15 days after discontinuing business or
ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove required and pay the tax
to the Collector.
E. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section or who fails to pay
such tax to the Collector shall be liable for such tax in full as though the
tax had originally been levied against such employer. No employer shall
be liable for failure to deduct the tax if the failure to deduct the tax
arises from incorrect information submitted by the employee as to the
employee's place or places of employment, the employee's principal
office or where the employee is principally employed.
F. Priority of withholding.
(1) The tax shall be withheld at the place of employment on the first
day the person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll
period.
(2) In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, i.e.,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the
person working in more than one political subdivision during the
payroll period, the priority to withhold the local services tax shall
be in the following order:
(a) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed.
§ 508-38 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-38
1:448
(b) The political subdivision in which the person resides and
works, if the tax is levied by that political subdivision.
(c) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
G. The employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate
records concerning the employees in the cases described in Subsection
G(1) and (2) hereof.
(1) It is the intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the
payment of the local services tax in more than one municipality
during each payroll period. No taxpayer shall be required to pay
more than $52 in total during the calendar year. In the case of
concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax, if the employee provides:
(a) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes
the name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and
the amount of local services tax withheld; and
(b) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from
the employee's principal employer and the employee will notify
other employers of a change in principal place of employment
within two weeks of its occurrence.
(2) In the case of an employee claiming the exemption set forth at
§ 508-36, if:
(a) The employee has provided an exemption certificate to the
employer;
(b) The Collector has not otherwise instructed the employer;
(c) The employer has not received notification from the person
who claimed the exemption or from the Collector that the
person has received earned income and/or net profits from all
sources within the municipality equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year; or
(d) The employer has not paid to the person earned income within
the municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000
in that calendar year.
(3) If a person has claimed exemption from the tax under § 508-36 for a
given calendar year but either:
(a) The employer has received notification from the person who
claimed the exemption or from the Collector that the person
has received earned income and/or net profits from all sources
within the municipality equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
§ 508-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-38
1:449
§ 508-39. Direct payment by self-employed taxpayers.
Every taxpayer who is self-employed and has not filed an exemption
certificate with the Collector, or whose tax for any other reason is not
collected under § 508-38, shall file a return on a form prescribed by the
Collector and shall pay a pro rata share of the tax directly to the Collector
within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The pro rata share of
the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax levied ($52) for the calendar year by four.
calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the
tax exemption for that calendar year; or
(b) The employer has paid to the person earned income within the
municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year, then the employer shall withhold the tax for
the remainder of that calendar year and the employer shall
withhold from the person, for the first payroll period after
receipt of the notification described in Subsection G(3)(a)
above or for the first payroll period after payments described
in Subsection G(3)(b) above have been made, a lump sum equal
to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due
to the exemption claimed by the person, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax
withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the Collector may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with an exemption certificate form at the time of
hiring and prior to the first pay period of each calendar year.
(5) A person seeking exemption from the tax under § 508-36 must
annually file an exemption certificate with the employer and the
Collector.
(6) Each employer within the municipality and each employer located
outside the municipality who engages in business within the
municipality is hereby charged with the duty of collecting the tax
from each of the employees engaged by the employer and
performing work for the employer within the municipality.
§ 508-38 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-40
1:450
§ 508-40. Nonresident taxpayers.
Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the municipality, be subject to the tax and the provisions
of this article.
§ 508-41. Administration and enforcement.
The Collector, on behalf of the municipality, shall collect and receive the
taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article and shall maintain
records showing the amounts received and the dates such amounts were
received. The Collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for
the administration of the tax and shall enforce regulations adopted by the
governing body relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
of this article, including, but not limited to, requirements for collection
through employers, requirements for evidence and records, and provisions
for the examination and correction of returns. The Collector and any
designated agents may examine the records of any employer or supposed
employer or of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to ascertain the
tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed
employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the Collector
and any designated agent all means, facilities and opportunity for the
examinations hereby authorized. Any such examination shall be conducted
within this municipality or at the office where the tax return is processed.
§ 508-42. Suits for collection of tax.
The municipality or its collector of the tax may collect unpaid taxes from the
taxpayer or employer owing such taxes by suit as provided for by Act 511 of
1965, as amended, known as "The Local Enabling Tax Act."
§ 508-43. Interest and penalties for unpaid tax or late payment.
§ 508-44. Refunds.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due and unpaid for
30 days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for
recovery of any such tax due and unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due,
interest thereon shall accrue at the rate of 6% per annum on the
amount of such unpaid tax, calculated beginning with the date the tax
was due, and a penalty of 10% shall be added to the flat rate of said tax
for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this
tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and
liable for the cost of collection.
B. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section in this article.
A. Any person who has overpaid the tax may obtain a refund by making a
written application for a refund to the Collector no later than one
§ 508-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-44
1:451
§ 508-45. Receipt.
The Collector shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment of the tax
upon request by the taxpayer. A stamped self-addressed envelope shall be
furnished by the taxpayer if a receipt via return mail is desired.
§ 508-46. Applicability.
The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within the taxing
power of the municipality under the Constitution of the United States and
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 508-47. Duration.
This article shall continue in force from one calendar year to another
without annual reenactment.
§ 508-48. Violations and penalties.
calendar year after payment of the tax or three years after the due
date for payment of the tax, whichever is later, and satisfactorily prove
to the Collector that the taxpayer is entitled to the refund. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day
the employer is required to remit the tax to the Collector for the last
quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to
interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. A refund shall be provided
only for an amount overpaid in a calendar year that exceeds $1.
B. Refund requests must be submitted on the form approved by the
Collector. It should be noted that incomplete refund requests will be
deferred until the missing or incomplete information is provided.
Refunds in the deferred status are not subject to the payment of
interest requirement.
A. Any taxpayer or employer who fails, neglects or refuses to make a
return required; any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register
or to pay the tax deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses
to deduct or withhold the tax from employees; any taxpayer or employer
who refuses to permit the Collector to examine the books, records and
papers; and any taxpayer or employer who knowingly makes any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of tax due in order
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed shall,
upon conviction thereof before the Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense and costs
and, in default of said fines and costs, be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied
or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
§ 508-44 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-48
1:452
violation continues or each section of this article which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant any
person or entity other than the municipality the right to commence any
action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
B. The failure of a taxpayer or employer to receive or procure forms
required for filing the required return does not excuse the taxpayer or
employer from the filing requirement.
§ 508-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-48
1:453
Chapter 513
TOBACCO
§ 508-48 BELLEFONTE CODE § 508-48
1:454
ARTICLE I
Possession and Use by Minors
[Adopted 4-4-2011 by Ord. No. 040411-01]
§ 513-1. Authority: intent and purpose.
Pursuant to Section 1202 of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.), the
Borough has the power to enact such ordinances as are necessary for the
protection of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the Borough. It is the intent and purpose of this article to promote and
protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public and to
eliminate the public health hazards from the use of tobacco in the Borough
by persons under the age of 18, when these persons are prohibited from
the lawful purchase of tobacco and persons 18 years of age and older are
prohibited from lawfully providing tobacco to persons under the age of 18.
§ 513-2. Unlawful to possess or use tobacco.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to use or
possess tobacco in any form within the Borough of Bellefonte.
§ 513-3. Definition of tobacco.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOBACCO — Any product or thing containing tobacco leaf, including, but
not limited to, lighted or unlighted cigarettes, lighted or unlighted cigars,
any other smoking product containing tobacco leaf, smokeless tobacco in
any form, and a tobacco pipe containing pipe tobacco, whether lit or unlit,
and including counterfeit tobacco products.
§ 513-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this article shall be a summary offense, and any person who
violates this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of up
to $300.
§ 513-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 513-4
1:455
Chapter 520
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 133.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 495.
Trees and subdivision or development of
land — See § 500-34.
Zoning and landscaping — See Ch. 575, Art.
XX.
§ 513-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 513-4
1:456
ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 12-24-1963 by Ord. No. 484 (Ch. 1026 of the 1979
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 520-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 770]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHADE TREE — Any tree located in and along the streets, highways,
alleys and roads of the Borough or within the paved cartway of any street,
highway, road or alley of the Borough.
§ 520-2. Rules and regulations for shade tree work. [Amended
11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 11052012-001]
No person shall perform any work upon any shade tree (with the exception
of minor pruning), including, but not limited to, the planting, removal,
maintenance and/or protection thereof, without first having permission via
a letter from the Borough, for which no fee shall be charged, and without
conforming strictly to all of the following rules and regulations:
A. Such work shall be performed under the supervision of the Shade Tree
Commission or its authorized agent and shall conform to any and all
standards specified by the Commission in addition to those set forth in
this article. The person desiring to perform such work shall notify the
Commission in advance of the time and place where the work is to be
done.
B. All work of planting and maintenance shall be done at the proper
season of the year, as determined by the Commission.
C. Planting and maintenance of shade trees shall be done under the direct
supervision of a competent tree surgeon. Qualifications of tree
surgeons shall be subject to review by the Commission.
D. Any person engaging in maintenance work on shade trees shall paint,
with a proper protective agent, all limbs cut which are more than two
inches in diameter.
E. Any person engaging in maintenance work on shade trees shall remove
all dead limbs from any tree on which such maintenance work is being
done.
F. Any person working on the planting, maintenance or removal of any
shade tree shall maintain proper danger signals and barricades to
protect the public from bodily injury or property damage. Prior
permission shall be obtained from the Chief of Police before
undertaking any work that would be accompanied by obstruction of any
street or alley in the Borough.
§ 520-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-2
1:457
§ 520-3. Payment of costs. [Amended 6-7-1976 by Ord. No. 770]
All costs of planting, transplanting or removing any shade tree or providing
necessary and suitable guards, curbing and grading for the protection of
any such shade tree and of replacing any curb, pavement, sidewalk or street
damaged by the execution of such work shall be paid for by the owner of the
real estate on, in front of or alongside of which such shade tree is located
or the owner of the area where such work is done. However, in the case
of a shade tree located within the actual paved, traveled cartway of any
street, road, highway or alley of the Borough, the owner of the real estate
in front of or alongside of which such shade tree is located or the owner of
the area where such work is done shall be required to pay 1/2 of the cost
of such work with the balance to be paid by the Borough, but in each and
every such instance the Shade Tree Commission shall be the sole judge of
the applicability of this exception.
§ 520-4. Removal of diseased or dangerous shade trees. [Amended
11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 11052012-001]
Whenever the Shade Tree Commission determines that any shade tree is
diseased or is otherwise dangerous to the public, it may direct the owner of
the real estate in front or alongside of which such tree is located to remove
such tree at his sole expense. If, within 30 days of receipt of written notice
from the Commission to do so, any property owner fails to remove any such
tree, the Borough may cause such work to be done and may collect the cost
thereof from such property owner as provided by law. Removal of any and
all trees within the Borough must also include removal of the stump.
G. Any person doing work of any kind on any shade tree shall, at his own
expense, remove all brush, limbs and other refuse or debris resulting
from or caused by such work.
H. Any person doing work of any kind on any shade tree, which work
results in or causes damage to any curb, sidewalk, street or alley in the
Borough, shall, at his own expense, restore or replace such damaged
curb, sidewalk, street or alley in as good a condition as it was in prior to
the commencement of such tree work.
I. Any person engaging in work on any shade tree shall provide
certificates of insurance, cancellable only on notice to the Borough,
protecting the Borough against any and all claims for damages
resulting from or caused by the performance of such tree work. Such
insurance shall be in amounts of $50,000 for bodily injury to one
person, $100,000 for bodily injury to all persons, and $10,000 for
property damage for each incident or accident.
J. The Commission shall have authority to prescribe species of shade trees
that may be planted on public property and rights-of-way within the
Borough, and no person shall plant any shade tree in any such location
without prior approval of the Commission.
§ 520-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 520-5
1:458
§ 520-5. Planting of trees as recommended by Commission.
Whenever the Shade Tree Commission determines that it is in the public
interest to plant shade trees on any street in the Borough, it shall so
recommend to Council. If such recommendation is approved by Council, the
Commission shall have authority to proceed in accordance with statutory
procedures to require planting of such shade trees at the sole expense of
abutting property owners.
§ 520-6. Trimming trees by public utilities.
Every public utility operating within the Borough shall have the right and
privilege to trim any and all trees along their respective rights-of-way and/
or pole lines erected upon any street, alley or public place in the Borough,
subject to all conditions set forth in this article.
§ 520-7. Replacement of trees. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No.
972]
Whenever any person cuts down or removes a shade tree, he or she shall
replace the removed tree with a shade tree deemed suitable and approved
in writing by the Shade Tree Commission not later than:
§ 520-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-5-2012 by Ord. No.
11052012-001]
Residents may be subject to a fine of $100 for not receiving prior approval
from the Borough’s Shade Tree Commission to remove a tree and/or the
resident may be required to enter the spring or fall tree planting campaign
to replace any unauthorized removal of a tree at his expense. If a contractor
is hired to remove a tree for a resident, he is also subject to a fine of $100
for not receiving prior approval from the Borough.
A. Thirty days after removal of the original tree, if the removal occurred
between April 1 and October 31; or
B. May 1, if the removal occurred between the preceding November 1 and
March 31.
§ 520-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 520-8
1:459
Chapter 524
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bellefonte Borough Authority — See Ch. 12,
Art. I.
Refuse Collection Department — See Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 455.
Solid waste — See Ch. 482.
Water — See Ch. 544.
§ 520-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 520-8
1:460
ARTICLE I
Discontinuance of Water, Sewer and Refuse Service
[Adopted 2-21-1977 (Ch. 1040 of the 1979 Codified Ordinances)]
§ 524-1. Collection of monies.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary presently contained in the
ordinances, rules and regulations of the Borough for the establishment
of fees, charges, rentals, rates and other costs for the provision of utility
services for water, sewer and refuse to the various customers of the
Borough, the following procedure shall be followed by the proper officers
charged with the collection of moneys for the Borough for the provision
of such services prior to the discontinuance of service by the Borough for
nonpayment of rates, rentals, charges, fees or other costs by the various
water, sewer and refuse customers of the Borough.
§ 524-2. Notice of discontinuance of service.
Prior to the discontinuance of service, the Borough Secretary shall cause
to be served upon the customer whose service is to be discontinued, by
certified mail or by personal service by a police officer of the Borough, a
notice of discontinuance of service, which service is to be discontinued by a
police officer of the Borough, and which notice shall be served not less than
10 days prior to the date upon which service is to be discontinued.
§ 524-3. Statement of defense.
Such notice shall contain a statement to the effect that the person liable for
payment of the rentals, rates, charges or other costs may, if he has a just or
valid defense to the claim or any part thereof, file within the aforesaid tenday
period a written statement under oath or affirmation stating that he has
such a just defense and that such statement is not made or executed for the
purpose of delay, which statement shall also be under oath or affirmation.
§ 524-4. Hearings; appeals.
Such notice shall be served upon the Secretary of the Council within such
ten-day period, and the utility service for which such notice is filed shall
not be terminated until such time as a hearing upon the statement filed
by the person responsible for such charges is heard and determined by
Council. Any person aggravated by such decision of Council shall have the
right, within 30 days, to appeal such decision as appeals are presently taken
under the Local Agency Law of December 2, 1968, P.L. 1153.109
109. Editor's Note: See now 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 524-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-4
1:461
Chapter 530
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 405,
Art. I.
Tampering with public property — See Ch.
429.
Coasting and sledding on public ways — See
§ 495-14.
§ 524-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 524-4
1:462
ARTICLE I
Administration, Enforcement and Penalty
§ 530-1. Definitions; standard of time. [Amended 12-17-1979 by
Ord. No. 834]
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, being Act No. 81 of June 17,
1976, (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), as now in force, or as hereafter amended,
enacted or reenacted, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. Whenever any time is mentioned in this
chapter, it shall be construed as Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight
saving time, as the case may be, depending upon which standard of time is
generally used in the Borough at the time.
§ 530-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough.
§ 530-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 530-4. Experimental regulations.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the case
of parades or processions or other public events, to restrict or
prohibit parking or traffic in limited areas for periods of not more
than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the police of the Borough in the same manner as permanent
regulations. No person shall operate a vehicle in violation of any such
regulation or move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign erected
or posted to give notice of any such regulation.
A. Council may, from time to time, designate places upon the streets and
alleys in the Borough in which, for a period of not more than three
months, specified traffic and parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall violate any such regulation, prohibition or
§ 530-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-4
1:463
§ 530-5. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.
§ 530-6. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Borough
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency
of the commonwealth, or any other person required to make such a report,
shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth, make a
written report to the Police Department of the Borough, containing the
same information.110
§ 530-7. General Traffic Code penalty; waiver. [Amended 12-17-1979
by Ord. No. 834]
restriction or move, remove, injure, destroy or deface any sign or
marking erected or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough regulating traffic and parking.
A. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto,
for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined $25 and the
costs of prosecution for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues.
B. Upon a plea and proof that a person is unable to pay any fine and costs
imposed under Subsection A hereof, a court may, in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, order payment of the
fine and costs in installments and shall fix the amounts, times and
manner of payment.
C. Any person who does not comply with an order entered under
Subsection B hereof may be imprisoned for a number of days equal to
one day for each $10 of the unpaid balance of the fine and costs.
D. Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made may pay such sum in
the manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall
be deemed a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and
acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and may be
accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for such alleged
violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when
110. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 420.07, Speed timing devices, added 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 876,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 530-4 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-7
1:464
laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall require
court appearance.
§ 530-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-7
1:465

ARTICLE II
One-Way Streets, Stop Intersections and Play Streets
§ 530-8. One-way streets. [Amended 1-21-1965 by Ord. No. 502;
9-5-1967 by Ord. No. 577A; 8-17-1970 by Ord. No. 649; 11-16-1970
by Ord. No. 662; 1-20-1975 by Ord. No. 741; 9-18-1978 by Ord. No.
810; 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 824; 7-21-1980 by Ord. No. 845;
2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 895; 1-21-1991 by Ord. No. 1043]
A. The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Academy Lane Westbound and
northbound
From Spring Street to
Brachbill's Alley
Cherry Street (Lane) Westbound From Badger Lane to
Spring Street
(two-way traffic from
Wilson Street to Badger
Lane)
East High Street, north
let
Westbound From Allegheny Street to
Ridge Street
East High Street,
south leg
Eastbound From Allegheny Street to
Ridge Street
Logan Street Eastbound From Spring Street to
Ridge Street
North Ridge Street Northbound From Curtin Street to
Beaver Street
North Thomas Street Southbound From North Potter Street
to High Street
Pike Street Westbound From Allegheny Street to
Spring Street
South Spring Street Northbound From West Bishop Street
to West High Street
Stony Batter Street Northbound From the intersection of
Water Street to the
southern terminus of the
Knights of Columbus
parking lot
Thomas Street Northbound From High Street to
Potter Street
West Howard Street Eastbound From North Spring
Street to North
Allegheny Street
§ 530-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-8
1:467
§ 530-9. Stop intersections. [Amended 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 834;
3-18-1991 by Ord. No. 1048; 6-2-1997 by Ord. No. 1121; 9-19-2005
by Ord. No. 1198]
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Wilson Street
Extension L
Southbound From Bishop Street to
Logan Alley
B. No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or portion thereof
hereby established as a one-way street other than in the direction
hereby established for vehicular traffic thereon.
A. The following intersections are hereby declared to be stop
intersections, and official stop signs are or shall be erected, or are
hereby confirmed if heretofore erected, in accordance with the rules,
regulations and laws of the commonwealth and the Department of
Transportation of the commonwealth. Such signs shall be erected in
such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street
upon the first-named street in the direction or directions herein
indicated. All vehicles approaching the intersection upon the firstnamed
street in the direction or directions herein indicated in each case
shall come to a full and complete stop within a reasonable distance
before entering such intersection:
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Academy Lane Bishop Street Eastbound
Academy Lane Spring Street Eastbound
Addams Circle Wood Street Northbound
Ardell Lane Cowdrick Lane Eastbound
Ardell Lane Cowdrick Lane Northbound
Ardell Lane Cowdrick Lane Southbound
Ardell Lane Cowdrick Lane Westbound
Ardell Lane Linn Street Westbound
Ardell Lane Ridge Street Eastbound
Ardell Lane Ridge Street Westbound
Armor Street Beaver Street Northbound
Armor Street Curtin Street Southbound
Armor Street Linn Street Southbound
Badger Street Cherry Lane Northbound
Badger Street Cherry Lane Southbound
Badger Street High Street Northbound
Beaver Street Allegheny Street Westbound
§ 530-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-9
1:468
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Beaver Street North Spring Street Eastbound
Beaver Street Ridge Street Westbound
Benner Avenue Curtin Street Southbound
Birch Street Hill Street Southbound
Birch Street West Lamb Street Northbound
Blanchard Street Burnside Street Northbound and
southbound
Blanchard Street Humes Road Northbound
Blanchard Street Humes Road Southbound
Brown Avenue Halfmoon Street Southbound
Brown Avenue Lamb Street Northbound
Brown Avenue Lamb Street Southbound
Burgundy Lane Brown Avenue Eastbound
Burnside Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Burnside Street Blanchard Street Eastbound
Burnside Street Blanchard Street Eastbound
Burnside Street Hughes Street Eastbound
Burnside Street Shope Street Westbound
Burrows Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
Burrows Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Burrows Street Cowdrick Lane Eastbound
Burrows Street Locust Lane Eastbound
Burrows Street Locust Lane Westbound
Burrows Street Ridge Street Eastbound
Burrows Street Ridge Street Westbound
Burrows Street Spring Street Westbound
Cedar Lane Bishop Street Southbound
Cedar Lane Cherry Lane Northbound
Centre Street High Street Southbound
Centre Street Route 550 – Bishop
Street
Northbound
Centre Street Route 550 – Zion Road Northbound
Cherry Lane Allegheny Street Westbound
Cherry Lane Badger Street Westbound
Cherry Lane McAllister Street Eastbound
Cherry Lane Monroe Street Eastbound
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-9
1:469
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Cherry Lane Monroe Street Westbound
Cherry Lane Penn Street Westbound
Cherry Lane Spring Street Eastbound
Cherry Lane Spring Street Westbound
Cherry Lane Wilson Street Eastbound
Cherry Lane Wilson Street Westbound
Church Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
Church Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Church Street Armor Street Eastbound
Church Street Armor Street Westbound
Church Street Locust Lane Eastbound
Church Street Locust Lane Westbound
Church Street Ridge Street Eastbound
Church Street Ridge Street Westbound
Church Street Spring Street Eastbound
Church Street Spring Street Westbound
Church Street Wilson Street Eastbound
Collins Avenue Halfmoon Street Southbound
Collins Avenue Lamb Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Beaver Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Church Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Church Street Southbound
Cowdrick Lane Curtin Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Curtin Street Southbound
Cowdrick Lane Howard Street Southbound
Cowdrick Lane Lamb Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Lamb Street Southbound
Cowdrick Lane Linn Street Northbound
Cowdrick Lane Linn Street Southbound
Crawford Lane Allegheny Street Eastbound
Crawford Lane Allegheny Street Westbound
Crawford Lane Blanchard Street Eastbound
Crawford Lane Hepburn Street Eastbound
Crawford Lane Hepburn Street Westbound
Crider Lane East Linn Street Northbound
Crider Lane Howard Street Southbound
§ 530-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-9
1:470
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Curtin Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
Curtin Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Curtin Street Linn Street Westbound
Curtin Street Spring Street Eastbound
Curtin Street Spring Street Westbound
Curtin Street Wilson Street Eastbound
Curtin Street Wilson Street Westbound
Decatur Street Burrows Street Southbound
Decatur Street High Street Southbound
Decatur Street Howard Street Northbound
Decatur Street Howard Street Southbound
Decatur Street Lamb Street Northbound
Decatur Street Pike Street Northbound
Decatur Street Pike Street Southbound
Deiter Lane Bishop Street Southbound
Deiter Lane High Street Northbound
Dunlap Street High Street Southbound
Dunlap Street Lamb Street Northbound
East Linn Street Lewis Street Eastbound
East Linn Street Lewis Street Westbound
East Linn Street Wilson Street Eastbound
East Linn Street Wilson Street Westbound
Fairview Drive Summit Street Northbound
Governors Park Road Airport Road Northbound
Governors Park Road Private Lane Eastbound
Hale Lane Cowdrick Lane Eastbound
Hale Lane Penn Street Westbound
Hale Lane Ridge Street Eastbound
Hale Lane Ridge Street Westbound
Halfmoon Street Brown Avenue Eastbound
Halfmoon Street Brown Avenue Westbound
Halfmoon Street Collins Avenue Eastbound
Halfmoon Street Collins Avenue Westbound
Halfmoon Street Haupt Avenue Eastbound
Hamilton Street Bishop Street Northbound
Hamilton Street Humes Road Northbound
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-9
1:471
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Haupt Avenue Halfmoon Street Southbound
Haupt Avenue Lamb Street Northbound
Haupt Avenue Lamb Street Southbound
Hepburn Street Burnside Street Northbound
Hepburn Street Burnside Street Southbound
Hepburn Street Cowdrick Lane Southbound
Hepburn Street Logan Street Northbound
Hickory Lane Hill Street Southbound
Hickory Lane West Lamb Street Northbound
High Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
High Street McAllister Street Eastbound
High Street McAllister Street Westbound
High Street Ridge Street Westbound
High Street School Street Eastbound
High Street School Street Westbound
High Street Wilson Street Eastbound
High Street Wilson Street Westbound
High Street, north leg Allegheny Street Westbound
High Street, south leg Ridge Street Eastbound
Hill Street Brown Avenue Eastbound
Hill Street Brown Avenue Westbound
Hill Street Collins Avenue Eastbound
Hill Street Collins Avenue Westbound
Hill Street Haupt Avenue Eastbound
Hill Street Haupt Avenue Westbound
Holmes Street Willowbank Street Northbound
Howard Street Spring Street Westbound
Hughes Street Bishop Street Northbound
Hughes Street Logan Street Northbound
Humes Road Blanchard Street Eastbound
Humes Road Hughes Street Eastbound
Humes Road Shope Street Eastbound
Humes Road Shope Street Westbound
John Miller Lane Hughes Street Westbound
John Miller Lane McAllister Street Eastbound
Lamb Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
§ 530-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-9
1:472
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Lamb Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Lamb Street Brown Avenue Eastbound
Lamb Street Brown Avenue Westbound
Lamb Street Haupt Avenue Eastbound
Lamb Street Haupt Avenue Westbound
Lamb Street North Thomas Street Eastbound
Lamb Street North Thomas Street Westbound
Lamb Street Spring Street Westbound
Lamb Street Wilson Street Eastbound
Lewis Street High Street Southbound
Linn Street Linn Street Southbound
Linn Street Wilson Street Eastbound
Linn Street Wilson Street Westbound
Locust Lane Burrows Street Northbound
Locust Lane Burrows Street Southbound
Locust Lane Howard Street Southbound
Logan Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
Logan Street Allegheny Street Eastbound
Logan Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Logan Street Blanchard Street Eastbound
Logan Street Blanchard Street Eastbound
Logan Street Hamilton Street Westbound
Logan Street Hepburn Street Eastbound
Logan Street Hepburn Street Westbound
Logan Street Monroe Street Eastbound
Logan Street Monroe Street Eastbound
Logan Street Shope Street Westbound
Logan Street Shope Street Westbound
Logan Street Spring Street Eastbound
Logan Street Spring Street Westbound
Maple Lane Centre Street Southbound
Maple Lane Zion Road Northbound
McAllister Street Bishop Street Northbound
McAllister Street Bishop Street Southbound
McAllister Street Howard Street Southbound
McAllister Street Wood Street Northbound
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-9
1:473
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
McAllister Street Wood Street Southbound
Meek Street Potter Street Eastbound
Meek Street South Thomas Street Westbound
Mill Street Water Street Northbound
Monroe Street Beaver Street Northbound
Monroe Street Bishop Street Northbound
Monroe Street Bishop Street Southbound
Monroe Street Curtin Street Northbound
Monroe Street Curtin Street Southbound
Monroe Street High Street Northbound
Monroe Street High Street Southbound
Monroe Street Howard Street Southbound
Monroe Street Humes Road Southbound
Monroe Street Linn Street Northbound
Morning Aire Lane Hill Street Southbound
Morning Aire Lane West Lamb Street Northbound
North Spring Street West Howard Street Northbound and
southbound
North Thomas Street High Street Southbound
Oak Street High Street Southbound
Parking Lot A Locust Lane Westbound
Parking Lot D Eastbound entrance
(internal to lot)
Eastbound
Parking Lot D Perry Street Eastbound
Parking Lot D Spring Street Westbound
Parkwood Drive Parkview Boulevard Westbound
Parkwood Drive Pine Street Eastbound
Parkwood Drive Pine Street Westbound
Penn Street Bishop Street Northbound
Penn Street Bishop Street Southbound
Penn Street High Street, North Southbound
Penn Street High Street, South Northbound
Penn Street Howard Street Northbound
Penn Street Howard Street Southbound
Penn Street Lamb Street Northbound
Penn Street Logan Street Southbound
§ 530-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-9
1:474
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Penn Street Pike Street Northbound
Penn Street Pike Street Southbound
Perry Lane Cherry Lane Northbound
Phoenix Avenue Willowbank Street Southbound
Pike Street Allegheny Street Westbound
Pike Street Locust Lane Westbound
Pike Street Penn Street Westbound
Pike Street Ridge Street Eastbound
Pike Street Ridge Street Westbound
Pike Street Spring Street Westbound
Pine Street Parkwood Drive Northbound
Pine Street Parkwood Drive Southbound
Potter Street High Street Northbound
Potter Street High Street Southbound
Private Lane
(Governor's Gate)
Governors Park Road Northbound
Railroad Street North Thomas Street Eastbound
Reynolds Avenue Willowbank Street Southbound
Ridge Street Beaver Street Northbound
Ridge Street Beaver Street Southbound
Ridge Street Bishop Street Northbound
Ridge Street Bishop Street Southbound
Ridge Street Cherry Lane Northbound
Ridge Street Curtin Street Northbound
Ridge Street Curtin Street Southbound
Ridge Street Howard Street Northbound
Ridge Street Howard Street Southbound
Ridge Street Lamb Street Northbound
Ridge Street Lamb Street Southbound
Ridge Street Linn Street Northbound
Ridge Street Linn Street Southbound
Ridge Street Logan Street Southbound
Ridge Street Pike Street Northbound
Robin Road Parkwood Drive Southbound
Robin Road Summit Drive Northbound
School Street Bishop Street Southbound
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-9
1:475
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
School Street High Street Northbound
School Street High Street Southbound
Scott Lane Coleville Road Northbound
Scott Lane High Street Southbound
Scott Lane Lamb Street Northbound
Scott Lane Lamb Street Southbound
Shoemaker Avenue Lamb Street Northbound
Shoemaker Avenue Lamb Street Southbound
Shope Street Bishop Street Northbound
Shope Street Humes Road Northbound
Shope Street Humes Road Southbound
Shugert Lane Church Street Northbound
Shugert Lane Church Street Southbound
Shugert Lane Curtin Street Northbound
Shugert Lane Linn Street Southbound
Simpson Street Curtin Street Northbound
Simpson Street Linn Street Southbound
South Spring Street Crawford Lane Westbound
South Thomas Street St. Paul Street Northbound
Spring Street Beaver Street Northbound and
southbound
Spring Street Bishop Street Southbound
Spring Street Lamb Street Northbound
Spring Street Lamb Street Southbound
Spring Street Linn Street Northbound
Spring Street Linn Street Southbound
Spring Street Pine Street Northbound
St. Paul Street St. Thomas Street Northbound
Stony Batter Street Pine Street Northbound
Sylvan Circle Summit Drive Southbound
Sylvan Circle Sylvan Circle Eastbound
Tanney Street Centre Street Eastbound
Tanney Street Centre Street Westbound
Tanney Street Lewis Street Westbound
Tanney Street Parkview Drive Eastbound
Teener Road Parkwood Drive Southbound
§ 530-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-9
1:476
§ 530-10. Turning lanes. [Amended 9-18-1978 by Ord. No. 810;
5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 1064]
The following turning lanes are hereby established on the streets or other
public ways of the Borough, and all vehicles moving into such turning lanes
shall turn in the appropriate direction as indicated by the sign governing
movement within such turning lanes then and there existing upon the
surface of the roadway or upon a sign posted conspicuously for the purpose
of governing vehicular traffic upon such portion of the street or other public
way:
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Valentine Road Willowbank Street Northbound
West Beaver Street Linn Street Westbound
West Beaver Street Spring Street Eastbound
West Howard Street North Spring Street Westbound
West Lamb Street Gamble Mill/
Pedestrian Walk
Eastbound
Wilson Street Beaver Street Northbound
Wilson Street Bishop Street Southbound
Wilson Street Curtin Street Northbound
Wilson Street Curtin Street Southbound
Wilson Street East Linn Street Northbound
Wilson Street East Linn Street Southbound
Wilson Street Howard Street Northbound
Wilson Street Howard Street Southbound
Wood Street McAllister Street Eastbound
Wood Street McAllister Street Westbound
Woodland Drive Centre Street Eastbound
Woodland Drive Centre Street Westbound
Woodland Drive Lewis Street Westbound
Woodland Drive Parkview Drive Eastbound
B. No operator of a vehicle shall fail to come to a stop within a reasonable
distance before entering any such stop intersection as hereinabove
required.
A. Turning lane westbound on Bishop Street at Allegheny Street
intersection.
B. Left-turn lane northbound on Allegheny Street at the intersection with
Howard Street.
§ 530-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-10
1:477
§ 530-11. Play highways.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as a play highway, whenever
he deems such action advisable and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any portion of any street or alley in the Borough whereon sledding
and coasting shall be permitted. Such highways shall be set apart and
marked off for the purpose under the direction of the Mayor. No person
shall operate any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any time when
such highway is so designated, except in case of emergency or with special
permission of the Mayor or of the police officer in charge, who shall first
clear such highway of all persons using such highway for the purpose for
which it was set apart.
C. Left-turn lane westbound on High Street at the intersection with Water
Street.
D. Right-turn lane westbound on High Street at the intersection with
Spring Street.
E. Left-turn lane southbound on Allegheny Street at the intersection with
Bishop Street.
F. Left-turn lane eastbound on Bishop Street at the intersection with
Allegheny Street.
§ 530-10 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-11
1:478
ARTICLE III
Traffic Control Devices
§ 530-12. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
if heretofore erected are hereby ratified), and traffic at such
intersections may be directed by such signals:
(1) Allegheny Street and Bishop Street.
(2) Allegheny Street and Howard Street.
(3) Allegheny Street and Linn Street.
(4) High Street and Spring Street.
(5) High Street and Water Street.
B. No operator of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such traffic
signal.
§ 530-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-12
1:479

ARTICLE IV
Commercial and Heavy Vehicles
[Added 5-8-1968 by Ord. No. 597]
§ 530-13. Spilling or depositing dirt or rubbish; tracking mud;
removal required.
A. No person shall cause, allow or the spilling or deposit of dirt, rubbish or
any other item from a loaded vehicle upon any street, highway, alley or
right-of-way of the Borough.
B. No person shall cause, allow or permit the tracking or deposit of mud,
dirt or other debris onto any street, highway, alley or right-of-way of the
Borough.
C. In the event the person responsible for the spilling, tracking or deposit
of any material upon the streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way of the
Borough is unknown, then the owner of such vehicle shall be deemed
the responsible party and shall be liable to the penalty provided in
§ 530-15.
D. Upon notice from the Chief of Police, the responsible party or the owner
of any vehicle spilling, tracking or depositing any material upon any
highway, street, alley or right-of-way of the Borough shall have 12 hours
to remove or clean up the material so spilled, deposited or tracked and,
in default thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 530-15.
E. In the event the person responsible or the owner of any vehicle spilling,
tracking or depositing material or debris upon the public ways refuses
or neglects, after notice by the Chief of Police, to remove or clean up the
material, such material may be removed or cleaned up by the Chief of
Police or at his direction, and the costs for the same shall be charged
directly to the responsible party or the owner of the vehicle under the
provisions of this section. The payment of any costs or charges for the
removing or cleaning up as authorized by this section shall, unless such
payments are made under protest, be final and conclusive and shall
constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
F. In the event that any removing or cleaning charge imposed is paid
under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a
magistrate or a court of record having jurisdiction, in which case such
defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is
required by law in other cases of summary offenses and shall have the
same rights to appeal and waiver of hearing.
G. For the purposes of this section, after separate notice, each distinct
tracking, spilling or deposit of dirt or other debris shall constitute a
separate offense subject to a separate fine and costs.
H. All fines and penalties collected for violations of this section and all bail
forfeited shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough.
§ 530-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-14
1:481
§ 530-14. Weight restrictions on bridges. [Added 7-7-1986 by Ord.
No. 959]
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS WEIGHT — The combined weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles and its load and driver.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A self-propelled device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except one which is propelled solely by human power. "Motor vehicle"
includes motor carriers, trucks, combination units, automobiles and
trailers.
B. After the effective date of this section (Ordinance No. 959, adopted July
7, 1986), no person shall operate any vehicle having a gross weight in
excess of the posted weight limit upon any bridge located in the
Borough or upon any bridge belonging to the Borough. If any bridge
belonging to the Borough or located within the Borough is unposted,
then weight limits thereon shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Transportation.
C. The weight limit for the Railroad Street Bridge, located on Railroad
Street near its intersection with Sunnyside Boulevard, is hereby
established at 36 tons (72,000 pounds).
D. Determination of gross weight shall be made by portable scales, which
may be certified for use by the State Department of Transportation. In
the event of a dispute as to the actual weight, the vehicle shall forthwith
be transported at the time of violation to the nearest certified scale
capable of weighing motor vehicles, where the vehicle shall be
weighed. If the scales used by the police are within 10% of the actual
weight of the motor vehicle, load and driver, as provided in this section,
then all expenses of such weighing shall be borne by the operator and/
or owner of the motor vehicle allegedly in violation of this section. If
such scales are more than 10% in error, then all expenses for the
weighing of the subject motor vehicle shall be at the cost of the
Borough. In no event shall the inaccuracy of any scales used by the
Police Department be grounds for the dismissal of any action brought as
a result of the violation of this section, nor shall such inaccuracy be
competent evidence of the innocence of any owner or operator of any
motor vehicle judged to be in violation of this section. For the purposes
of any citation, complaint or other criminal prosecution brought under
this section, the weight as established by the certified scales shall be
the weight upon which such citation, complaint or other criminal
process is founded. Such weight shall also be determinative of any fine
which may be imposed as a result of the violation of this section.
E. This section is enacted in direct response to a certain agreement
between the State Department of Transportation, the Borough and the
United States Department of Transportation.
§ 530-14 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-14
1:482
§ 530-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-1986 by Ord. No.
959112]
Whoever violates § 530-14 is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except that any person
convicted or operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of a posted
weight shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight.
F. The proper officers of the Borough are hereby required, requested,
directed, empowered and authorized to make and erect certain signs in
compliance with the Act of June 18, 1980, P.L. 229, No. 68, Section 5,111
at the entrance and exit of any bridge which is the subject of this
section and at the intersection nearest each end of the restricted bridge
or portion of highway, which signs will allow drivers to avoid the
restricted bridge or portion of highway in accordance with law and the
agreement referred to in Subsection E hereof.
111. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(e).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 530-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-15
1:483

ARTICLE V
Motor Carriers, Trucks and Truck Tractors and Combination Units
[Added 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 934]
§ 530-16. Maximum weight; permit required for operation.
No motor carrier registered as a truck, a combination unit or a trailer
shall be operated on any street of the Borough enumerated in § 530-17
that has a registered gross weight in excess of 11,000 pounds, or if it
has a Class 4 or higher registration, as defined by the Vehicle Code of
Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1916, or if it is a foreign motor carrier which
would be classified as a Class 4 or higher if it were to be registered in
the commonwealth pursuant to the Vehicle Code, without a special permit
issued by the Borough Secretary, the Mayor or the Chief of Police and
approved by Council. For purposes of this article, gross weight of 11,000
pounds shall not be exceeded by any truck towing a trailer when the
combined weight of truck and trailer exceeds 11,000 pounds or by any
combination unit having a combined weight of truck and trailer in excess of
11,000 pounds.
§ 530-17. Operation on certain streets prohibited. [Amended
12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 940]
Vehicles having a registered gross weight, as defined in § 530-16, in excess
of 11,000 pounds shall be prohibited from the following Borough streets:
Name of Street Location
Beaver Street From Allegheny to Wilson
East and West Curtin Streets From Wilson to Linn
East Linn Street From Allegheny to Wilson
Hamilton Street From Bishop to Burnside
Hughes Street From Humes to Bishop
Humes Road From Blanchard to Hughes
Linn Street From Allegheny to Wilson
McAllister Street From Bishop to Howard
Monroe Street From Humes to Bishop
Shope Street From Humes to Bishop
Wilson Street From Bishop to Howard
Wilson Street From Howard to Beaver
§ 530-18. Parking on certain streets prohibited. [Amended
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 1124; 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 1145; 6-1-2009
by Ord. No. 06012009-01]
A. No motor carrier registered as a truck, a combination unit or a trailer
shall be parked on any street or state highway within the Borough if it
§ 530-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-18
1:485
§ 530-19. Determination of gross vehicle weight.
For purposes of this article, gross vehicle weight shall be that weight which
is stamped on the manufacturer's serial plate attached to any vehicle. If
there is no manufacturer's serial plate attached to a vehicle, then the lowest
weight indicated in any vehicle class of registration defined in the act of
February 15, 1980, as supplemented and amended (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1916 et
seq.), shall determine the weight of any such vehicle cited for a violation of
any of the provisions of this article.
§ 530-20. Exceptions to chapter.
This article shall not apply to motor homes, motor buses, school buses or
those motor carriers making local deliveries.
has a registered gross weight in excess of 11,000 pounds, where the
parking of said vehicle creates a visibility problem at the intersections,
or when said truck parking, in the opinion of Council, the Mayor or the
Chief of Police, causes a safety hazard.
B. Streets and highways that have been declared to be a visibility problem
or a safety hazard, with signs prohibiting trucks or vans from parking in
those areas, shall be as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
North Spring Street From Linn to Fifth Avenue
South Allegheny
Street
From Bishop to Crawford Lane
West Curtin From West Linn to Allegheny
Street
West Linn Street East From West Curtin Street to West
Beaver Street
West Linn Street From West Curtin to Allegheny
Street
C. Additional streets may be added, at the discretion of Council, the Mayor
or the Chief of Police.
D. Within the first parking space adjacent to any intersection or within 40
feet of any intersection if no established parking space exists, these
areas shall constitute a restricted parking zone.
E. Any truck or van parked in violation of this section shall receive a fivedollar
ticket for the first offense, with subsequent tickets increasing by
$5 for violations by the same vehicle in the same zone. For example, a
second violation shall result in a ten-dollar ticket, a third violation shall
result in a fifteen-dollar ticket, and so on. No vehicle may be ticketed
more than once in any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 530-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-21
1:486
§ 530-21. Prohibition.
No person shall operate a vehicle, motor carrier, truck, tractor or
combination unit upon any of the streets of the Borough set forth in
§ 530-17, which vehicle bears a Class 4 registration or higher or exceeds
the maximum gross weight of 11,000 pounds, as determined by the
manufacturer's serial plate and/or registration class of such vehicle or
combination.
§ 530-22. Signs.
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby required, requested, directed
and authorized to erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs
designating the restrictions set forth in this article at each end of that
portion of the Borough streets restricted in accordance with this article.
§ 530-23. Purpose; findings of Council.
The restrictions set forth in this article are imposed as to the weight or size
of vehicles operating upon certain streets by reason of deterioration, rain,
snow and other climatic conditions, which conditions, unless the use of such
vehicles is prohibited and/or the permissible weights of such vehicles are
reduced, may damage or destroy such streets. Further, it is the finding of
Council that the narrowness and width of such streets and the congestion
occasioned by the operation of vehicles or combinations in excess of 11,000
pounds thereon have led to serious and dangerous traffic conditions and
congestions resulting in the restriction of free traffic flow through the
streets of the Borough and have caused significant danger to other users
of the Borough streets, including pedestrians, all of which necessitate the
regulations, restrictions and requirements set forth in this article.
§ 530-24. Violations and penalties.113
Whoever violates § 530-21 is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 530-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-24
1:487

ARTICLE VI
Operation Generally
§ 530-25. Speed limits on certain streets. [Amended 4-6-1964 by
Ord. No. 487; 10-25-1966 by Ord. No. 555; 1-21-1991 by Ord. No.
1043]
A. The following speed limits are hereby established:
Street From To
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
Allegheny Street Bishop Street Linn Street 25
Blanchard
Street
East Bishop
Street
South Borough
line
25
Cherry Street
(Lane)
Wilson Street Spring Street 15
East and West
Logan Streets
Spring Street Blanchard Street 25
East Beaver
Street
Allegheny Street Bonner Road 25
East Bishop
Street
Allegheny Street Badger Street 25
East Bishop
Street
Badger Street East Borough line 35
East Burnside
Street
Allegheny Street Blanchard Street 25
East Curtin
Street
Allegheny Street East Borough line 25
East High Street Allegheny Street Parkview
Boulevard
25
East Howard
Street
Allegheny Street Wilson Street 25
East Howard
Street
Wilson Street East Borough line 35
East Lamb
Street
Allegheny Street Wilson Street 25
East Linn Street Allegheny Street Wilson Street 25
McAllister
Street
Bishop Street Howard Street 25
North Thomas
Street
West High
Street
Northwest
Borough line
25
§ 530-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-25
1:489
§ 530-26. Right turns prohibited at certain intersections. [Amended
9-18-1978 by Ord. No. 810]
§ 530-27. Passing prohibited on certain streets. [Amended
8-20-1973 by Ord. No. 707]
No operator of any vehicle shall overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
following public ways in the Borough:
Name of Street Location
Stony Batter Street Between Water Street and Pine Street
§ 530-28. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates § 530-25 shall be fined $35 plus $2 per mile for each mile
in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum speed limit for each
offense.
Street From To
Speed Limit
(miles per
hour)
North Water
Street
High Street West Linn Street 35
South Potter
Street
West High
Street
South Borough
line
25
South Water
Street
High Street Mill Street 35
West Linn Street Allegheny Street West Borough line 35
Willowbank
Street
Mill Street Southwest
Borough line
35
B. No person shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that hereby
established upon any of the public ways herein specified.
A. No driver entering any of the following intersections from the firstnamed
street shall make a right turn before awaiting a green light
signaling such driver to proceed:
(1) High Street and Water Street.
(2) Water Street and High Street.
B. Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. of the following day, no
driver shall make a right turn at the southeast corner of South Spring
Street and West High Street. [Added 9-17-1979 by Ord. No. 824]
§ 530-25 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-28
1:490
ARTICLE VII
Pedalcycles
[Added 7-12-1982]
§ 530-29. Business district defined; riding restrictions.
§ 530-30. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates § 530-29 shall be fined not more than $10.
A. Under and pursuant to the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as amended,
Council hereby adopts the area bounded on the north by Borrows Lane,
on the south by Bishop Street, on the east by Penn Street and on the
west by Potter Street as the "business district" referred to in Section
3508(b) of the Vehicle Code.
B. After the effective date of this resolution (adopted July 12, 1982), the
proper officers of the Borough are hereby required, requested,
authorized and directed to enforce Section 3508(b) of the Vehicle Code
in accordance with its terms, and thereafter no person shall ride a
pedalcycle in such area bounded and described above.
C. The plan of the Borough's business district attached to the original
resolution passed on July 12, 1982, and made a part hereof, is hereby
expressly adopted by Council.
§ 530-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-30
1:491

ARTICLE VIII
Parking Generally
§ 530-31. Parking in lot adjoining Borough Municipal Building
restricted. [Amended 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 804]
§ 530-32. Angle parking. [Amended 1-21-1965 by Ord. No. 502;
4-20-1970 by Ord. No. 641; 3-18-1974 by Ord. No. 719]
§ 530-33. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street or alley for the parking
of a vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines
bounding such space.
§ 530-34. Prohibited parking areas. [Amended 9-9-1964 by Ord. No.
491; 1-21-1965 by Ord. No. 502; 4-5-1965 by Ord. No. 509;
4-19-1965 by Ord. No. 509-A; 4-20-1970 by Ord. No. 643; 3-5-1973
A. Between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., parking upon premises
owned by the Borough adjoining the Borough Municipal Building on
Lamb Street shall be restricted to vehicles belonging to employees of
the Borough and/or vehicles belonging to persons having official
business to transact with the Borough and/or vehicles belonging to any
person authorized by Council to park on such premises. Such
restriction shall be in effect Monday through Friday of each week, legal
holidays recognized by the Borough excepted. For purposes of this
section, the word "belonging" also includes vehicles used or operated
by such persons. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of this
section.
B. In addition to the penalty provided in § 530-43, a vehicle belonging to
any unauthorized person or to any person not having official business
with the Borough or any person not employed by the Borough shall be
towed away from the municipal lot at the owner's expense.
A. Angle parking is required on the following portions of streets in the
metered area of the Borough, and in no other portions of streets or
alleys in the Borough:
Street Side From To
Allegheny Street Both Bishop Street Logan Street
East High Street
(north leg)
South 100 feet east of
Penn Street
100 feet west of
Penn Street
West Bishop Street North Spring Street Academy Lane
B. Except at such locations within such angle-parking zones where
parallel parking is indicated by official signs, on all streets or portions
thereof where angle parking is now or hereafter authorized, all vehicles
parked thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 530-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-34
1:493
by Ord. No. 700; 8-20-1973 by Ord. No. 707; 5-15-1978 by Ord. No.
807; 6-16-1980 by Ord. No. 843]
Parking is prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side From To
Allegheny Street West Linn Street Lamb Street
Bishop Street North McAllister
Street
Parkview Boulevard
Bishop Street South McAllister
Street
East end of PennDOT
maintenance facility
(1,600 feet)
Bishop Street South Spring Street Academy Lane
Blanchard Street West Logan Street Burnside Street
Burrows Street North Penn Street Cowdrick Street
Burrows Street South Penn Street Ridge Street
Cedar Street Both Cherry Street Bishop Street
Cherry Street Both Spring Street Penn Street
Decatur Street Both Pike Street Burrows Street
Dunlap Street West West Lamb
Street
South end of Cerro
Corporation property
East Howard
Street
Both McAllister
Street
Eastward to Borough line
Hale Street Both Penn Street Cowdrick Street
High Street North East line of
YMCA property
The Diamond
High Street North Scott Street Point opposite intersection
with South Thomas Street
High Street South Point opposite
intersection
with Scott
Street
Potter Street
High Street,
East (north leg)
South Allegheny
Street
Point 100 feet west of
Penn Street
High Street,
East (south leg)
North Allegheny
Street
Point 100 feet west of
Penn Street
High Street,
East (south leg)
North Point 200 feet
west of Ridge
Street
Ridge Street
Howard Street Both Wilson Street North Monroe Street
Lamb Street North Allegheny
Street
Point opposite intersection
with Decatur Street
§ 530-34 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-34
1:494
Street Side From To
Lamb Street South Thomas Street Penn-Central Railroad
tracks
Linn Street Both Allegheny
Street
Spring Street
Linn Street North Cowdrick Street Armor Street
Locust Street Both Howard Street Pike Street
Logan Street Both Spring Street Allegheny Street
Logan Street North Allegheny
Street
Ridge Street
Logan Street South Allegheny
Street
Penn Street
McAllister Street Both Howard Street Wood Street
Monroe Street Both Bishop Street Alley south of Bishop
Street
Monroe Street West Cherry Street Bishop Street
Monroe Street West Logan Lane Humes Road
North Thomas
Street
East Lamb Street North Potter Street
North Water
Street
Both Linn Street High Street
Penn Street Both Cherry Street Bishop Street
Penn Street East Lamb Street Burrows Street
Pike Street Both Allegheny
Street
Penn Street
Pike Street Both Ridge Street Alley east of Ridge Street
Pike Street North 215 East Pike
Street
219 East Pike Street
Pike Street South Penn Street Ridge Street
Pine Street South Spring Street South Borough line
Reynolds Avenue East North end of
Reynolds
Avenue
Point 300 feet south
thereof
Ridge Street East Lamb Street Burrows Street
Shope Street East Gallo residence Corner
Shope Street West Burnside Street Humes Road
South Potter
Street
West West High
Street
South Thomas Street
South Water
Street
Both High Street Penn-Central Railroad
tracks
§ 530-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-34
1:495
Street Side From To
Spring Street West Linn Street Lamb Street
Spring Street Both Academy Lane Stony Batter Street
St. Paul Street Both Halfmoon Street South Thomas Street
Stony Batter
Street
Both Spring Street South Water Street
Willowbank
Street
North Penn-Central
Railroad tracks
Logan Branch of Spring
Creek
Willowbank
Street
North Reynolds
Avenue
West Borough line
Willowbank
Street
South Penn-Central
Railroad tracks
Logan Branch of Spring
Creek
Willowbank
Street
South Valentine Road West Borough line
Wilson Street Both East Howard
Street
Lane behind Centre Crest
Wilson Street East Cherry Street Bishop Street
§ 530-35. Two-hour and fifteen-minute parking areas. [Amended
5-15-1972 by Ord. No. 690; 2-1-1981 by Ord. No. 860]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked for
longer than two hours at any location listed in Subsection A hereof or longer
than 15 minutes at any location listed in Subsection B hereof.
A. Two-hour parking.
Street Side From To
High Street North North Thomas
Street
North Potter
Street
South Allegheny
Street
Both Bishop Street Logan Street
West High
Street
Both Water Street Allegheny Street
(With the exception of those spaces presently designated as fifteenminute
parking stalls, as defined in § 530-51C.)
B. Fifteen-minute parking.
§ 530-34 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-35
1:496
§ 530-36. Cab stands, bus loading and unloading areas, and
physicians' parking areas in parking meter zones.
Street Side From To
Allegheny
Street
East In front of Mid-
State Bank and
Trust Co.
High Street North Space for one
meter immediately
west of Dunlap
Street
High Street North Space for one
meter immediately
west of Spring
Street
High Street Space for one
meter at
Oddfellows
Building
High Street South Space for one
meter in front of
Murphy's Store
High Street South Space for two
meters on bridge
over Spring Creek
High Street West In front of Mid-
State Bank and
Trust Co.
West Lamb
Street
South North Water Street West Penn Power
Co. Driveway
(Being those fifteen-minute meters excepted in Subsection A hereof.)
A. Upon request and application by the person desiring such special
reserved space, and upon the payment of the annual license fee herein
provided, Council may establish reserved areas within the parking
meter zones, as follows:114
(1) Cab stands for use by taxicabs awaiting, taking on or discharging
passengers, not more than two parking spaces or stalls to be
reserved for any person engaged in the taxicab business, the
annual license fee shall be established by resolution of Borough
Council.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 530-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-36
1:497
§ 530-37. Parking unlicensed vehicles on public ways.
No person shall park or allow to remain parked, upon any street or public
alley in the Borough, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer not bearing
the current and valid license plate assigned thereto.
§ 530-38. Loading and unloading zones. [Amended 4-19-1965 by
Ord. No. 509-A]
The following areas upon the streets in the Borough are hereby designated
as loading and unloading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in any such
zone at any time except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading and/or unloading:
Street Side Location
Bishop Street North West of Allegheny Street
East High Street (south leg) South East of Allegheny Street
High Street North Between Dunlap Street and
Spring Creek
High Street South West of Spring Street
Spring Street East North of High Street
§ 530-39. General parking restrictions. [Amended 12-11-1979 by
Ord. No. 834; 12-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1116]
No person shall:
(2) Bus stops, for use by buses awaiting, taking on or discharging
passengers, the annual license fee shall be established by
resolution of Borough Council.
(3) Physicians' parking areas, not more than one parking space or stall
to be reserved for any one physician, the annual license fee shall be
established by resolution of Borough Council.
B. Upon establishment of any such special reserved space, the adjacent
parking meter shall be removed therefrom and a sign shall be erected
giving notice of the purpose for which such space is reserved. No
person shall stand or park any vehicle in any such reserved space other
than the particular vehicle or type of vehicle for which the license was
issued.
A. Park a vehicle within an intersection;
B. Park a vehicle within an intersection of highways;
C. Park a vehicle within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
§ 530-36 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-39
1:498
§ 530-40. Additional parking restrictions. [Amended 10-16-1967 by
Ord. No. 581; 3-16-1970 by Ord. No. 640; 4-20-1970 by Ord. No.
642; 3-1-1971 by Ord. No. 670; 7-20-1981 by Ord. No. 864;
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 901; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1090; 8-1-1994
by Ord. No. 1092]
D. Park a vehicle on a crosswalk;
E. Park a vehicle within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
F. Park on a sidewalk, except for pedalcycles, which may be parked as
provided in Section 3509(b)(2) of the Vehicle Code;
G. Park a vehicle in front of a public or private driveway;
H. Park a vehicle on a highway, except as otherwise authorized;
I. Park a vehicle on the left side of a highway against traffic;
J. Park a vehicle more than 12 inches from the curb;
K. Park a vehicle within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
or, when properly sign posted, on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance;
L. Park a vehicle where the vehicle would prevent the free movement of
traffic;
M. Leave a vehicle unattended on any right-of-way, street, highway, alley or
thoroughfare for a period exceeding 96 hours consecutively without a
current registration or inspection sticker;
N. Leave a vehicle unattended on any right-of-way, street, highway, alley or
thoroughfare for a period of 96 hours after police notification; or
O. Park a vehicle on the painted lines which denote the measured parking
space on the street or in the municipal parking lots of the Borough.
A. Parking is hereby prohibited at the following locations at any time
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
(1) In front of the Brockerhoff Hotel on the southern side of High
Street: four stalls.
(2) On the northern side of High Street in front of the Mid-State Bank
and Trust Company: four stalls.
B. Alternate side parking. For the purpose of clearing the streets of ice
and snow in the wintertime and for clearing the downtown streets of
debris, dust and dirt in the summertime, parking is hereby prohibited
on alternate sides of the street on a year-round basis. These parking
regulations will be in effect regardless of the conditions of the streets
and shall have no bearing on whether a winter storm has occurred or
not. The regulations will be in effect in the summer season regardless of
§ 530-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-40
1:499
whether the Borough has scheduled a need for sweeping or not. It is
the intent that these regulations will be in effect at all times, seven
days a week, 52 weeks a year, unless Council has directed a temporary
suspension of the regulations for a specific duration to accommodate
a special event or occasion. Parking is hereby prohibited on alternate
sides of the streets between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. The
"downtown section" of the Borough is defined as that area bounded by
Burrows Street on the north, Penn Street on the east, Logan Street on
the south and Dunlap Street on the west.
(1) Effective immediately, parking shall be prohibited on Monday,
Wednesday, Friday and Sunday, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., inclusive, as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Allegheny Street East From Logan Street to Burrows
Street
Bishop Street North From Spring Street to Penn
Street
High Street North From Penn Street to Dunlap
Street
Howard Street North From Spring Street to Penn
Street
Spring Street East From Logan Street to Howard
Street
(2) Parking is hereby prohibited on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., inclusive, as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Allegheny Street West From Logan Street to Burrows
Street
Bishop Street South From Spring Street to Penn
Street
High Street South From Penn Street to Dunlap
Street
Howard Street South From Spring Street to Penn
Street
Spring Street West From Logan Street to Howard
Street
C. Parking is hereby prohibited on the south side of Bishop Street from
Penn Street to McAllister Street on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and
parking is hereby prohibited on the north side of Bishop Street from
Penn Street to McAllister Street on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
§ 530-40 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-40
1:500
§ 530-41. Campers, motor homes and recreational vehicles. [Added
8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 1052]
No person shall park, let stand or leave any camper, motor home,
recreational vehicle or truck camper, as defined in the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 82 et seq., known as the Vehicle Code, as supplemented
and amended, upon any cartway, street, lane, highway, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property of the Borough for a period exceeding 14 days
out of 365 days. The 365 days shall be measured from the first day said
vehicle is left parked or left standing upon any cartway, lane, street, alley,
thoroughfare or other public property of the Borough. On days other than
the allowed fourteen-day period, any of the aforesaid vehicles must be
placed or positioned off the cartway of any right-of-way, street, alley or
thoroughfare of the Borough. No permitted use shall be made of any
camper, motor home, recreational vehicle or truck camper while the same
is parked or left standing within the Borough without the express written
permission of Council and compliance with all applicable ordinances and
regulations.
§ 530-42. Handicapped or disabled veteran parking spaces. [Added
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 1060]
§ 530-43. Violations and penalties; waiver. [Amended 4-3-1978 by
Ord. No. 804; 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 834; 12-21-1983 by Ord. No.
902; 6-4-1990 by Ord. No. 1031; 8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 1052;
D. Parking is hereby prohibited at the parking meter located on the south
side of West Bishop Street, near the intersection of West Bishop Street
and South Spring Street, from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of the next day.
Such prohibition shall be conspicuously posted on such meter by the
proper authorities of the Borough.
A. Pursuant to the Act of November 9, 1977, P.L. 226, No. 69, as
supplemented and amended (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3354), it shall be unlawful
for any person to park a vehicle on public or private property reserved
for a handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran, which
property has been posted in accordance with regulations established
and implemented by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except for persons parking vehicles
lawfully bearing a handicapped or a severely disabled veteran
registration plate or displaying a handicapped or a severely disabled
veteran parking placard when such vehicles are being operated by or
for the transportation of a handicapped or a severely disabled veteran.
B. This section may be enforced and violators may be cited by a parking
officer or the Police Department of the Borough. Citations in the form
described by the Borough Secretary and approved by the Borough
Mayor shall be issued by the parking officer or the Police Department of
the Borough in accordance with the Act of November 9, 1977, as
supplemented and amended.
§ 530-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-43
1:501
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 1060; 8-1-1994 by Ord. No. 1092; 8-21-1995 by
Ord. No. 1101; 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1177; 5-17-2004 by Ord. No.
1185]
A. General penalty. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this article for which no penalty is otherwise provided
shall be fined not more than $15 for each offense.
B. Violation of § 530-31. Whoever violates § 530-31 shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $300 or imprisoned not less than two days nor
more than 10 days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each
offense.
C. Prescribed fines. Any person charged with a violation of any provision
of this article for which payment of a prescribed fine may be made may
pay such sum in the manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket.
Such payment shall be deemed a plea of guilty, waiver of court
appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense,
and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for
such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses
shall require court appearance.
D. Establishment of schedule. Until changed by resolution of Council,
there is hereby established a schedule of prescribed fines to be printed
on all traffic tickets of the Borough for enumerated offenses as listed
upon such preprinted traffic tickets. A schedule of fines in substantially
the same form as the schedule contained in Subsection F hereof shall
be printed on all traffic tickets of the Borough and shall be the fines
which are due and payable by an offender in accordance with
Subsection C hereof.
E. Implementation of schedule. All of the proper officers, employees and
police officers of the Borough are hereby required and requested to
implement the schedule set forth in Subsection F hereof, effective
December 21, 1983. Magisterial District Judges and/or courts of Centre
County are hereby authorized, required and requested to accept, for
the requisite offense charged, the amount so established in payment of
fines due the Borough.
F. Schedule.
Borough of Bellefonte Fine
Overparked, parking meter expired $5
Overparked, two-hour limit, whether meter is
expired or not. A chalk mark placed by a meter
person is prima facie evidence of a vehicle
exceeding the two-hour limit.
$8
Parking at a fire hydrant $15
Parking in restricted area $15
§ 530-43 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-43
1:502
Borough of Bellefonte Fine
Parking against traffic $15
Parking on highway $15
Parking across lines $15
Parking on sidewalk $15
Snow emergency $15
Parking in violation of the alternate side
restriction
$15
Head-in only $15
Borough of Bellefonte Parking Authority
Overtime parking meter $1
Restricted area $2
Across lines $2
Head-in only $2
G. Violation of § 530-40B. Whoever violates § 530-40B shall be fined not
less than $25 for the first offense. If the same vehicle remains in
violation for 48 hours, a second fine of $25 will be assessed in addition
to the cost of towing as provided in Subsection H hereof.
H. Towing vehicles. A vehicle found to be in a continuous (second)
violation of § 530-40B may be towed and impounded at the vehicle
owner's expense when towing is authorized by the Chief of Police.
Towing will be done by a licensed towing business, and all costs
associated with towing and impounding must be paid in full before the
vehicle can be reclaimed by the owner.
I. Violation of § 530-41. Whoever violates § 530-41 shall be subject to the
penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
J. Violation of § 530-42. Whoever violates § 530-42 shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $200.
§ 530-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-43
1:503

ARTICLE IX
Parking Lots
[Added 10-21-1974 by Ord. No. 730]
§ 530-44. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department on
all parking lots owned by or under the control of the Parking Authority of
the Borough or the Borough. Law enforcement officers aiding the Borough
Police Department, including the Pennsylvania State Police and the police of
neighboring municipalities, are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions
of this article on property belonging to or under the control of the Parking
Authority of the Borough or the Borough.
§ 530-45. General regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the
protection of property belonging to the Borough or under its control or the
control of the Parking Authority of the Borough:
A. No person shall injure, deface, remove, cut or in any manner damage
any parking meter, curbstone, pavement surface, post, pole, plant, tree,
shrub, building or structure on any property belonging to or under the
control of the Borough or the Parking Authority of the Borough.
B. No person shall remove any planter, parking meter, post, pole, shrub,
tree, plant or structure from any property belonging to or under the
control of the Borough or the Parking Authority of the Borough.
C. No person shall hold any meeting, gathering, assembly or congregation
upon property belonging to or under the control of the Borough or loiter
or congregate thereon without good and sufficient reason therefor. The
arresting police officer or any complaining official of the Borough or the
Parking Authority of the Borough shall have the power and privilege to
determine the sufficiency of any reason for congregating, loitering,
loafing, assembling or gathering upon such property, and his judgment
of such sufficiency of reason shall be prima facie evidence of any
alleged violation of this subsection.
D. No person shall set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any
article within or upon any property belonging to or under the control of
the Borough or the Parking Authority of the Borough unless consent
therefor is received, in writing, signed by two or more officers of the
aforesaid Authority or unless consent therefor is received, in the case of
Borough property, from the Borough Secretary.
E. No person shall dispose of any waste, litter, garbage, trash or refuse
upon property belonging to or under the control of the Borough or the
Parking Authority of the Borough except in receptacles designed for
such purpose.
§ 530-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-45
1:505
§ 530-46. Parking in Parking Lot A limited. [Added 8-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 789]
Between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time, no person
shall park any vehicle in any metered parking stall in Parking Lot A of
the Bellefonte Borough Parking Authority or cause or allow any vehicle to
occupy, stand or use any metered parking stall in Parking Lot A.
F. No person shall injure or deface any notice, rule or regulation posted at
any place within or upon property owned by or under the control of the
Borough or the Parking Authority of the Borough or any other authority
of the Borough.
G. No person shall place at any place within or upon property belonging to
or under the control of the Borough or the Parking Authority of the
Borough any notice other than that notice for which consent in writing
has been received from two or more officers of the aforesaid Authority
by the proposed posters thereof or, in the case of Borough property,
from the Borough Secretary.
H. (Reserved)115
I. The speed limit on all property belonging to or under the control of the
Borough or the Parking Authority of the Borough shall be five miles per
hour.
J. No two-wheel vehicle, known as a motorbike, motorcycle, motor scooter
or similar mechanical contrivance containing two wheels and an
internal combustion engine, shall be permitted within or upon property
belonging to or under the control of the Borough or the Parking
Authority of the Borough unless it is properly licensed and registered
with the commonwealth under the Vehicle Code. Such two-wheel motor
vehicles shall have affixed thereto a valid Pennsylvania registration
plate and sticker.
K. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage upon or within
property belonging to or under the control of the Borough or the
Parking Authority of the Borough.
L. No person shall be permitted to park more than one car, truck or van in
a metered parking space. Any combination of one of the
aforementioned motor vehicles with a motorcycle, motorbike or motor
scooter is also prohibited. However, two motorcycles, two motorbikes
or two motor scooters, or any combination of two thereof, may share a
single metered parking space. In the event of a meter violation for that
space, both motorcycles, motorbikes or motor scooters, or any
combination thereof, will receive a separate violation (ticket) notice.
[Added 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1132]
115. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H, pertaining to persons other than officers of the law
carrying any firearm on property belonging to or under the control of the Borough or
Parking Authority of the Borough, was repealed 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 06012015-02.
§ 530-45 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-47
1:506
§ 530-47. Driving in Parking Lot A limited; exception. [Added
8-15-1977 by Ord. No. 789]
No person shall drive any vehicle upon Parking Lot A or use Parking Lot A
as a thoroughfare or street between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
prevailing time. This section shall not apply to those persons authorized to
reach real estate adjoining such Parking Lot A, provided that such persons
are authorized by the owners and/or occupiers of such real estate adjoining
and adjacent to Parking Lot A.
§ 530-48. Suspension of article provisions. [Added 8-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 789]
At any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, Council, by
motion and subsequent written direction of the Mayor, may suspend any or
all of the provisions of this article.
§ 530-49. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be fined not more than $300 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
§ 530-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-49
1:507

ARTICLE X
Parking Meters
§ 530-50. Meters to be installed in certain locations. [Amended
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1091]
Parking meters shall be installed in the following locations in the Borough,
which locations shall be zoned according to the parking time limit and rate,
as provided in § 530-51:
§ 530-51. Parking meter areas assigned to zones. [Amended
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1091; 1-19-2004 by Ord. No. 1183]
The parking meter areas set forth in § 530-50 are hereby zoned for
established parking spaces as follows:
A. On the streets in the Borough.
(1) Allegheny Street, from Logan Street to Linn Street;
(2) Bishop Street, from Penn Street to Academy Lane;
(3) High Street, from Penn Street to Thomas Street;
(4) Howard Street, from Decatur Street to Spring Street; and
(5) Spring Street, from Logan Street to Howard Street.
B. At off-street parking lots owned by the Borough. Train station lot, being
a lot located at the southwest corner of Potter Street and High Street.
C. At off-street parking lots owned or leased by the Parking Authority of
the Borough.
(1) Lot A, leased by the Parking Authority of the Borough, being those
lots located at the southeast corner of Howard Street and Locust
Lane.
(2) Lot D, owned by the Parking Authority of the Borough, being a lot
located at the southeast corner of Cherry Lane and Spring Street.
A. Zone 1.
(1) Allegheny Street, east side, from Burrows Street to Logan Street,
and west side, from Burrows Street to Bishop Street.
(2) Spring Street, east and west sides, from Pike Lane to Bishop Street.
(3) Howard Street, north and south sides, from Locust Lane to Decatur
Street.
(4) High Street, north side, from Thomas Street to Decatur Street, and
south side, from Potter Street to Penn Street.
§ 530-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-51
1:509
(5) Bishop Street, north and south sides, from Spring Street to Cedar
Lane; excepting those locations which may be zoned otherwise, as
established herein.
B. Zone 2.
(1) Allegheny Street, east side, from Linn Street to Burrows Street,
and west side, from Lamb Street to Burrows Street.
(2) Spring Street, east and west sides, from Howard Street to Pike
Lane, and east and west sides, from Bishop Street to Logan Street.
(3) Potter Street, east side, 12 spaces north of High Street, and west
side, from Meek Lane to Thomas Street.
(4) Howard Street, north and south sides, from Spring Street to Locust
Lane.
(5) High Street, eastbound, north side, and westbound, south side,
from Allegheny Street to Penn Street.
(6) Bishop Street, north side, from Academy Lane to Spring Street;
excepting those locations which may be zoned otherwise, as
established herein.
C. Zone 3.
(1) Allegheny Street, east side, two spaces just south of Howard Street,
one space just south of Pike Alley, and one space just south of High
Street; and west side, one space just north of Bishop Street.
(2) Spring Street, east side, two spaces just south of Pike Lane.
(3) Howard Street, south side, two spaces just west of Decatur Street.
(4) High Street, north side, one space just west of Dunlap Street, one
space just east of Water Street, and one space just west of Spring
Street; and south side, one space just east of Water Street and one
space five spaces west of Allegheny Street.
(5) Bishop Street, north side, one space just east of Spring Street.
D. Zone 4.
(1) Allegheny Street, east side, one space three spaces south of
Howard Street and one space just north of Bishop Street; and west
side, one space just north of High Street and one space five spaces
south of Bishop Street.
(2) Spring Street, west side, one space five spaces south of Howard
Street.
(3) Howard Street, north side, one space just east of Allegheny Street.
(4) High Street, north side, one space 11 spaces east of Spring Street.
§ 530-51 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-51
1:510
§ 530-52. Charges and restrictions in various parking meter zones.
[Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 1091; 12-16-2002 by Ord. No.
1178; 1-19-2004 by Ord. No. 1183]
The charges and restrictions for the zones provided for in § 530-51 shall be
as follows:
(5) Lot A, northeast corner, two spaces just south of Howard Street.
(6) Lot D, southeast corner, one space just north of Bishop Street, and
northwest corner, one space just east of Spring Street.
(7) Train Station Lot, northeast corner, one space just west of Potter
Street.
E. Zone 5. Off-street lots owned by the Borough.
A. Zone 1 (SILVER): 30 minutes for $0.10 and one hour for $0.25, with the
maximum parking period allowed of two hours.
B. Zone 2 (RED): one hour for $0.10, five hours for $0.25, and 10 hours for
$0.50, with the maximum parking period allowed of 10 hours.
C. Zone 3 (GOLD): 15 minutes for $0.10 or $0.25, with the maximum
parking period allowed of 15 minutes.
D. Zone 4 (BLUE): handicapped parking meter.
E. Zone 5 (GRAY): one hour for $0.10 and three hours for $0.25 with the
maximum parking period allowed of three hours; and (YELLOW): 1 1/2
hours for $0.25, with the maximum parking period allowed of 12 hours.
F. Zone 6 (GRAY): one hour for $0.10, three hours for $0.25, six hours for
$0.50, nine hours for $0.75, and 12 hours for $1, with the maximum
parking period allowed of 12 hours.
G. As an alternative to the parking rate stated in Zone 6, a person may
purchase a monthly parking lease from the Borough at the rate of $25
per month, which will entitle the holder of the lease to park in any legal
parking space in Zone 6. The display of a placard on the dashboard of
the vehicle of the holder of the lease shall show that the vehicle is
parked free of daily meter charges pursuant to the parking lease. The
placard shall be obtained from the Borough offices in exchange for the
required monthly payment. The effective beginning and ending dates of
the lease shall be prominently displayed on the placard.
H. As an alternative to the parking rate stated in Zone 5, a person may
purchase a monthly parking lease from the Borough at the rate of $15
per month, which will entitle the holder of the lease to park in any legal
parking space in the Train Station Lot or the Pike Street Lot. The
display of a placard on the dashboard of the vehicle of the holder of the
lease shall show that the vehicle is parked free of daily meter charges
pursuant to the parking lease. The placard shall be obtained from the
§ 530-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-52
1:511
§ 530-53. Enforcement of parking meter zone restrictions. [Added
7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 1151; amended 12-16-2002 by Ord. No. 1177;
5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 1185]
Borough offices in exchange for the required monthly payment. The
effective beginning and ending dates of the lease shall be prominently
displayed on the placard.
A. For vehicles parked in violation of the restrictions set forth in § 530-52,
it shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
officer of the Borough, acting in accordance with the directions of the
Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article;
(2) The date and time of the violation;
(3) The license number of the vehicle;
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. Violation notices.
(1) The police officer or parking enforcement officer making such
report shall also attach to every such vehicle a notice that such
vehicle was parked in violation of § 530-52, which notice shall
contain instructions to such owner or operator to pay, at the
Borough Office or courtesy box as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $5 for the first hour or part
of an hour the vehicle was parked in violation of § 530-52; the sum
of $8 for the second hour the vehicle was parked in violation of
§ 530-52; and the sum of $14 for the third hour or part of an hour
the vehicle was parked in violation of § 530-52. All subsequent
violations will be $14. Said penalties shall be cumulative.
(2) Where a parking meter exists with a less than one-hour time limit,
the frequency or interval for a second and subsequent violation
shall equal the time limit on the parking meter. For example, a
fifteen-minute maximum time limit meter space could receive a
violation every 15 minutes after its expiration.
(3) If payment is not made as hereinbefore set forth within a seventytwo-
hour period, any person violating the provisions of § 530-52
shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus the penalty set forth
above, payable to the Borough, and costs of prosecution.
Prosecution for each such violation shall be in accordance with the
practice in the case of summary offenses, including default
§ 530-52 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-53
1:512
§ 530-54. Days and hours of parking meter operation. [Amended
3-21-1966 by Ord. No. 539; 6-19-1967 by Ord. No. 576; 10-9-1967 by
Ord. No. 580]
The restrictions and parking meter charges shall apply as follows:
§ 530-55. Installation and manner of operation of parking meters.
[Amended 6-19-1967 by Ord. No. 576]
Council or such officers or employees of the Borough as it may select or
the Parking Authority of the Borough, or such officers or employees as it
may select shall provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation
and use of the parking meters provided for in this article and shall maintain
the same in good workable condition. Each parking meter shall be so set
as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of a United
States coin. Each meter shall, by its device, clearly set out and continue in
operation from the time of depositing such coin until the expiration of the
time paid for by the deposit thereof as provided in § 530-52. Each meter
shall be so arranged that, upon the expiration of the parking limit, it will
indicate by a mechanical operation and the display of a proper signal that
the lawful parking period as fixed in § 530-52 has expired.
§ 530-56. Coin deposit in meter; overtime parking. [Amended
6-19-1967 by Ord. No. 576]
When any vehicle is parked in any space alongside of or next to which
there is located, under this article, a parking meter, the owner, operator,
manager or driver of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space,
immediately deposit one or more coins of the United States of America,
as provided in § 530-52, in the parking meter applicable to such parking
space, which space may then be used by such vehicle during the parking
time so paid for, as provided in § 530-52. If such vehicle remains parked
beyond the parking limit fixed by any applicable ordinance of the Borough in
force for such parking space, the parking meter shall display a sign showing
proceedings under Criminal Procedure Rule 65 or its equivalent.
Each occurrence shall be considered a separate offense.
A. In locations on streets from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, on
Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, and from 9:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m., prevailing time, on Tuesdays and Fridays. [Added
5-15-1972 by Ord. No. 690]
B. In off-street parking lots in Zone 7, 24 hours a day, and in off-street
parking lots in Zone 8, from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
C. Both in locations on the streets and in off-street parking lots, however,
the charges and restrictions provided in § 530-52 shall not apply on
Sundays or on any of the following legal holidays: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
§ 530-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-56
1:513
illegal parking and, in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parked
overtime and beyond the limit fixed by such ordinance, and the parking
of any vehicle overtime or beyond the limit now or hereafter fixed by any
ordinance of the Borough in any such street or off-street parking zone,
whether such zone is owned or leased by the Borough or owned or leased
by the Parking Authority of the Borough, where such meter is located, shall
be a violation of this section and subject to the penalty provided in § 530-63.
No person shall cause, allow, or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to
be parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time as above prescribed.
§ 530-57. Deposit of additional coin to extend parking time beyond
legal limit.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any
coin for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the time fixed by
§ 530-52 for parking in the parking space applicable to such vehicle.
§ 530-58. Parking in metered space when overtime parking
indicated.
No person shall a vehicle to remain or to be placed in any metered parking
space while such meter is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle has
already been parked beyond the period of time for which the coin or coins
deposited permitted such vehicle to be parked.
§ 530-59. Manner of parking within spaces and in lots. [Amended
6-19-1967 by Ord. No. 576; 4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1132]
§ 530-60. Tampering with meters.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions
A. Every vehicle parked in any space in a parking meter zone shall be
parked wholly within the parking meter spaces marked off and
designated upon the street and/or curb or upon the surface of the
parking lot, as the case may be. No vehicle shall be parked across or
beyond any parking meter space, boundary line or mark or upon any
curb or sidewalk. In off-street parking lots belonging or leased to either
the Borough or to the Parking Authority of the Borough, all vehicles
shall be parked heading into the metered space, and no person shall
park a vehicle in any other manner.
B. No person shall be permitted to park more than one car, truck or van in
a metered parking space. Any combination of one of the
aforementioned motor vehicles with a motorcycle, motorbike or motor
scooter is also prohibited. However, two motorcycles, two motorbikes
or two motor scooters, or any combination of two thereof, may share a
single metered parking space. In the event of a meter violation for that
space, both motorcycles, motorbikes or motor scooters, or any
combination thereof, will receive a separate violation (ticket) notice.
§ 530-56 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-60
1:514
of this article; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
authorized opening or working upon any such meter by a Borough officer or
employee or other person by authority of the Mayor and/or Council.
§ 530-61. Unattended vehicles. [Added 3-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1086]
§ 530-62. Bagged meters. [Added 3-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1086]
No person shall park a vehicle in a metered stall, on a street or in a
municipal parking lot, the meter of which has been bagged by the Police
Department or the Street Department, which vehicle has not been
authorized to park in such restricted space.
§ 530-63. Violations and penalties; waiver.
A. No person shall leave any vehicle in a metered parking area, on a street
or in a municipal lot unattended for more than 12 hours at any time
during the year.
B. No person shall leave any vehicle continuously unattended for more
than 24 hours in a metered parking space, on a street or in a lot. A
vehicle in violation of this subsection may be towed and impounded at
the vehicle owner's expense when towing is authorized by the Chief of
Police. Towing will be done by a licensed towing business, and all costs
associated with towing and impounding must be paid in full before the
vehicle can be reclaimed by the owner.
A. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
article, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not
more than $15 for each offense.
B. Whoever violates § 530-60 shall be fined not more than $300 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. [Amended 12-17-1979 by Ord. No.
834]
C. Whoever violates § 530-61A shall be subject to a fine of $25.
D. Whoever violates § 530-61B shall be subject to a fine of $25 in addition
to the twenty-five-dollar fine imposed for a violation of § 530-61A and
shall also be subject to the cost of having the vehicle towed and
impounded.
E. Whoever violates § 530-62 shall be subject to a fine of $25. [Amended
3-7-1984 by Ord. No. 1086]
F. Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this article for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made may pay such sum in
the manner prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall
be deemed a plea of guilty, waiver of court appearance and
acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and may be
§ 530-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-63
1:515
accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed penalty for such alleged
violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be accepted when
laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall require
court appearance.
§ 530-63 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-63
1:516
ARTICLE XI
Immobilization of Vehicles
[Added 8-7-1995 by Ord. No. 1100]
§ 530-64. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOOT, BOOTING and BOOTED — The act of immobilizing a motor vehicle
in such a manner as to prevent its operation with a device or means which
will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device is
in place or while such means are employed.
UNSETTLED CITATION — A citation for unpaid parking violations for which
a citation or summons has been issued (to which either no response has
been made or for which a warrant has been issued) and includes an
adjudicated citation for which the fines and costs imposed are unpaid.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATION — A violation of the parking, standing
or stopping regulations of the Borough or of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code which is outstanding and unpaid over 30 days from the date of
issuance.
§ 530-65. Reasons for booting.
A motor vehicle found parked within the municipality upon any public
ground at any time may, by or under the direction of the Chief of Police, be
booted if there are five or more unsettled parking violations, three or more
unsettled citations, or one or more arrest warrants, as a result of parking
violations, pending against the owner of the motor vehicle.
§ 530-66. Notice of booting and of violations or citations.
Upon booting of a motor vehicle, the officer of the municipality shall place
or cause to be placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice
sufficient to warn any individual that the vehicle has been immobilized
and that any attempt to move the vehicle might result in damage to the
vehicle. The notice shall also outline the procedure for obtaining removal
of the boot. As soon as practicable, the officer shall provide the owner of
the booted vehicle, at his or her request, with a list of the prior unsettled
parking violations or unsettled citations for which, or on account of which,
such vehicle was booted.
§ 530-67. Authorized removal of boot.
The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall be permitted
to secure the release of the vehicle upon:
A. Deposit of the collateral required for his or her appearance before a
Magisterial District Judge to answer for each unsettled citation; or
§ 530-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-67
1:517
§ 530-68. Hearings; authority of Chief of Police.
The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall have the
right to a post-immobilization hearing limited to the determination of the
validity of the booting. Such hearing must be requested within 10 days after
the vehicle is booted and shall be conducted by the Chief of Police. The
hearing shall be held during normal business hours within one business
day of the demand thereof. The post-immobilization hearing will not be
determinative of or adjudicate the merits of any citation or violation issued
relative to any immobilized vehicle but will be limited solely to whether the
vehicle was properly subject to booting under the provisions of this article.
§ 530-69. Towing and storage of vehicles; fees; disposal.
The boot shall remain in place for 72 hours, unless the owner has complied
with § 530-67. If such compliance has not occurred within 72 hours, the
vehicle shall be towed and impounded under the authority of this article. If
the booting occurs when a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of
the law or any ordinance of the municipality, then such vehicle is subject to
immediate towing and impounding. Towing and storage fees, as established
from time to time by Council, shall be paid, along with the fee specified
in § 530-70, before the owner of such vehicle or other authorized person
shall be permitted to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Vehicles
unclaimed within 45 days of towing and storage shall be deemed abandoned
and subject to disposal as such in the manner authorized by law.
§ 530-70. Booting fee.
The owner of the booted vehicle shall be subject to a fee of $50 for such
immobilization.
§ 530-71. Tampering with and unauthorized removal of boot.
No person shall tamper with, remove or attempt to remove any device used
to immobilize a motor vehicle that has been booted pursuant to this article
or move or attempt to move the vehicle booted before release of the vehicle
has been officially secured.
§ 530-72. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or other
designated employees of the municipality acting in accordance with the
instructions of the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Payment of the amount of the fines, penalty and court costs, if any, for
each unsettled citation and each unsettled parking violation; and
C. Payment of the fee as prescribed in § 530-70.
§ 530-67 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-73
1:518
§ 530-73. Right to hearing or trial.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any person of the
constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to the violations for which
parking violation notices or citations have been issued.
§ 530-74. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates § 530-71 is guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300
together with the cost of prosecution or be imprisoned for not more than 90
days, or both.
§ 530-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-74
1:519

ARTICLE XII
Fire Lanes
[Added 8-21-1995 by Ord. No. 1102]
§ 530-75. Designation of no-parking areas.
Whenever the Fire Chief shall determine that the parking of motor or other
vehicles on any portion of any public street, private street, shopping center,
multifamily building parking lot or school is likely to interfere with the
operation of the fire company or seriously hamper egress of occupants
from buildings in case of fire, he or she shall designate such areas, in
writing, including the use of maps or sketches, numbered consecutively,
to the Zoning Officer. After review by the Zoning Officer, Council shall
consider such recommendations of the Fire Chief and shall either approve
or disapprove each of such designated locations. Once approved, each such
location shall be added to a list, numbered consecutively, and maintained in
the municipal offices of the Borough. Such lists may be modified, added to
or reduced from time to time, after written recommendations by said Fire
Chief.
§ 530-76. Marking of fire lanes; time limit for compliance.
§ 530-77. Temporary no-parking areas.
In the event of an emergency or special condition whereby the Fire Chief
shall determine that the parking of vehicles is likely to interfere with the
operation of the fire company in any public street, private street, shopping
center, multifamily building parking lot or school, the Fire Chief shall direct
the posting of signs in such areas reading "NO PARKING — TEMPORARY
FIRE REGULATIONS — BY ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT CHIEF". Such
signs shall be removed at the direction of the Fire Chief when such
emergency or special condition ceases.
A. Once fire lanes are established as set forth in § 530-75, such fire lanes
shall be marked, under the direction of Fire Chief, by the following
appropriate methods:
(1) By posting signs in such areas reading "FIRE LANE — NO
PARKING" in accordance with state regulations;
(2) By the painting of lines four inches in width on the road or parking
surface indicating the area; and/or
(3) By painting the words "FIRE LANE — NO PARKING" in letters
three feet in height on the roadway or parking lot surface.
B. The designation of fire lanes, by whatever means, is the responsibility
of the property owner within 30 days of notification. Whenever the
Borough regulations for marking fire lanes change, the property owner
shall comply with the new standards within 90 days of notification.
§ 530-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 530-78
1:521
§ 530-78. Violations.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle within any fire lane
established and marked as set forth in §§ 530-75 and 530-76 or in any
temporary no-parking area as set forth in § 530-77.
§ 530-79. Notice of violation; payment of fine.
§ 530-80. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough, on finding any
vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article, to
report:
(1) The state or province license number attached to such vehicle;
(2) The location and nature of the parking violation;
(3) The time and date of such violation; and
(4) Any other relevant facts attending such violation.
B. On finding a vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
article, a police officer shall also attach to such vehicle, where possible,
a notice that such vehicle was parked in violation of this article and
instructing such owner or operator to report to the Municipal Police
Office of the Borough in regard to such violation.
A. Any owner or operator receiving a notice issued pursuant to § 530-79
may, within 48 hours of the time such notice was attached to the
vehicle, pay to the Municipal Police Office of the Borough, as a penalty
and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $25.
B. The continued violation of § 530-78 for a period of more than two hours
shall constitute a new and separate offense for each successive
additional two-hour period.
C. Failure to make payment as provided in Subsection A hereof shall
render such owner or operator subject to the penalty provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 530-78 BELLEFONTE CODE § 530-80
1:522
Chapter 544
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bellefonte Borough Authority — See Ch. 12,
Art. I.
Discontinuance of service — See Ch. 524, Art.
I.
§ 544-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Council of the Borough and the Bellefonte Borough
Authority, acting through their properly authorized officers, agents or
employees, when and only when acting within the scope of the duties
entrusted to them.
CONSUMER — Includes each person, group of persons, family,
proprietorship, partnership, association or corporation and means anyone
to whom water is supplied by the Borough, whether as owner or tenant,
from whom a separate application for water service is required.
OWNER — Includes any person, firm, corporation or association having
an interest as owner, whether legal or equitable, sole or partial, in any
premises which is or is about to be supplied with water by the Borough.
RESIDENCE — Each room, suite of rooms, building or buildings containing
separate kitchen and bath facilities and utilized as a single domicile by a
person, group of persons or a family.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities of the Borough for the supplying of water
to the Borough's consumers.
§ 544-2. Establishment of Authority.
The President and Secretary of the Bellefonte Borough Council are hereby
authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Bellefonte,
Articles of Incorporation for said Authority in the form required by said Act,
which Articles of Incorporation shall set forth among other things:
A. That the name of said Authority is "Bellefonte Borough Authority.
B. That said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.116
C. That no other authority organized under said Act or under the Act of
June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, is in existence in and for the incorporating
116. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now the Municipality Authorities
Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 530-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-2
1:523
§ 544-3. Water Department under control of Council.
The source of water supply now existing, the waterworks, machinery,
pipelines and all other appurtenances that now exist or that may be
hereafter acquired shall be under the control of Council and shall be
managed in accordance with Chapter 88, Article I, Manager, and § 544-4 of
this chapter.
§ 544-4. Authority of Borough Manager.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to administer the operation
of the Water Department in such a manner as to ensure efficient and
economical operation thereof.
§ 544-5. Noncompliance; remedy of Borough.
If an owner of any occupied house, building or structure in the Borough
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter or the rules
and regulations manual governing water service, the Borough may perform
or cause to be performed such work and labor and furnish or cause to be
furnished such material as may be necessary to comply with the provisions
of this chapter or the rules and regulations manual, at the cost and expense
of such owner or owners, together with 10% additional thereof and all
charges and expenses incidental thereto, which sum shall be collected from
such owner for the use of the Borough as debts are by law collectible,
or the Borough may, by its proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien
therefor against such premises as provided by law. Such remedies shall be
in addition to any penalty thereof as provided by Borough resolution.
§ 544-6. Confidentiality of information.
municipality other than the Bellefonte Borough Authority heretofore
organized pursuant to creation by Borough Council on August 15, 1938,
amended 3-16-1966 by an unnumbered resolution; 4-4-1966 by Ord.
No. 540; and 7-17-1967 by Ord. No. 577. Ordinance No. 975, adopted
October 5, 1987, amended the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority.
D. That the name of the incorporating municipality under the Authority is
the Borough of Bellefonte situated in Centre County, Pennsylvania.
E. That there shall be seven members of the Board of the Authority. All
appointments are made by the Borough of Bellefonte's Borough
Council.
F. That the Authority shall govern water service by the Manual of Rules
and Regulations adopted February 2004 and any modifications or
changes that occur and are adopted by the Authority thereafter.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections
shall be available to the public and governmental agencies without
§ 544-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § 544-6
1:524
§ 544-7. Conflict of laws.
In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this chapter and
a provision of any other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the
Borough, the provision of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 544-8. Water supply.
restriction, unless the user specifically requests confidentiality and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. All
records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or the approval authority upon
request.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this chapter, the NPDES permit, the state disposal system
permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
C. Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the Borough. The Borough may
provide such information to the United States Environmental
Protection Agency without notice, provided that said Agency maintains
such information in accordance with the procedures contained in 40
CFR, Subpart B, Section 2.201 et seq. Such information may be
provided to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
without notice, provided that said agency agrees in writing to abide by
the procedures contained in 40 CFR, Subpart B, Section 2.201 et seq.
A. The Borough shall use every reasonable means to provide the consumer
with an adequate supply of portable water. The Borough shall not be
liable for a deficiency or in failure of the supply when occasioned by the
shutting off of water to make repairs, connections, additions or
betterments, or by an act of God, or from any other cause beyond the
control of the Borough, or for premises above the reservoir levels or
level.
B. The Borough shall not be liable for any damages resulting from leaks,
broken pipe or any other cause occurring to or within any house or
building, and it is expressly stipulated by and between the Borough and
the consumer or owner that no claim shall be made against the Borough
on account of the bursting or breaking of any main or service pipe or
any attachment to the water system.
§ 544-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-8
1:525
Chapter 553
WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 553-1. Use of firearms, bow and arrow.
No person shall, except in the necessary defense of person or property, fire
or discharge any gun or other firearm or shoot with any bow and arrow at
any place within the Borough. However, nothing herein shall prohibit the
use of firearms at any rifle or bow-and-arrow range, the location of which
has been approved by the Mayor and which is supervised by an adult whose
qualifications have been approved by the Mayor.
Chapter 575
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical and Architectural Review
Board — See Ch. 62.
Planning Commissions — See Ch. 103.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 235,
Art. I.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 307.
Garage sale signs — See Ch. 313, Art. I.
Historic District — See Ch. 330.
Noise — See Ch. 372.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 425.
Solid waste — See Ch. 482.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 490.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 495.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
500.
C. The Borough reserves the right to restrict the supply of water or the use
thereof. In the case of scarcity of water or whenever such action may be
required for the public welfare, such restriction as to use or suspension
of service may include the use of hoses, sprinklers, swimming pools and
all uses not essential to public health and safety.
D. The Borough makes no guarantee of service if such service is through
mains or service lines to the property served that are insufficient in
size.
§ 544-8 BELLEFONTE CODE § 553-1
1:526
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 575-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bellefonte Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 575-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as
amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), and has been developed to be consistent
with the Nittany Valley Regional Comprehensive Plan.
§ 575-3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 575-4. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives of this chapter are the goals,
objectives and policies of the Nittany Valley Regional Comprehensive Plan
as applicable to the purposes of this chapter.
§ 575-5. Establishment of controls.
In their interpretation and application, the regulations set by this chapter
within each district shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the purposes of this chapter and shall apply with
uniformity to each class of use or structure.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate public health, safety, morals, general
welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper
density of population, civil defense, disaster evacuation, airports and
national defense facilities, the provision of adequate light and air, police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements.
B. To prevent the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property
from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To satisfy the land use, infrastructure, services and facilities planning
elements of the Nittany Valley Regional Comprehensive Plan. This
chapter is made in accordance with the Nittany Valley Regional
Comprehensive Plan and with consideration to the character of the
municipality, its various parts and to the suitability of the various parts
for particular uses and structures.
§ 575-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-5
1:527
§ 575-6. Transitional zone.
In order to facilitate orderly development and accommodate sound land
use planning and community design principles, a transitional zone may be
established, by conditional use, for any property or portion thereof located
within the Borough of Bellefonte and directly adjacent to a neighboring
municipality. This transitional zone may allow for the application of certain
elements of the neighboring municipality's zoning criteria to be applied
to adjacent properties within Bellefonte Borough. The Bellefonte Borough
Council may, upon recommendation from the Bellefonte Planning
Commission, approve the utilization of the bulk, density and/or design
requirements from the residential zoning districts of an adjacent
municipality, subject to the following:
A. Types of control. The following regulations shall apply in the respective
districts: use regulations, including primary and accessory uses; lot
requirements, including size, width and coverage; setback
requirements for front, side and rear yards; maximum height
requirements; and supplemental regulations.
B. New lots, uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date of
this chapter, any new lot, use or structure shall be constructed,
developed and used only in accordance with the regulations specified
for each district.
C. Existing lots, uses and structures. In all districts, after the effective date
of this chapter, any existing lot, use or structure which is not in
conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located
shall be deemed as nonconforming and subject to the regulations of
Article II of this chapter, entitled "Nonconforming Lots, Structures and
Uses."
D. Relationship with other restrictions. The provisions of this chapter are
not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul other rules,
regulations or ordinances, provided that, where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than that imposed by such other rules, easements,
covenants, restrictions, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
E. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to any lot, use or structure
exempted from zoning regulations by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code or other laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Properties proposed for inclusion within a transitional zone must be
directly adjacent to a neighboring municipality (or bisected by the
municipal line).
B. The zoning district (or proposed use) within the adjacent municipality
proposed for extension into the transitional zone must be compatible
with the permitted uses within the given Bellefonte Borough zoning
district in which the subject property lies.
§ 575-5 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-6
1:528
ARTICLE II
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
§ 575-7. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to recognize the right of nonconformities to
continue, but to encourage that such lots, uses and structures be brought
into conformity with this chapter as soon as constitutionally permissible. To
achieve this end, nonconformities are subject to the regulations set forth in
this article.
§ 575-8. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 575-9. Nonconforming uses and structures.
Where a lawful use or structure exists which, on the effective date of
this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto, becomes nonconforming,
such use or structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise
lawful, including subsequent sales of the property, subject to the following
provisions:
A. In any district in which dwellings are permitted as primary uses, a
single-family detached dwelling and customary accessory uses may be
erected on any single nonconforming lot of record at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding limitations
imposed by this chapter. Such nonconforming lot must be in separate
ownership and not abut other lots under the same ownership. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area and/or width that are applicable in the district,
provided that all other yard dimensions and requirements of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for single-family detached dwellings in
a single-family residential district. Variance of yard setback
requirements may be obtained only through action of the Zoning
Hearing Board.
B. If two or more abutting lots or combinations of abutting lots and
portions of lots under the same ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this chapter and if all or part of the lots do not
meet the requirements established for lot width or area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes
of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a
manner which diminishes compliance with lot width or area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter.
C. Lots which fail to meet minimum width or area requirements may be
expanded to include abutting lots under the same ownership.
A. The existing nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different
nonconforming use.
§ 575-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-9
1:529
§ 575-10. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures.
In order to administer this article, the Zoning Officer shall identify and
register nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 575-11. New construction.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. "Actual construction" is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
B. No such nonconforming use or structure shall be altered or extended
except if such use complies with the following criteria and standards:
(1) To provide for a natural expansion that is not detrimental to public
health, safety and general welfare, provided that such expansion
does not exceed 50% of the existing ground floor area of the
structure or other space occupied by the use;
(2) Provided that such does not constitute the addition of a new
nonconforming use or structure;
(3) Provided that such does not decrease yards when such already fail
to meet minimum yard setback areas; and
(4) Provided that the alteration or extension meets the district
regulations for such use or structure as if same were being altered
or extended in the district where such use is permitted. In cases
where the use is permitted in two or more districts, the most
restrictive district regulations shall apply.
C. In the event that any nonconforming structure is destroyed or partially
destroyed by any means to an extent of 75% or more of the market
valuation of all structures and other improvements on the lot, as
determined from the Centre County Tax Assessment Office effective at
the date of the destruction, such nonconforming structure and use
thereof may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of
damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within
two years of the date of such damage. Should the nonconforming use or
structure be redesigned to encompass a different or larger building
footprint, the construction drawings for the new construction shall be
submitted to the Borough Planning Commission for review and
recommendation to Borough Council.
D. When a nonconforming use or structure is discontinued or abandoned
for a period of one year or more continuously or replaced by a
conforming use or structure, the premises shall not thereafter be used
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
§ 575-9 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-11
1:530
position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or
demolition or removal of an existing structure has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on
diligently.
§ 575-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-11
1:531

ARTICLE III
Conservation District (C-1)
§ 575-12. Intent.
It is the intent of the Conservation District to promote the following:
§ 575-13. District regulations.117
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Conservation District. All
uses shall conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height regulations
stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
Conservation District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Single-family
detached
residential units
(minimum
designated open
space required =
70%)
0.5 acre
(overall
density shall
not exceed 1
unit per 3
acres)
100 20%
buildings,
35% total
impervious
40 15 40 35
Forestry and forest
management uses
1 acre 100 10%
buildings,
20% total
impervious
50 50 50 35
A. To preserve and protect the natural diversity of the rural areas.
B. To preserve and protect the region's natural landscapes, including
wooded areas, hillsides, ridges, steep slopes, wetlands and floodplains.
C. To protect the quality of the region's surface waters.
D. To protect natural habitat areas and provide passive recreational
opportunities.
E. To discourage sprawling development patterns and further
deterioration of rural character.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-13
1:533
Conservation District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Horticultural uses
relating to the
raising and
propagating of
shrubs, flowers,
and other plant
materials
produced and
raised on the
premises
Tilling of land,
raising of crops,
fruits, and
vegetables
Public or private
conservation areas
for the
conservation of
open space, water,
soil, and wildlife
resources
Public or private
park and
recreation areas
10 acres 300 10%
buildings,
20% total
impervious
50 100 75 35
Accessory Uses
Home occupations
Customary and
secondary uses
and structures
necessary to the
above primary
uses
Bed-and-breakfast
home
Essential services
See primary use above to which proposed use is accessory
Conditional Uses
§ 575-13 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-13
1:534
Conservation District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Sales of shrubs,
flowers, and other
plant materials
produced and
raised on the
premises
§ 575-14. Development standards.
An environmental impact report shall be required prior to the creation
of new lots within the Conservation District. This report shall identify
important natural features on the site (e.g., steep slopes, soil types,
wetlands, floodplains, surface water features, etc.) and shall provide a
plan to manage potential impacts to these features. Proposed development
activities should be located in such a manner as to minimize impacts to
these features.
§ 575-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-14
1:535

ARTICLE IV
Suburban Residential District (R-1)
§ 575-15. Intent.
The intent of the Suburban Residential District is to promote the following:
§ 575-16. Criteria and standards for Suburban Residential District
(R-1).
The R-1 District lot development standards include two options (standard
development and traditional neighborhood development). The standard
development option provides low-density residential development
opportunities reflective of the existing character of the Nittany Valley's
municipalities. The traditional neighborhood development option provides
additional opportunities to increase density while adding community
amenities including limited neighborhood-scale commercial and
recreational options. Finally, the traditional neighborhood development
option allows the applicant to purchase development credits from an
approved "sending area" and apply the density bonus.
§ 575-17. District regulations.
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Suburban Residential
District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum
height requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate
requirements of this chapter.
A. To provide for a variety of low-density residential development
opportunities.
B. To provide flexibility in neighborhood design options.
C. To provide for density bonus incentives to encourage the maximization
of efficient land use and to decrease development pressure on the
outlying rural landscape.
D. To ensure a diversity of housing types, sizes, and costs.
E. To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting against
hazards and nuisances.
§ 575-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-18
1:537
§ 575-18. Standard development option.
Standard Development Option – R-1 District
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Single-family
detached unit
12,000
square feet
10
Duplex unit 7,500 square
feet/unit
10; 0 at
common
wall
30 35
Churches 2 acres
Public and private
schools
2 acres
Public park and
recreation areas
No minimum
75 40% 20 on
local and
collector
streets;
50 on
arterial
streets 50 75 35
Accessory Uses
Home occupations:
see Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
Customary uses
accessory to above
Essential services
See primary use above to which it is accessory
A. A minimum of 50% of total developed residential units shall be singlefamily
detached units.
§ 575-18 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-19
1:538
§ 575-19. Traditional neighborhood development (TND) option.
Traditional Neighborhood Development – R-1 District
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Maximum
Permitted
Density
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Single-family
detached unit
10,000
square feet
(7,500 feet
with TDRs)
10
Duplex 7,500 feet
per unit
50
Townhouse 3,000 square
feet per
dwelling unit
150
40% 20 on
local and
collector
streets;
50 on
arterial
streets
10; 0 at
common
wall
30 35
Neighborhood
commercial
(excluding gasoline
sales)
25,000
square feet
Government offices 25,000
square feet
Churches 2 acres
Public and private
schools
2 acres
Public park and
recreation areas
No minimum
150 50% 50 50 75 35
Accessory Uses
Home occupations:
see Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
Customary uses
accessory to above
Essential services
See primary use above to which it is accessory
§ 575-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-19
1:539
A. Applicants shall be required to schedule a presubmission conference
(see § 575-136, presubmission conference).118
B. Maximum area devoted to single-family residential development shall
not exceed 50%.
C. Minimum area devoted to neighborhood retail shall be 10%.
D. Minimum area devoted to open space shall be 10%.
E. Developments shall conform to the district regulations set forth above
and shall also conform to the design and performance standards as
follows:
(1) Master plan requirement. A traditional neighborhood development
shall consist of an area to be master planned of not less than 50
acres and not more than 250 acres. A property may be considered
contiguous even if it is separated by a public right-of-way.
(2) Land use types. A traditional neighborhood development shall be
divided into at least three types of neighborhood areas, with each
type of area having different land use and land development
regulations. The following neighborhood areas are permitted in a
TND:
(a) Open space area. A TND shall have some land dedicated to
open space located in a location central to, or readily
accessible by, the majority of the dwelling units in the proposed
development. Open space areas may include woodlands,
meadows or grassland, greenways or wildlife corridors, or
agriculture. The open space area must include all lands defined
as environmentally sensitive.
(b) Neighborhood center area. One neighborhood center area is
required in a TND. The neighborhood center area shall serve
as the focal point of the TND, containing retail, commercial,
civic and public services to meet the daily needs of community
residents. A neighborhood center is pedestrian-oriented, and it
is designed to encourage pedestrian movement between a
mixed residential area and a neighborhood center area. A
square is required in a neighborhood center area. Retail and
commercial uses should generally be located adjacent to a
square. Neighborhood center area uses include retail shops,
restaurants, offices, banks, hotels, post office, governmental
offices, churches, community centers, and attached residential
dwellings.
(c) Mixed residential area. At least one mixed residential area is
required in a traditional neighborhood development containing
a variety of residential land uses, including single-family
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-19 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-19
1:540
houses, duplexes, townhouses, and multifamily residences.
Residential-scale retail and commercial uses are permitted
within a mixed residential area with strict architectural and
land use controls. Retail and commercial uses in a mixed
residential area are required to blend into the residential
character of the neighborhood. A mixed residential area
includes open spaces including small squares, pocket parks,
community parks, and greenways. A mixed residential area
promotes pedestrian activity through well-designed and varied
streetscapes that also provide for the safe and efficient
movement of vehicular traffic.
(d) Neighborhood edge area. A neighborhood edge area is
permitted but not required and is the least dense portion of a
traditional neighborhood development, with larger lots and
greater setbacks than the rest of the neighborhood. Only
single-family residential dwellings are permitted. A
neighborhood edge area is appropriate along the perimeter of
the neighborhood.
(3) Civic uses. Civic uses such as parkland and community centers are
an important part of the social and physical fabric of a traditional
neighborhood development (TND) district and will be required. The
location and type of civic uses shall be spread throughout the TND
and be generally oriented to both the residents of the neighborhood
and the public as a whole.
(4) Pedestrian orientation. A TND is designed to be pedestrianoriented
and less dependent upon the automobile. As a result,
sidewalks and interconnected parks and open space are essential
to the TND and provide mobility throughout the community by
means other than the automobile. In addition, the street network
shall be designed to provide for multiple routes to a single location
by both automotive and nonautomotive forms of transportation.
Parking for the automobile shall be required but will be done in a
manner that has minimal physical, aesthetic and environmental
impacts.
§ 575-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-19
1:541

ARTICLE V
Town Residential District (R-2)
§ 575-20. Intent.
The Town Residential District development standards provide two options
(infill development standards and new development standards). All
construction, alteration and/or demolition for buildings located within the
R-2 Town Residential District and the boundaries of the Historical
Architectural Review Board District shall be subject to the guidelines,
standards and approval processes of the Bellefonte Historic District and the
Historical Architectural Review Board.
§ 575-21. Infill development standards.
A. Intent. The intent of the Town Residential District–Infill Development
Standards is to promote the following:
(1) To provide for medium-density residential development
opportunities;
(2) To provide neighborhood development opportunities and limited
adaptive reuse opportunities which promote infill development in
areas served by a full range of public utilities and services;
(3) To promote the expansion of traditional neighborhoods as
appropriate;
(4) To promote adaptive reuse of carriage houses and other related
outbuildings as a means of providing affordable housing
opportunities;
(5) To provide limited home occupations and suitable adaptive reuse of
accessory historic structures;
(6) To ensure a diversity of housing types, sizes, and costs; and
(7) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
(8) To promote adaptive reuse of buildings greater than 10,000 square
feet without creating a burden to the traditional neighborhood.
[Added 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 121718-2]
B. District regulations. Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the
Town Residential–Infill Development District. All uses must conform to
the lot, yard setback, and maximum height requirements stipulated
herein, as well as other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
[Amended 12-17-2018 by Ord. No 121718-2]
§ 575-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-21
1:543
R-2 Town Residential District (Infill Development)
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Single-family home 7,500 square
feet
50 7 20
Duplex 5,000 square
feet per unit
50
50% See
Subsection
C below 7; 0 at
common
wall
30
35
Churches
Public and private
schools
0.5 acre 150 at
building
setback
line
50% See
Subsection
C below
30 50 35
Public park and
recreation areas
No minimum 40% 30 30 30
Nursing homes;
professional offices
See Subsection F below.
Accessory Uses
Home occupations:
see Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
Accessory building
apartments: see
Subsection D below
Customary uses
accessory to above
Essential services
See primary use above to which it is accessory
C. Front yard setbacks. In order to preserve community character in welldefined
neighborhoods, the front yard setback shall be established such
that the setback line is within 10% of the average of the established
block face (existing building setback lines). However, the front yard
setback shall be no less than 15 feet and no more than 40 feet.
§ 575-21 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-21
1:544
D. Accessory building apartments. Within the R-2 Town Residential
Zone–Infill Development Standard, an accessory outbuilding that
existed on the effective date of this chapter may be converted into one
dwelling unit, or may accommodate an accessory occupation by
conditional use, subject to the following criteria:
(1) The applicant shall furnish evidence that an approved system of
water supply and sewage disposal will be utilized.
(2) Applicants shall maintain the existing exterior character of the
building.
(3) Each dwelling unit/use shall have at least 400 square feet of
habitable floor area and a direct means of escape to ground level.
(4) The applicant must provide for two off-street parking spaces for
each accessory building residential unit in addition to any other
required parking.
(5) Accessory structures may not be altered in such a way that the
roofline of the accessory structure is made higher than the roofline
of the primary structure.
E. Adaptive reuse provisions. While the intent of the R-2 Town
Residential–Infill Development Standards is to provide for a diversity of
residential development and infill opportunities within the Borough,
there may be instances in which the size, nature and/or location of an
existing structure is not suitable for use as prescribed in the permitted
uses table above. The purpose of this section is to encourage the
retention and reuse of structures that have historic, architectural or
cultural value to the municipality by recognizing the importance of
these significant buildings and providing a process by which these
buildings can be reused and retained while minimizing any secondary
impacts to the surrounding properties. This section allows flexibility in
the proposed use, dimensional setbacks, design criteria and parking
requirements in a way that significantly reduces the conflicts created
by changing the use of an existing building.
(1) Applicability. In order to utilize the adaptive reuse provisions of this
section, the building or structure must be designated as a local or
national historic landmark, located within an approved historic
district, or within 300 feet of an approved historic district. In
addition, at least one of the following criteria must apply:
(a) The building or structure would no longer be allowed under
this chapter in its present use, and the building or structure
would not easily be retrofitted to comply with the existing
criteria without variances, vacating right-of-way, purchasing
adjacent property, or removing all or portions of the existing
building.
§ 575-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-21
1:545
§ 575-22. New development standards.
(b) The original intended use of the building no longer functions in
the current environment today or would create secondary
impacts to the surrounding neighborhood if utilized for its
original function.
(2) Applicants meeting the standards set forth above may apply for a
conditional use permit through the procedures outlined in this
chapter in order to facilitate the adaptive reuse of such structures,
so long as the proposed use is compatible with, and will not
negatively impact use of, the adjacent properties or promote the
deterioration of the residential character of the neighborhood or
district.
(3) The Borough Council, upon recommendation from Borough staff,
the Borough Planning Commission, and the Historic Architectural
Review Board (if applicable) may consider such requests and may
impose such conditions as are necessary to fulfill the intent of this
section.
(4) Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, buffer
requirements, parking and lighting standards, use restrictions,
limitations on hours of operation, and other conditions as may be
necessary to fulfill the intent of this chapter and to protect the
general health, safety and welfare.119
F. Nursing homes; professional offices. Within the R-2 Town Residential
Zone — Infill Development Standard, an existing building, as of the date
of this amendment, greater than 10,000 square feet may be used as or
converted into nursing homes and professional office space. For
purposes of clarification, this type of adaptive reuse is considered land
development and must go through the Historical Architectural Review
Board (if applicable), Planning Commission, and Council approval
processes. All ordinances related to stormwater, parking, lighting,
landscaping, and any other applicable standards must be adhered to,
Bellefonte Borough Council may impose such conditions as deemed
necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of the district.
[Added 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 121718-2]
A. Intent. The intent of the Town Residential District–New Development
Standards is to promote the following:
(1) To provide for medium-density residential development
opportunities;
(2) To provide neighborhood development opportunities in areas
served by a full range of public utilities and services compatible
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-21 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-22
1:546
with the existing development patterns within the Borough and
neighboring municipalities, as applicable;
(3) To promote the expansion of traditional neighborhoods, as
appropriate;
(4) To ensure a diversity of housing types, sizes, and costs and
integrated nonresidential opportunities; and
(5) To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
B. District regulations. Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the
Town Residential–New Development District. All uses must conform to
the lot, yard setback, and maximum height requirements stipulated
herein, as well as other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
R-2 Town Residential District (New Development)
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Single-family home 15,000
square feet
50 20 10 20
Duplex 7,500
square feet
per unit
50 20 10; 0 at
common
wall
30
Churches 30,000
square feet
Public and private
schools
30,000
square feet
150 at
building
setback
line; 50 at
street line
50%
30 30 50
35
Public park and
recreation areas
No
minimum
40% 30 30 30
Accessory Uses
Home occupations:
see Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
See primary use above to which it is accessory
§ 575-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-22
1:547
R-2 Town Residential District (New Development)
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Customary uses
accessory to above
Essential services
C. Transfer of development rights (TDR). Properties within the R-2 New
Development Zone that are designated by the Bellefonte Borough
Council as TDR-receiving areas may receive development credits from
approved TDR-sending areas. Residential development densities may
be increased by a maximum of one single-family home or two duplex
units per acre. In order to achieve the TDR-receiving-area permitted
densities, permitted lot sizes may be reduced to a minimum of 10,000
square feet per single-family home and 5,000 square feet per duplex
unit.
D. Master plan development option. In order to facilitate the development
of new communities that will be compatible with the existing built
environment and the character of the Borough, while providing local
amenities for nearby residents, applicants may utilize the master plan
development option to incorporate limited commercial uses into a
master planned development. Such commercial uses shall constitute no
more than 10% of the total acreage of the entire site and no more than
25,000 square feet of total gross floor area. In addition, no individual
commercial use shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Commercial uses shall be limited to neighborhood retail, professional
offices, and child day-care uses. Master planned developments shall
conform to the district regulations set forth above and shall also
conform to the design and performance standards as follows:
(1) A master planned development shall consist of an area not less than
10 acres.
(2) A master planned development shall be designed to be pedestrianoriented
and less dependent upon the automobile. Commercial
development opportunities should be located in such a way as to be
primarily accessible from within the community. As such, sidewalks
and interconnected open space networks are essential to the
master planned development. In addition, the street network shall
be designed to provide for multiple routes to a single location by
both automotive and nonautomotive forms of transportation.
Parking for the automobile shall be required but will be done in a
§ 575-22 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-22
1:548
manner that has minimal physical, aesthetic and environmental
impacts.
(3) Commercial developments shall employ design standards that are
sensitive to the predominately residential character of the
community.
(4) Drive-through operations shall not be permitted.
(5) Gasoline sales and service stations shall not be permitted.
(6) Commercial developments shall conform to the following bulk,
density and setback requirements:
Master Plan Development Option — Commercial Uses (R-2 District)
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Primary Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Neighborhood retail
Professional office
1 acre 50
Child day-care uses 30,000
square
feet
150 30% 30
30 —
child
day
care
50 35
§ 575-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-22
1:549

ARTICLE VI
Multifamily Residential District (R-4)
§ 575-23. Intent.
The intent of the Multifamily Residential District is to promote the
following:
§ 575-24. District regulations.
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Multifamily Residential
District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum
height requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate
requirements of this chapter.
R-4 Multifamily Residential District
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Open Space
Required/
Maximum
Density
Permitted
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Townhouse: see Use
Regulations, § 575-74
20/unit 20 15 feet
at ends
30
Apartment
20% open
space
150 30 30 20
Duplex 6 units/acre 70 20 10; 0 at
common
wall
30
Patio homes 6 units/acre 70 20 15; see
definition
30
Churches 1 acre
minimum lot
size
75
50%
30 30 50
35
A. To provide for high-density multifamily residential development
opportunities;
B. To provide for low- and moderate-income housing;
C. To promote a diversity of housing types and character; and
D. To meet minimum standards of health and safety by protecting against
hazards and nuisances.
§ 575-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-24
1:551
R-4 Multifamily Residential District
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Open Space
Required/
Maximum
Density
Permitted
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Public and private
schools
1 acre
minimum lot
size
75 30
Public park and
recreation areas
No minimum 40% 30
30 50
Accessory Uses
Home occupations:
see Supplemental
Regulations
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
Customary uses
accessory to above
See primary use above to which it is accessory.
Essential services
§ 575-25. Conditional uses in R-4 District.
A. Group homes. Intent: The following conditions are intended to provide
for the siting and operating of group homes within the Nittany Valley
Region while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to
the neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects.
(1) The applicant shall be required to secure all necessary federal,
state and/or local permits. All materials, including but not limited
to those associated with permits, submitted to any federal, state or
local governing body or regulatory agency shall also be submitted
to the municipality for review, comment and, if applicable,
approval.
(2) The municipal governing body may impose other site-specific
conditions as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety
and welfare.
§ 575-24 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-25
1:552
ARTICLE VII
Highway Commercial District (HC)
§ 575-26. Intent.
The intent of the Highway Commercial District is to promote the following:
§ 575-27. District regulations. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
05032010-01; 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 041618-01]
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Highway Commercial
District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum
height requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate
requirements of this chapter.
A. To permit a concentration of retail establishments, commercial offices,
and community facilities that may be too large or intensive to adapt to a
downtown or village setting;
B. To minimize the impacts of highway commercial activity;
C. To encourage the clustering of commercial establishments;
D. To encourage shared development features; and
E. To meet minimum standards of health, safety and welfare by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
§ 575-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-27
1:553
Highway Commercial Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
All retail
establishments for the
sale, service, and
rental of goods
Eating and drinking
establishments
Hotels and motels
Professional offices
Business and financial
services
Personal services
Instruction of fine arts
Photography studios
Motor vehicle services
and sales
Bus passenger services
Automobile service
stations
Commercial parking
lots
Transportation
terminals
Amusement
enterprises
Arenas, stadiums, and
commercial
auditoriums
Motion-picture and
other theaters
Government offices
The
minimum
lot size
shall be
determined
on the basis
of the
minimum
width,
maximum
coverage,
yard
setback,
parking and
other
requirements
contained
in this
chapter
150 30%
buildings;
70% total
impervious
50 15 50 35
§ 575-27 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-27
1:554
Highway Commercial Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Public and private
institutions of higher
education
Emergency service
facilities
Community centers
Clubs, lodges, and
fraternal organizations
Outpatient medical
clinics and offices
Adult day-care centers
Hospitals
Opticians and optical
goods dealers
Animal hospitals and
veterinary offices
Funeral homes/
mortuaries
Self-storage facilities
Essential services
Places of worship
Public or private
schools
The
minimum
lot size
shall be
determined
on the basis
of the
minimum
width,
maximum
coverage,
yard
setback,
parking and
other
requirements
contained
in this
chapter
150 30%
buildings;
70% total
impervious
50 15 50 35
Accessory uses
customary to the
above
See primary use above to which it is accessory
§ 575-28. Design standards.
§ 575-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-28
1:555
A. Front yard landscaping strips shall be required along the road (see
Article XX, Landscaping).
B. Off-street loading spaces and outdoor storage areas (exclusive of
outdoor sales) shall be screened from the roads and adjoining
properties (see Article XX, Landscaping).
C. Shared parking facilities shall be required where applicable (see Article
XIX, Off-Street Parking and Loading).
D. On-site lighting of buildings and surrounding areas shall employ
hooded or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, and security
lighting should be directed toward the building rather than the area
around it.
E. Speaker and/or public address systems used in external areas shall be
designed to keep audible impact at ambient levels.
§ 575-28 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-28
1:556
ARTICLE VIII
Central Business District (CBD)120
§ 575-29. Intent.
The intent of the Central Business District is to promote the following:
§ 575-30. Development standards.
§ 575-31. District regulations.
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Central Business District.
All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height
requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate requirements
of this chapter. Adult-oriented businesses shall not be permitted within the
Central Business District.
A. To serve as the Nittany Valley Region's commercial, cultural and civic
core;
B. To provide for retail, service and office uses of appropriate scale in
appropriate locations.
C. To promote uses oriented towards pedestrian customers and create
continuous shopping frontage;
D. To maintain Bellefonte's historic character;
E. To promote adaptive reuse of existing buildings;
F. To encourage mixed-use commercial and residential opportunities; and
G. To meet minimum standards of health, safety and welfare by protecting
against hazards and nuisances.
A. All construction, alteration and/or demolition for buildings located
within the Central Business District and the boundaries of the
Historical Architectural Review Board District shall be subject to the
guidelines, standards and approval processes of the Bellefonte Historic
District and the Historical Architectural Review Board.
B. To maintain the unique character of historic Bellefonte, buildings
should not be branded using an architectural style of a company.
Therefore, franchise architecture (building design that is trademarked
or identified with a particular chain or corporation and is generic in
nature) shall not be permitted.
A. Permitted uses.
120. Editor's Note: Maps showing the Central Business District boundaries on the Zoning Map,
as adopted in 1994, and the 2006 adopted Central Business District Boundaries, based
upon recommendations of the Nittany Valley Joint Comprehensive Plan, are on file in the
Borough offices, where they are available for inspection.
§ 575-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-31
1:557
Amusement enterprises
Art and dance studios
Art galleries
Bakeries with retail sales
Banks
Bed-and-breakfasts
Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations
Computer and software sales
Community centers (includes senior centers and youth centers)
Dry cleaner service retailers with no dry cleaner operation
Eating and drinking establishments
Essential services
Farmers market
Florists
Government offices
Health and fitness centers
Hotels
Jewelry stores
Laundromats
Libraries
Live/work units
Medical and dental offices
Motion picture and other theaters
Multifamily residential*
Multi-shop arcade stores**
Museums and galleries
Neighborhood retail stores
Opticians and optical goods dealers
Personal services
Pharmacies
Photocopy and office supply stores
Photography studios
Places of worship [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 05032010-01]
Professional offices
Public or private schools
Repair establishments (including small appliance, shoe and
electronic, but excluding automotive)
§ 575-31 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-31
1:558
Special events, contingent upon Borough Council approval
Tailors and seamstresses
Tattoo establishments [Added 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 041618-01]
Transportation terminals
NOTES:
* Multifamily residential development shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of any structure, except for those units developed
within residential condominiums by conditional use.
** The development of multi-shop arcade stores shall be limited to
the adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Customary. All uses customary to the uses listed above.
(2) Residential. Residential uses shall be permitted on the upper
stories of mixed-use buildings (ground-floor residential
development shall not be permitted) and in existing residential
buildings and carriage houses (the construction of new accessory
buildings, outbuildings, carriage houses, or other accessory units
shall not be permitted for residential use).
(3) Craft/artisan studio/limited manufacturing. Studios/limited
manufacturing may be permitted subject to the following criteria:
(a) Retail sales activities must occupy the ground-floor storefront
portion of the building.
(b) Manufacturing activities are limited to the rear of the groundfloor
portion of the building.
(c) Manufacturing is limited to products made for on-site retail
sales, off-site art and craft sales, and e-commerce sale.
(d) Manufacturing facilities may occupy no more than 50% of the
total floor area.
(e) Craft and artisan studios containing health and environmental
hazards that reach beyond the limits of the property shall not
be permitted. (For example: noise and/or odors associated with
the fabrication process may limit studio activity.)
(f) Welding and/or machining shall not be permitted in the craft/
artisan studio or limited manufacturing space.
(4) Outdoor cafes.
(a) Outdoor seating may be provided as an accessory use to eating
and drinking establishments.
§ 575-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-31
1:559
§ 575-32. Lot requirements.
§ 575-33. Building requirements.
(b) At a minimum, a sidewalk width of six feet must be maintained
between the limits of the outdoor seating area and the roadway
edge of the sidewalk.
(c) The applicant shall secure a permit from Bellefonte Borough
prior to providing outdoor seating. At the request of the
applicant, this permit may be renewed on an annual basis by
Bellefonte Borough.
(5) Youth day care. Youth day-care facilities shall be permitted as an
accessory use to churches, health and fitness centers, or in
adaptive reuse of residential buildings.
C. Conditional uses. Conditional uses shall conform to all applicable
conditional use criteria contained within this section and chapter.
(1) Residential condominiums.
(2) Public or private parking structures.
A. Height requirement.
(1) The height of any building constructed within the Central Business
District shall be within 10% of the average height of all buildings
along the shared street front of the block within which the building
is to be constructed. However, no building shall be constructed that
is less than 30 feet in height or more than 50 feet in height, except
as provided for in the conditional use provisions of this district.
(2) To encourage architectural detailing and features consistent with
the historic character of Bellefonte's downtown, the height of
buildings within the Central Business District shall be measured
from the average of the ground-floor elevation to the finished
ceiling of the highest habitable space.
B. Front yard setback. The front yard setback of any building constructed
within the Central Business District shall be, at a minimum, zero feet
from the interior edge of the sidewalk and, at a maximum, within 10%
of the average setback of all buildings along the shared street front of
the block within which the building is to be constructed. However, no
building shall be constructed with a front yard setback that is greater
than five feet.
C. Side yard setback: no minimum.
D. Rear yard setback: no minimum.
§ 575-31 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-33
1:560
§ 575-34. Use and performance standards.
§ 575-35. Conditional use criteria for residential condominium
development.
The building height restriction may be expanded by 10 feet (to a maximum
height of 60 feet); the maximum building footprint may be expanded by up
to 20,000 additional square feet (to a maximum of 50,000 square feet); the
maximum building width may be expanded by up to 150 additional feet (to
a maximum of 250 feet) and/or the front yard setback may be extended, by
conditional use, subject to the following:
A. Building size. The total footprint of any building constructed within the
Central Business District shall not exceed 30,000 square feet, except as
provided for in the conditional use provisions of this district.
B. (Reserved)121
C. Facade standards. Buildings constructed on assembled lots with a total
width greater than 50 feet shall have facades that vary the plane of the
front facade and shall contain varied roof shapes using height and
architectural features.
D. Building materials. All materials to be used in the construction or
alteration of buildings located within, or to be constructed within, the
Bellefonte Historic District shall be subject to the Bellefonte Historical
and Architectural Review Board process.
A. Outdoor sales and storage of merchandise and/or materials shall be
permitted in accordance with § 495-15, Display of merchandise on
sidewalks.
B. The dispensing of and retail sale of gasoline products for vehicular use
shall not be permitted.
C. Adult businesses shall not be permitted.
D. New ground-floor residential uses shall not be permitted (except for
those developed by conditional use within residential condominium
developments).
E. Street venders shall be permitted as an extension of an existing
business, by permit only, with necessary permits, sales tax number, DEP
food handler's permit, health permits, and/or insurance.
A. The project must meet the definition of a residential condominium,
which is hereby defined as "a building dedicated for multifamily
residential use within which each individual dwelling unit is owned by
an individual person or persons with a requirement that the building
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding maximum building width, was repealed
2-17-2014 by Ord. No. 02172014-01.
§ 575-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-35
1:561
itself and all related facilities and common areas are owned and
maintained by a condominium property owners' association."
B. The maximum number of living units that can be constructed on the
property shall be 35 units per acre.
C. The project must provide for various sizes of condominium living units.
D. Site design shall be sensitive to environmental concerns and shall
minimize impervious coverage to the greatest extent possible. Blasting
shall be specifically addressed and reviewed by Borough Council. Only
upon determination of no adverse effect will blasting be permitted.
E. The design of landscaping, outdoor lighting, and outdoor space shall be
a component of the plan.
F. Parking shall be provided at a minimum of two spaces per residential
dwelling unit.
G. All required parking (surface, structure and/or underground) shall be
located on site and subject to the requirements of Chapter 500,
Subdivision and Land Development. Preference will be given to parking
located to the rear of the building, except as follows:
(1) Side yard or front yard parking may be permitted to provide
connectivity to adjacent parking areas and allow for an overall
improvement to the district's parking network.
(2) Side yard or front yard parking that does not connect to adjacent
parking areas may be provided through construction of an on-site
parking structure.
H. If all required parking cannot be accommodated on site, the applicant
shall provide 1.5 spaces per living unit on site, include specific
conditions on providing off-site parking, include design during the
subdivision and land development process for the required two spaces
per unit, and post surety for the remainder (the number of parking
spaces above 1.5 spaces per unit that cannot be built on site) with the
stipulation that a traffic study be done to evaluate need and establish
the threshold for completion of the additional spaces. Upon reaching
the established and agreed upon thresholds, the developer would be
required to construct the additional spaces.
I. A condominium association shall be formed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Condominium Act,122 and condominium documents shall
be provided to the Borough and recorded with the Centre County
Recorder of Deeds.
J. Other provisions as are determined by the Borough Council to be
necessary to provide for the general public health, safety and welfare.
122. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 575-35 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-36
1:562
§ 575-36. Conditional use criteria for public or private parking
structures.
The maximum building footprint may be expanded by up to 20,000
additional square feet (to a maximum of 50,000 square feet); the maximum
building width may be expanded by up to 150 additional feet (to a maximum
of 250 feet); and/or the front yard setback may be extended by conditional
use, subject to the following:
A. Parking structures shall include space for ground-floor commercial
development.
B. A traffic study shall be prepared to show the proposed number of
parking spaces, proposed ingress and egress areas, and any associated
impacts to the road network and local traffic flows.
§ 575-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-36
1:563

ARTICLE IX
Waterfront Business District (WBD)
§ 575-37. Intent.
The intent of the Waterfront Business District is to promote the following:
§ 575-38. Development standards.
§ 575-39. District regulations.
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Waterfront Business
District. All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum
height requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate
A. To complement the Central Business District.
B. To make efficient use of the existing historic buildings located within
the Borough and retain any historic character of the area by providing
adaptive reuse opportunities.
C. To develop properties with uses that contribute to the economic vitality
of the Borough.
D. To encourage uses that are sized and designed to complement the
desired theme of the WBD and can be adequately housed within the
existing/proposed facilities.
E. To minimize the detrimental effect on existing sensitive and natural
features and improve compatibility with adjoining uses.
F. To participate in the provision and use of pedestrian access throughout
the WBD.
G. To ensure that adequate vehicular circulation and parking are part of
the proposed use.
H. To, wherever practical, make use of shared amenities with other nearby
uses for parking, loading, vehicular access, signage, stormwater
management, etc.
A. All construction, alteration and/or demolition of buildings located
within the Waterfront Business District and the boundaries of the
Historical Architectural Review Board District shall be subject to the
guidelines, standards and approval processes of the Bellefonte Historic
District and the Historic Architectural Review Board.
B. To maintain the unique character of historic Bellefonte, buildings
should not be branded using an architectural style of a company.
Therefore, franchise architecture (building design that is trademarked
or identified with a particular chain or corporation and is generic in
nature) shall not be permitted.
§ 575-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-39
1:565
requirements of this chapter. Adult-oriented businesses shall not be
permitted within the Waterfront Business District.
A. Permitted uses.
Amusement enterprises
Art, dance, and photography studios
Bakeries
Banks
Boathouses
Clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations
Community centers (includes senior centers and youth centers)
Dry cleaners and laundromats
Eating and drinking establishments
Essential services
Farmers' market
Florist, with or without greenhouse
Government offices
Health and fitness centers
Hotels and motels
Light industrial uses
Live/work units
Medical and dental offices
Motorcycle and ATV repair establishments
Multi-shop arcade stores*
Multifamily residential**
Museums, galleries, libraries
Neighborhood retail stores***
Personal services
Places of worship [Added 5-3-2010 by Ord. No. 05032010-01]
Professional offices
Public or private parks
Public or private schools
Public or private surface parking lots
Radio and television studios and transmitters
Repair establishments (including small appliance, shoe, and electronic,
but excluding automotive)
Research, engineering or testing laboratories
Transportation terminals
§ 575-39 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-39
1:566
§ 575-40. Lot requirements.
NOTES:
* The development of multi-shop arcade stores shall be limited to
the adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
** Multifamily residential development shall not be permitted on the
ground floor of any structure, except for those units developed
within residential condominiums by conditional use.
*** Neighborhood retail shall be defined as individual retail
establishments of less than 20,000 total square feet.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Customary. All uses customary to the uses listed above.
(2) Residential. Residential uses shall be permitted on the upper
stories of mixed-use buildings (ground-floor residential
development shall not be permitted) or on the upper stories of
accessory structures (e.g., garages). The construction of new
accessory buildings, outbuildings or other accessory units shall not
be permitted for a primary residential use.
(3) Outdoor cafes. Outdoor seating may be provided as an accessory
use to eating and drinking establishments, subject to the following:
(a) At a minimum, a sidewalk width of six feet must be maintained
between the limits of the outdoor seating area and the roadway
edge of the sidewalk, if applicable.
(b) At a minimum, for properties along the waterfront, a
pedestrian walkway width of 10 feet with an improved width of
five feet must be maintained between the limits of the outdoor
seating area and the edge of the stream bank or stream-bank
fence. The pedestrian walkway may be located within the
required stream-bank setback.
(c) The applicant shall secure a permit annually from Bellefonte
Borough prior to providing outdoor seating.
(4) Youth day care. Youth day-care facilities shall be permitted as an
accessory use to churches, health and fitness centers, or in
adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Residential condominium.
(2) Public or private parking structures.
A. Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be determined on the
basis of the minimum width, maximum coverage, yard setback, parking
and other requirements contained in this chapter.
§ 575-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-40
1:567
§ 575-41. Use and performance standards.
The following use and performance standards shall apply to all
developments within the Waterfront Business District:
B. Maximum impervious coverage: 75% (any combination of buildings and
impervious surfaces).
C. Building height. To encourage architectural detailing and features
consistent with the historic character of the waterfront area, the height
of buildings within the Waterfront Business District shall be measured
from the average of the ground-floor elevation to the finished ceiling of
the highest habitable space.
D. Minimum building height: 20 feet.
E. Maximum building height (primary structure): 50 feet.
F. Maximum building height (accessory structure). The maximum building
height of any accessory structure constructed within the Waterfront
Business District shall be 20 feet; however, the highest point of the
accessory structure shall be no taller than the highest point of the
primary structure.
G. Front yard setback. The front yard setback of any building constructed
within the Waterfront Business District shall be, at a minimum, zero
feet from the interior edge of the sidewalk and, at a maximum, within
10% of the average setback of all buildings along the shared street front
of the block within which the building is to be constructed.
H. Side yard setback: no minimum (except for properties bordering the
waterfront).
I. Stream setback (properties bordering the waterfront). A minimum
setback area of 20 feet shall be maintained. This setback area shall be
measured from the top of the stream bank and/or the stream-bank fence
(if applicable) and the nearest edge of the building or any improved or
occupiable space (e.g., patio, outdoor seating area, etc.).
J. Rear yard setback: no minimum.
A. Outdoor sales and storage of merchandise and/or materials shall be
permitted in accordance with § 495-15 of the Code
B. The dispensing of and retail sale of gasoline products for vehicular use
shall not be permitted.
C. Adult businesses shall not be permitted.
D. Buildings shall be spaced appropriately to ensure privacy and sufficient
light and air. Fences, walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used, as
appropriate, for the protection and aesthetic enhancements of property,
§ 575-40 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-41
1:568
§ 575-42. Conditional use criteria for residential condominium
development.
The building height restriction may be expanded by 10 feet (to a maximum
height of 60 feet); the maximum building footprint may be expanded by up
to 20,000 additional square feet (to a maximum of 50,000 square feet); the
maximum building width may be expanded by up to 150 additional feet (to a
maximum of 250 feet) and/or the front yard setback may be extended, at the
discretion of Borough Council, by conditional use, subject to the following:
the privacy of its occupants, the screening of objectionable views, and
the reduction of noise.
E. Land use buffers shall be required when an industrial land use abuts a
nonindustrial land use (see Article XX, Landscaping). The required
buffer between industrial and nonindustrial uses may be waived by
Council if the location of the buffer is an area developed as a parking lot
to be shared between the industrial and nonindustrial uses or where the
buffer is impractical due to the location of existing structures.
F. Pedestrian access shall be maintained along the stream bank.
G. The minimum floor area for new dwelling units and/or live/work units
shall be 750 square feet.
H. To protect health, safety and welfare, a stream-bank fence may be
required at the recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
I. New ground-floor residential uses shall not be permitted (except for
those developed by conditional use within residential condominium
developments).
J. Street vendors shall be permitted as an extension of an existing
business by permit only with necessary permits, sales tax number, DEP
food handler's permit, health permits, and/or insurance.
K. All applicable federal and state regulations regarding the situation of
structures in floodplains shall apply. Evidence of compliance shall be
required.
L. Speaker and/or public address systems used in external areas shall be
designed to keep audible impact at ambient levels. (See Chapter 372,
Noise.)123
A. The project must meet the definition of a residential condominium,
which is hereby defined as "a building dedicated for multifamily
residential use within which each individual dwelling unit is owned by
an individual person or persons with a requirement that the building
itself and all related facilities and common areas are owned and
maintained by a condominium property owners' association."
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-42
1:569
§ 575-43. Conditional use criteria for public or private parking
structures.
The maximum building footprint may be expanded by up to 20,000
additional square feet (to a maximum of 50,000 square feet; the maximum
B. The maximum number of residential units that can be constructed on
the property shall be 35 units per acre.
C. The project must provide for various sizes of condominium living units.
D. Site design shall be sensitive to environmental concerns and shall
minimize impervious coverage to the greatest extent possible. Blasting
shall be specifically addressed and reviewed by Borough Council. Only
upon determination of no adverse effect will blasting be permitted.
E. The design of landscaping, outdoor lighting, and outdoor space shall be
a component of the plan.
F. Parking shall be provided at a minimum of two spaces per residential
dwelling unit.
G. All required parking (surface, structure and/or underground) shall be
located on site and subject to the requirements of Chapter, 500,
Subdivision and Land Development. Preference will be given to parking
located to the rear of the building, except as follows:
(1) Side yard or front yard parking may be permitted to provide
connectivity to adjacent parking areas and allow for an overall
improvement to the district's parking network
(2) Side yard or front yard parking that does not connect to adjacent
parking areas may be provided through construction of an on-site
parking structure.
H. If all required parking cannot be accommodated on site, the applicant
shall provide 1.5 spaces per living unit on site, include specific
conditions on providing off-site parking, include design during the
subdivision and land development process for the required two spaces
per unit, and post surety for the remainder (the number of parking
spaces above 1.5 spaces per unit that cannot be built on site) with the
stipulation that a traffic study be done to evaluate need and establish
the threshold for completion of the additional spaces. Upon reaching
the established and agreed upon thresholds, the developer would be
required to construct the additional spaces.
I. A condominium association shall be formed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Condominium Act, and condominium documents shall be
provided to the Borough and recorded with the Centre County Recorder
of Deeds.
J. Other provisions as are determined by the Borough Council to be
necessary to provide for the general public health, safety and welfare.
§ 575-42 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-43
1:570
building width may be expanded by up to 150 additional feet (to a maximum
of 250 feet) and/or the front yard setback may be extended, at the discretion
of Borough Council, by conditional use, subject to the following:
A. Parking structures shall include space for ground-floor commercial or
office development.
B. A traffic study shall be prepared to show the proposed number of
parking spaces, proposed ingress and egress areas, and any associated
impacts to the road network and local traffic flows.
§ 575-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-43
1:571

ARTICLE X
Village Commercial District (VC)
§ 575-44. Intent.
The intent of the Village Commercial District is to promote the following:
§ 575-45. District regulations. [Amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
05032010-01 ]
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Village Commercial District.
All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height
requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate requirements
of this chapter.
Village Commercial District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
All permitted uses in
the R-2 Infill
Development
Residential District
Duplex
Neighborhood retail
Eating and drinking
establishments
Bakeries
Banks
Medical and dental
offices; opticians and
optical goods dealers
7,500
square feet
50 25%
building;
65% total
impervious
*see
below
5 20 25
A. To concentrate a mix of residential uses, neighborhood-scale retail
uses, personal services, community facilities, specialty shops, and home
occupations.
B. To encourage adaptive reuse of buildings.
C. To provide for the public convenience and to avoid congestion.
§ 575-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-45
1:573
Village Commercial District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Business, professional,
and financial offices
Clubs, lodges, and
fraternal organizations
Personal services
Photography studios;
art and dance studios
Tailors and
seamstresses;
laundromats; dry
cleaner service
retailers
Florists; jewelry stores
Government offices;
community centers;
public or private
schools
Repair establishments
(except for automotive,
marine, and trucking
repair)
Communications
antennas mounted on
an existing public
utility transmission
tower, existing
communication tower
and structures
Places of worship
Accessory Uses
Home occupations: see
Supplemental
Regulations
§ 575-45 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-45
1:574
Village Commercial District Regulations
Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Bed-and-breakfast
establishments: see
Supplemental
Regulations
Essential services
Customary incidental
and secondary uses
and structures
necessary to the above
primary uses
Communications
equipment building
See primary use above to which it is accessory
NOTE:
* The front yard setback shall be generally consistent with the existing streetscape on a per-block
basis, as determined by the Zoning Officer; but in no case shall the front yard setback be less than
10 feet.
§ 575-46. Building requirements.
All uses must conform to the requirements stipulated herein, as well as
other appropriate requirements of this chapter.
A. No structure shall exceed 2,500 square feet in ground-floor area.
B. All drive-in primary and accessory commercial uses and all mobile
homes (even if placed on permanent foundations) are prohibited from
the Village District.
C. This district shall be limited to two total uses per property, either
residential and/or commercial.
§ 575-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-46
1:575

ARTICLE XI
Heavy Industrial District (HI)
§ 575-47. Intent.
The intent of the Heavy Industrial District is to promote the following:
§ 575-48. District regulations.
Only uses listed below shall be permitted in the Heavy Industrial District.
All uses must conform to the lot, yard setback, and maximum height
requirements stipulated herein, as well as other appropriate requirements
of this chapter.
Heavy Industrial District Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Primary Uses
Research, engineering
or testing laboratories
Self-service storage
facilities
Any production,
manufacturing,
assembly, processing,
cleaning, repair,
storage, or
distribution of goods,
materials, foodstuffs,
and other products
not involving a retail
activity except as an
accessory use
Auto wrecking, junk
and scrap
establishments
The
minimum lot
size shall be
determined
on the basis
of the
minimum
width,
maximum
coverage,
yard
setback,
parking and
other
requirements
contained in
this chapter
150 50%
building;
75% total
impervious
50 50 50 35
A. To cluster industrial development in appropriate locations.
B. To provide sites for heavy industries separated from incompatible uses.
C. To minimize the hazards and nuisances resulting from the operation of
industries.
§ 575-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-48
1:577
Heavy Industrial District Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Freight and trucking
terminals
The manufacture,
processing, or bulk
storage of natural gas,
petroleum, gasoline,
and other petroleum
derivatives and
explosives
Moving and storage,
parcel delivery and
express transfer
stations
Public and private
storage and
maintenance of motor
vehicles
Public utility facilities
Heavy equipment
sales, service, and
repair
§ 575-48 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-48
1:578
Heavy Industrial District Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Refractories
Wholesale
distribution,
warehouses,
contractor storage
and office facilities
The
minimum lot
size shall be
determined
on the basis
of the
minimum
width,
maximum
coverage,
yard
setback,
parking and
other
requirements
contained in
this chapter
150 50% 50 25 50 35
Accessory Uses
Customary, incidental
and secondary uses
and structures to the
above primary uses
Essential services
Communications
equipment building
See primary use above to which it is accessory
Conditional Uses
Billboards
Recycling facilities
Incinerators
Mineral resource
processing facilities
Sawmills
See § 575-50, Conditional use criteria
§ 575-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-48
1:579
Heavy Industrial District Regulations
Permitted Uses Lot Requirements
Yard Setback and Height
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Size
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Slaughtering,
processing, rendering,
and packaging
operations
Communications
towers and antennas
NOTE: No more than 10% of the gross floor area may be used for sales/showroom space.
§ 575-49. Design standards.
A. Front yard landscaping shall be required along public road frontage
(see Article XX, Landscaping).
B. Off-street loading spaces and outdoor storage areas (exclusive of
outdoor sales) shall be screened from public roads and adjoining
properties (see Article XX, Landscaping).
C. On-site lighting of buildings and surrounding areas shall employ
hooded or screened fixtures that confine glare to the site, and security
lighting should be directed toward the building rather than the area
around it.
§ 575-48 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-49
1:580
ARTICLE XII
Conditional Uses
§ 575-50. Conditional use criteria.
A. Application requirements.
(1) A potential applicant for a conditional use permit shall request a
conference with the Zoning Officer prior to application submission.
The Zoning Officer may recommend that the applicant request a
conference with the Planning Commission prior to application
submission.
(2) A preapplication conference shall not be regarded as a formal
application for the proposed conditional use. The filing of any
report, sketch plan, plat or map prior to or at such conference shall
not constitute submission of a plan or application for conditional
use, nor shall such materials be binding on subsequent submissions
by the applicant.
(3) An application for conditional use shall meet all content
requirements of a preliminary land development plan. In addition,
the applicant shall provide a copy of all proposed, pending and/or
approved federal or state permits necessary for the conduct of
operations. The municipality may require additional site-specific
information necessary for a thorough review of the application.
(4) The required filing fee for conditional use application review and
hearing will be specified by municipal resolution. This fee may from
time to time be amended by municipal resolution.
B. Application procedures.
(1) Following the required preapplication conference, the applicant
shall present to the municipality a complete application submission
as per the guidelines set forth in the application requirements
section above and shall appear before the municipal governing
body to request that a public hearing be set on the application.
Upon this request, the municipal governing body shall establish the
date, time and place for a public hearing. The public hearing shall
be held no later than 60 days following the meeting at which the
municipal governing body receives the request, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the application at the next
legally advertised regular meeting following the receipt of the
application from the municipal governing body or at a meeting
specially called for this purpose and shall make a recommendation
to the municipal governing body prior to the public hearing.
§ 575-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-50
1:581
§ 575-51. Communications towers.
(3) The applicant shall provide public notice, as defined by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, concerning the public
hearing for the proposed use.
(4) In addition to the public hearing notice, the applicant shall provide,
via certified mail, a written notice to the owners of all property
within 1,500 feet of the site proposed for conditional use. Copies of
the certified mail return receipts shall be provided to the
municipality by the applicant.
(5) The municipal governing body shall render a written decision on
the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
municipal governing body. The municipal governing body may
approve the request for a conditional use permit or may deny the
request for a conditional use permit with a specific list of reasons
for such denial. The municipality shall mail written notification of
the governing body's action, including the specific list of reasons
for denial, if applicable, to the applicant within five days of said
action by the governing body.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting
and operating of communications towers within the Nittany Valley
Region while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to
the neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects. Further, these regulations are intended to achieve
the following:
(1) To provide a competitive and wide range of communications
services while minimizing the impacts of the communications
infrastructure.
(2) To require the shared use of existing communication towers,
buildings and structures.
(3) To ensure that new towers will be safe, placed in suitable locations,
and blend into the environment to the greatest extent practicable.
(4) Legally preexisting towers and antennas will not be required to
meet the following requirements unless specifically indicated.
B. General site requirements.
(1) Maximum height of communications towers shall be 200 feet,
measured from the average natural grade of the approved facility
area to the top point of the tower or antenna, whichever is greater,
except for locations above elevation 1,400 feet as shown on United
States Geological Survey Topographic Quadrangle mapping, in
which case the maximum height shall be 50 feet or the average
height of the trees within a two-hundred-foot radius of the
proposed location of the tower, measured from the average natural
§ 575-50 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-51
1:582
grade of the approved facility area to the top point of the tower or
antenna, whichever is greater.
(2) The tower and/or antenna must be of a concealed, camouflaged or
stealth design that blends into the natural environment. This
includes tree poles or architecturally screened antennas that can
be attached to existing structures other than towers. Except as
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), lighting
shall be prohibited from these concealed towers and/or antennas.
(3) Minimum setback of communications towers shall be as required in
the applicable zoning district, except for the following: No
communications tower shall be located closer than 200 feet or
110% of the proposed communications tower height, whichever is
greater, from any existing residential lot line, regardless of the
zoning district in which the tower and associated buildings are
located. No new residential structures shall be built within this
setback area after the cell tower has been approved and the plan
recorded. In cases where this includes adjacent property, an
easement shall be obtained from the property owner limiting
residential development within the setback area as long as the
tower is in existence.
(4) No minimum lot, lease area and/or license area size is required for
a communications facility; however, the setbacks of the parent tract
perimeter boundaries shall apply.
(5) Applicants shall submit to the municipality evidence of the need for
the communications tower in the proposed location and that the
applicant has exhausted all alternatives to locate on an existing
tower or structure. Applicants shall also demonstrate via written
evidence from a qualified, licensed and professional engineer that,
in terms of location and construction, there are no existing towers,
communications towers, buildings, structures, elevated tanks or
similar uses able to provide the platform for the communications
antenna within a one-mile radius of the chosen location.
(6) In order for the applicant to demonstrate that co-location is not a
practicable alternative, coverage diagrams and technical reports
shall be submitted to the municipality which demonstrate that:
(a) Co-location on existing communications towers is not
technically possible in order to serve the need;
(b) Planned equipment would exceed the structure capacity of
existing communications towers within the municipality,
considering existing and planned use of the communications
tower;
(c) Existing communications towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost;
§ 575-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-51
1:583
(d) Planned equipment will cause radio frequency (RF)
interference with other existing or planned equipment for that
communications tower, and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost; or planned equipment can be
placed so it can function effectively and at least in parity with
existing or approved communications towers which do not
have the space on which other similar equipment is in place or
planned; or
(e) Other reasons make it impractical to place the equipment
planned by the applicant on existing and approved
communications towers.
(7) Communications antennas may be attached to any building or
structure in all zoning districts, including, but not limited to, a
church, a municipal or governmental building or facility, an
agricultural building, a building owned by a utility, communications
tower, water tank and major electrical transmission lines, pursuant
to the following:
(a) Antennas shall not be permitted on single-family homes,
townhomes and duplexes.
(b) Building and zoning permits shall be required.
(c) Antennas shall be no taller than 15 feet above the existing
structure.
(8) Any proposed communications tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically and in all respects, to accommodate both
the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height, or for at
least one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet but less than
100 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
(9) A communications tower may not be located on a lot that is listed
on a historic register or in an officially designated state or federal
historic district.
(10) The applicant shall present documentation that the
communications tower is designed in accordance with all
applicable state and federal regulations.
(11) Guy wires, if utilized, must be anchored no closer than 25 feet from
any property line. Guy wires shall not cross or encroach on any
utility rights-of-way.
(12) Except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, no
communications tower may use artificial lighting or strobe lighting
at night.
§ 575-51 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-51
1:584
§ 575-52. Mining, quarrying and mineral resource processing
facilities.
(13) Upon request, the applicant shall provide to the municipality, not
more than once per year, information indicating that the approved
communications tower or antenna remains structurally sound. The
applicant shall bear the costs of any inspection necessary to
determine the structural soundness of a communications tower or
antenna.
(14) All federal, state and local environmental regulations regarding the
placement and operation of communications facilities must be
followed in the design, review and construction, and operation
processes.
(15) All federal, state and local permits required for the siting and
operation of communications towers, antennas and facilities shall
be provided to the municipality for review.
(16) Communications facilities shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis. The site shall be visited only for necessary
observation and maintenance.
(17) Fencing and screening of facilities shall be required. A security
fence (including security wiring), of approved design, shall not
exceed eight feet in height and shall completely enclose the
communications facility and the anchored locations of guy wires, if
used.
(18)No signs displaying commercial advertisement shall be permitted
on the communications tower or antenna.
(19) The applicant must demonstrate on the land development plan that
parked vehicles at the facility will not impede traffic on the
adjoining cartways.
(20) Communications facilities that cease to operate for 12 consecutive
months shall be determined to have terminated operation and must
be removed within 90 days at the expense of the facility and/or
property owners.
(21) Site-specific conditions. The municipal governing body may impose
other conditions not listed above as are shown to be necessary and
appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
provided that those conditions do not preclude the reasonable
conduct of communications tower and antenna siting and
operations within the Nittany Valley Region.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the
reasonable development of minerals within the Nittany Valley Region
while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to the
§ 575-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-52
1:585
neighborhood in which the mining or quarrying operation will occur
against possible detrimental effects of the mining operations.
B. Buffer requirements. Mining and quarrying sites shall be located and
buffered in such a manner as to minimize the noise-related impacts
associated with the operation. The options set forth below allow
flexibility for the applicant to select criteria best suited for a given
operation while providing the municipality with the opportunity to
ensure a reasonable level of protection against possible negative
impacts. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall employ either
set of the following conditions:
(1) Option 1. The buffer requirement of Option 1 consists of a
landscaped soil berm.
(a) The required berm shall have a total height of not less than six
feet.
(b) Where there is a difference in elevation on opposite sides of the
berm, the height shall be measured from the highest elevation.
(c) To accommodate the required landscaping, the berm shall be
constructed of earthen materials, shall be a minimum of 25 feet
in width, and shall be stabilized with topsoil and grass and/or
other suitable vegetative ground cover.
(d) The top of the berm shall be landscaped to provide additional
noise attenuation. The landscaping shall consist of the
following:
[1] A minimum of one row of coniferous trees shall be planted.
The required trees shall be spaced no less than 10 feet and
no more than 15 feet apart on center. The trees shall be a
minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting. Due
to varying tree spread patterns and hardiness in the local
environment, the required trees shall be a variety of
spruce or fir to ensure that the noise-attenuation effects
are maximized.
[2] One row of evergreen shrubs shall be planted and shall be
spaced at an interval of not more than five feet, though not
evenly spaced across as screen width. The shrubs shall be
at least three feet tall at the time of planting.
(e) The berm requirements may be modified or waived by the
municipality for that portion of the site which has natural
geologic conditions, features and resources which would serve
the same objectives as the soil berm and which, in the opinion
of the Municipal Engineer, should not be disturbed by the berm
construction.
§ 575-52 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-52
1:586
(f) In combination with the above berming requirements, the
following setback distance requirements shall apply:
[1] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 100
feet of land zoned or used other than HI Heavy Industrial.
[2] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 100
feet of a public road right-of-way.
[3] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 300
feet of any residential dwelling unit unless the applicant
obtains written permission of the property owner(s)
consenting to the operation.
[4] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 500
feet of any public building, public park or other public
institution unless the governing body having jurisdiction
over the site has consented to the operation.
[5] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 750
feet of any structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places.
[6] Mixing plants, crushers and other processing mechanisms
on the site shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any
residential dwelling unit unless the applicant obtains
written permission of the property owner(s) consenting to
operation. In order to minimize noise and traffic impacts,
processing mechanisms shall, if practicable, be located on
the site. All processing mechanisms shall be located at the
lowest practicable site elevation.
(2) Option 2. The criteria set forth in Option 2 are designed to be
utilized in the instance where the applicant for a conditional use
permit elects against the berming provisions included in Option 1
above or if, for any other reason, the berming provisions included
in Option 1 above are not employed. The conditions outlined in
Option 2 consist of a dense vegetative buffer.
(a) Series of trees.
[1] The required buffer will consist of a series of coniferous
trees and deciduous canopy trees to be planted within a
thirty-foot-wide buffer area according to the following
schedule:
Required Plant Units per 100 Feet
Type Number
Coniferous 24
Canopy 10
§ 575-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-52
1:587
[2] Twenty percent of the coniferous trees shall be a minimum
of eight feet in height at the time of planting. The
remainder of the coniferous trees shall be a minimum of
six feet in height at the time of planting. All canopy trees
shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of
planting.
(b) Due to varying tree spread patterns and hardiness in the local
environment, the required coniferous trees shall be a variety of
spruce or fir to ensure that the noise attenuation effects are
maximized.
(c) In combination with the above landscape buffer requirements,
the following distance requirements shall apply:
[1] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 200
feet of land zoned or used other than HI Heavy Industrial.
[2] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 200
feet of a public road right-of-way.
[3] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 1,500
feet of any residential dwelling unit unless the applicant
obtains written permission of the property owner(s)
consenting to the operation.
[4] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 1,500
feet of any public building, public park or other public
institution unless the governing body having jurisdiction
over the site has consented to the operation.
[5] Mining or quarrying activities shall not occur within 1,500
feet of any structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places.
[6] Mixing plants, crushers and other processing mechanisms
on the site shall not be located within 1,500 feet of any
residential dwelling unit unless the applicant obtains
written permission of the property owner(s) consenting to
operation. In order to minimize noise and traffic impacts,
processing mechanisms shall, if practicable, be located on
the site. All processing mechanisms shall be located at the
lowest practicable site elevation.
(3) The following conditions shall apply to both Option 1 and Option 2:
(a) Installation and maintenance along perimeter.
[1] At a minimum, the operator shall install and/or maintain
the required buffer along the perimeter of the visible
portion of the area to be operated. This portion shall be
defined as any part of the site visible from any adjacent
parcel or any adjacent public right-of-way. An exception to
§ 575-52 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-52
1:588
this requirement may, at the request of the applicant,
be granted by the municipal governing body when the
following apply:
[a] The adjacent parcel is presently in use as a mining or
quarrying operation.
[b] The proposed use is an expansion of the existing use.
[2] In order to maintain the integrity of the buffer, if such a
request is approved, the buffering requirements shall
extend to the entirety of the existing site.
(b) In order to maximize noise attenuation, the buffer shall, to the
greatest extent practicable, be located within a fifty-foot zone
nearest to the adjacent property or public right-of-way from
which the specified distance requirements have been
measured.
(c) Prior to planting of any required landscaping, the applicant
shall provide evidence of a soils test to determine soil
suitability to sustain the required landscaping and to
determine any necessary soil supplements or remedies.
(d) Alternative designs for buffering may be approved if the
applicant can show, through the submission of a
comprehensive noise study, that the alternative designs are at
least as effective in controlling noise-related impacts.
(e) All required buffering shall be installed prior to
commencement of operations.
(f) Adequacy of the buffer shall be determined by the Zoning
Officer and the Municipal Engineer.
(g) Site-specific exceptions to the buffering requirement shall be
available for vehicular access, public and other infrastructure
improvements (including drainage systems), maintenance
requirements and safety considerations. The nature and
location of such exceptions shall be approved by the Zoning
Officer and the Municipal Engineer.
(h) The operator shall provide a bond or other acceptable security
in the amount of 100% of the cost of improvements for
approved buffering, which will be returned after the
improvements have been satisfactorily installed and have been
in place for one year. Acceptability shall be determined on
advice of the Municipal Solicitor. Adequacy as to amount shall
be determined by the Municipal Engineer.
C. Reclamation.
§ 575-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-52
1:589
(1) All proposed, pending and/or approved reclamation plans required
by any governing body or regulatory agency shall be submitted to
the municipality for review and consideration prior to issuance of a
conditional use permit.
(2) The operator will provide a bond or other acceptable security to
ensure that land will be reclaimed in accordance with the approved
reclamation plan.
(3) In order to minimize additional adverse impacts to adjacent
properties, when any mining or quarrying operation (including
legally nonconforming operations) expands into an area governed
by the provisions set forth in this chapter, efforts should be made by
the operator, to the greatest extent practicable, to commence
reclamation activities on the existing mined or quarried portion of
the site. Completed areas should be resurfaced and restored in
accordance with approved reclamation plans prior to or concurrent
with the commencement of extraction activities in an undisturbed
area.
(4) The applicant shall provide a bond or other acceptable surety, in an
amount determined to be acceptable by the Municipal Engineer, to
cover the costs of repairs to any municipal roads to be used by the
applicant or by other haulers to and from the site. The amount of
said bond or surety shall be reviewed annually, and any unused
portion shall be returned to the applicant within one year after the
site is no longer in use.
D. Monitoring.
(1) Timing. Unless the uses and conditions prescribed in a conditional
use permit are implemented within a maximum period of two years
of the issuance of all permits required by any federal or state
agency having regulatory authority over the conduct of such uses,
the conditional use permit shall expire. Evidence of receipt of all
necessary permits shall be provided to the municipality. The
municipal governing body may grant a maximum extension of one
year under exceptional circumstances.
(2) Discontinuation of use. Discontinuation of any nonconforming
operation for a period of more than one year shall result in the loss
of vested status for that operation. "Discontinuation" is defined as
the cessation of excavation or processing of material.
(3) Inspection. The municipality shall conduct an annual inspection to
ensure compliance with all approved conditions. An inspection fee
may be set by the municipal governing body by resolution.
(4) Blast notification. The applicant shall maintain a blast notification
list for anyone who requests notification and who owns, resides on
or has a business interest in property located within, at a minimum,
a radius of one mile around the site. Notification shall be provided
§ 575-52 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-52
1:590
at least 24 hours prior to blasting. The applicant shall provide an
up-to-date blast notification list for municipal review at the time of
annual inspection.
(5) Preblast survey. Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit,
the applicant shall provide documentation of the condition of
buildings, structures, wells, infrastructure, protected and unique
natural resources and historic sites located within 1,500 feet of the
proposed site. Adequacy of the survey shall be determined by the
Municipal Engineer. Any preblast surveys required by any federal
or state agency subsequent to the issuance of a conditional use
permit shall be provided to the municipality.
(6) Explosives storage. No explosive materials may be produced or
stored on site in any manner that is potentially endangering to
surrounding properties.
(7) Landscaping. The municipality shall require that the applicant
submit an annual survey of the health of all required landscaping.
This survey shall be required in each of the first two years after
planting. The applicant shall replace any trees not surviving as of
the date of each survey.
(8) Modification of conditions. No approved conditional use shall be
modified or expanded in ground area unless the plan is amended
and approved in accordance with procedures applicable to initial
approval of the conditional use permit.
E. Other conditions.
(1) Operational conditions. To further protect the health, safety and
welfare of adjacent property owners, the following conditions shall
also apply:
(a) Hours of operation. The hours of operation at any site may be
limited as the municipal governing body deems advisable.
(b) Dust mitigation. A dust-mitigation plan shall be provided. Dust
and debris from any mining and quarrying operation shall not
be permitted to accumulate within the right-of-way of any
public road. Adequate applicable technology shall be employed
on the site to prevent any dust and/or materials from being
washed and/or blown from the site. Adequacy of the dustmitigation
plan shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer.
(c) Environmental impact analysis. The applicant shall provide an
environmental impact analysis to address the following:
watershed impacts, surface water and/or groundwater
resource impacts, air quality impacts and erosion,
sedimentation and stormwater impacts. Adequacy of the
analysis shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer. The
applicant shall provide any environmental impact reports,
§ 575-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-52
1:591
statements or analyses that are required by any federal, state
or county governing body or regulatory agency having
jurisdiction over the conduct of mining and quarrying
operations. The applicant will be required to demonstrate that
the proposed project will not substantially injure or detract
from the lawful existing or permitted uses of neighboring
properties, will not injure any water supply sources, and will
not adversely affect any fragile environmental system of
particular significance.
(d) Stockpiles. No material stockpiles shall be located within 200
feet of the property line nor within 300 feet of a public right-ofway.
Any materials or wastes deposited on any stockpile shall
be prevented from washing, blowing or otherwise transferring
off the premises. Such stockpiles shall contain extracted
material from the on-site mining operation only.
(2) Site-specific conditions. The municipal governing body may impose
other conditions not listed above as are shown to be necessary and
appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
provided that those conditions do not preclude the reasonable
development of minerals within the Nittany Valley Region. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Development phasing schedule. The municipal governing body
may impose conditions related to the phasing of mining and
quarrying activities as it deems necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare.
(b) Open space dedication. The municipal governing body may
impose conditions related to the provision of open space in
order to implement the land use goals of the Nittany Valley
Regional Comprehensive Plan.
(c) Fencing and screening. The applicant shall provide details
showing any fencing and/or screening proposed to be located
on the site. The municipal governing body may impose fencing
and/or screening conditions as it deems necessary to protect
public health, safety and welfare. At a minimum, the applicant
shall provide a fence at least six feet in height around the
perimeter of the mining operation.
(d) Lighting. The applicant shall provide details showing the
height, number, types and location of any fixtures proposed to
be located on the site. All lighting shall be directed away from
adjacent properties and/or adjacent streets. The municipal
governing body may further impose lighting conditions as it
deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
(e) Public facilities and services. The applicant shall provide
evidence that the proposed project will not adversely affect the
logical, efficient and economical extension of public facilities
§ 575-52 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-52
1:592
§ 575-53. Solid waste disposal sites, incinerators and recycling
facilities.
and services throughout the municipality and the Nittany
Valley Region.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting
and operating of solid waste disposal and/or recycling facilities within
the Nittany Valley Region while providing reasonable protection to the
municipality and to the neighborhood in which the facility will be
located against possible detrimental effects.
B. Buffer requirements. The following buffer requirements apply to all
solid waste disposal sites, incinerators and/or recycling facilities. The
buffer requirements are applicable to all roads, dwelling units, and/or
structures in existence at the time that application has been made to
the municipality.
(1) All sites shall be screened from all adjacent streets and all adjacent
property by a sight-obscuring fence or wall of no less than seven
feet in height.
(2) No portion of any parcel of land on which any solid waste disposal
facility, incinerator or recycling facility is sited may be closer than:
(a) Two thousand five hundred feet from any public or private
school or hospital;
(b) Two thousand feet from any public or private water well which
is used for human or animal consumption;
(c) One thousand five hundred feet from any church, public
library, public park or trail, or any other public facility;
(d) One thousand five hundred feet from any surface water body;
(e) Two thousand feet from any residential dwelling unit; and
(f) Five hundred feet from any public road.
C. Traffic impact analysis. The applicant shall submit a traffic impact study
prepared by a qualified professional. The scope of said study shall be
determined by concurrence between the Municipal Engineer and the
Zoning Officer and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Analysis and description of existing conditions and traffic volumes
for the external road network serving the site.
(2) A base condition analysis shall be prepared to establish existing
levels of service followed by analysis and description of projected
traffic conditions based on the land uses proposed within the
development. Trip generation rates for project peak hours shall be
§ 575-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-53
1:593
prepared, as well as the internal/external trip distribution and
intersection analysis.
(3) The analysis shall address the traffic impacts of the proposed
development along with surrounding traffic-generating land uses in
the area, including land use changes. The analysis will demonstrate
the adequacy of the area road network and identify access and
traffic control measure improvements impacted by the proposed
development and surrounding land uses.
(4) The analysis shall contain recommended internal and off-site road
improvements. These recommended improvements should be
specific as to location and scope of work required along with a
phased schedule for possible implementation.
(5) Utilization of alternate modes of transportation (e.g., rail) shall be a
component of the traffic impact analysis. Evaluation of trafficmitigation
measures as it relates to alternative transportation and
future site development should also be addressed.
D. General site requirements.
(1) The applicant shall provide a bond or other acceptable surety, in an
amount determined to be acceptable by the Municipal Engineer, to
cover the costs of repairs to any municipal roads to be used by the
applicant or by other haulers to and from the site. The amount of
said bond or surety shall be reviewed annually, and any unused
portion shall be returned to the applicant within one year after the
site is no longer in use.
(2) An environmental assessment plan shall be provided to identify and
mitigate impacts of the proposed development on the environment,
public health, and public safety, including, but not limited to,
aesthetics, air quality, water quality, stream flow, fish and wildlife,
nuisance management, dust control, litter control, plants, aquatic
habitat, threatened or endangered species, water uses, and land
use. Proof of environmental impairment liability insurance may be
required. Consideration should be given to the minimization of land
disturbance activities within an exceptional value (EV) or high
quality (HQ) subwatershed or other areas of environmental
concern.
(3) A mitigation plan shall be submitted to identify procedures for the
removal of any mud, dust or debris on any public road from the
traffic entering or exiting the site. All mud, dust or debris shall be
kept off the public road and adjoining lands.
(4) An illumination plan shall be required. Lighting on the site shall use
full cutoff fixtures with shielding in appropriate areas to limit
spillover onto adjacent properties.
(5) A site security plan shall be required.
§ 575-53 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-53
1:594
(6) The applicant shall be required to secure all necessary federal,
state and/or local permits. All materials, including but not limited
to those associated with permits, submitted to any federal, state or
local governing body or regulatory agency shall also be submitted
to the municipality for review, comment and, if applicable,
approval.
(7) Any suspension or revocation of any necessary federal or state
permit shall constitute an automatic suspension or revocation of
the conditional use permit.
(8) Inspection. All solid waste disposal, recycling or incinerator
establishments shall permit code enforcement officers to inspect
the premises at any time without advance notice during normal
business hours.
(9) The municipal governing body may impose other site-specific
conditions as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety
and welfare.
§ 575-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-53
1:595

ARTICLE XIII
Supplemental Regulations
§ 575-54. Adult-oriented businesses.
§ 575-55. Auto wrecking, junk and scrap establishments.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to fulfill the recommendations of
the Nittany Valley Regional Comprehensive Plan as it relates to the
siting and operation of adult-oriented businesses.
B. Prohibited uses. Consistent with the Nittany Valley Regional
Comprehensive Plan, adult-oriented businesses shall not be permitted
within the Borough of Bellefonte.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to fulfill the recommendations of
the Nittany Valley Regional Comprehensive Plan as it relates to the
siting and operation of auto wrecking, junk and scrap establishments.
B. Performance requirements. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all auto wrecking, junk and scrap establishments shall meet
the following regulations:
(1) All material shall be placed in such a manner that it is incapable of
being transferred off the premises by wind, water or other natural
cause.
(2) No material shall be placed within the front, side or rear yard
setback areas. All yard setback areas shall at all times be kept
clean, vacant and maintained with grass and vegetative cover.
(3) All paper, cloth, rags and other fibers, and activities involving the
same, other than loading and unloading, shall be within fully
enclosed buildings.
(4) All materials and activities not within fully enclosed buildings shall
be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet high. Such fence
shall be completely sight-obscuring from the nearest point on the
lot line and maintained in good condition. No such fence may be
permitted in any yard setback area. Any gate in a fence shall be
similarly constructed and maintained and shall be kept securely
locked at all times when the establishment is not in operation. The
yard setback areas should be planted in grass, trees, bushes and
other vegetative cover.
(5) All gasoline and oil shall be drained from any junked motor vehicle
into containers and stored at only one aboveground location on the
premises.
(6) Fire hazards shall be minimized by the segregation of combustible
from incombustible materials and the provision of adequate aisles
for escape and fire-fighting equipment.
§ 575-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-55
1:597
§ 575-56. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting and
operating of bed-and-breakfast establishments within the Nittany Valley
Region while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to
the neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects. In addition to the underlying district regulations
specified in this chapter, all bed-and-breakfast establishments shall meet
the following requirements:
(7) The storage of material in piles shall not exceed 10 feet high.
(8) The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.
(9) Every structure erected upon the lot after the enactment of this
chapter shall be of fireproof construction.
(10)No structure or storage shall be within 100 feet of a body of water,
stream or sinkhole.
A. Bed-and-breakfast establishments with five or less guest rooms shall be
owner-occupied. The owner of the facility must physically reside on site
during all periods that the facility is open to the public and that guests
are housed.
B. Establishments with six to nine guest rooms may be approved by
Borough Council, through conditional use, subject to review and
comment by the Borough Planning Commission. The owner or
professional manager must physically reside on site during all periods
that the facility is open to the public and that guests are housed.
C. The building and parking areas shall be located and maintained in a
manner compatible with the general character of the surrounding
neighborhood. Exterior alterations, additions or changes to the
dwelling unit in order to accommodate or facilitate a bed-and-breakfast
establishment shall retain the residential character of the dwelling unit
and the surrounding neighborhood.
D. A bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be limited to rooms within the
single-family detached residential dwelling unit. Consideration may be
given to the placement of overnight accommodations in accessory
buildings, subject to the following:
(1) The primary building to which the subject building is accessory is
designated as a local or nationally registered historic property, and
the subject accessory building is a contributing building to the
historic district designation.
(2) The applicant shall furnish evidence that an approved system of
water supply and sewage disposal will be utilized.
§ 575-55 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-56
1:598
§ 575-57. Boardinghouses.
As of the effective date of this chapter, boardinghouses are not a permitted
use within Bellefonte Borough. However, permitted boardinghouses in
operation as of the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the
following regulations:
(3) Applicants shall maintain the existing exterior character of the
building.
(4) Accessory structures may not be altered in such a way that the
roofline of the accessory structure is made higher than the roofline
of the primary structure.
E. No off-street parking, other than that which is required in Article XIX of
this chapter, entitled "Off-Street Parking and Loading," shall be
required for bed-and-breakfast establishments with two or less guest
rooms. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
additional guest room over two. All such parking shall be unobtrusive.
Parking within a Conservation District shall be located and/or
landscaped in such a manner that it is screened from the view of
adjacent properties.
F. Signage for bed-and-breakfast establishments shall be consistent with
the requirements set forth in the Borough's sign regulations.
G. No outdoor storage shall be permitted other than that which would be
permitted under existing zoning.
H. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to guests of the bed-andbreakfast
establishment. No cooking or kitchen facilities shall be
permitted in any of the guest room units.
I. The length of stay per guest shall be limited to 14 consecutive days and
45 total days in any twelve-month period.
J. In order to ensure compliance with all aforementioned criteria, the
applicant shall be required to submit a general site plan, obtain a
zoning permit, and satisfy the requirements of Bellefonte Borough's
adopted International Property Maintenance Code prior to receiving
guests for compensation.
K. Permits required for the establishment and operation of a bed-andbreakfast
establishment may be transferred upon the sale of the subject
property. Permits shall not be transferable from one location to another.
L. Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall comply with all applicable
federal, state and local regulations.
M. Use of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit as a bed-andbreakfast
establishment shall not constitute an abandonment of singlefamily
residential use as a use by right.
§ 575-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-57
1:599
§ 575-58. Cemeteries.
§ 575-59. Day-care facilities.
A. Maximum gross density for boardinghouses shall not be greater than
21.8 boarding rooms per acre, but in no case shall any boardinghouse
consist of more than five rooms.
B. All boardinghouses shall meet the requirements of the Bellefonte
Borough adopted International Property Maintenance Code.
C. In addition to the district regulations specified, all boardinghouses shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIX of this chapter, entitled "Off-Street
Parking and Loading."
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting
and operating of cemeteries within the Nittany Valley Region while
providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to the
neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects.
B. General requirements. Any person desiring to establish or maintain a
cemetery or extend the boundaries of any existing cemetery shall file an
application for a conditional use permit which shall include the
following additional information:
(1) The names, addresses and applicable state licenses of all officers
and directors of the corporation or organization which will be in
charge of the operation of the cemetery.
(2) A map showing the exact location, exterior boundaries and legal
description of the property which is proposed to be used for a
cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery. Said map shall also
show any water sources, bodies of water, and/or wells existing on
site or within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property,
along with cemetery buildings and burial plots.
(3) A proposal for the perpetual care of the facility and proof of
financial ability to develop and maintain the facility in such a
manner as to prevent the proposed cemetery from becoming a
public nuisance.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting
and operating of day-care facilities within the Nittany Valley Region
while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to the
neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects.
§ 575-57 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-59
1:600
§ 575-60. Essential services.
Essential services shall be categorized as follows: on-lot facilities, area
facilities, and plants, and shall be subject to the following:
§ 575-61. Golf course facilities.
B. Performance requirements. In addition to the district regulations
specified, all day-care centers shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Location. Day-care centers shall be located only on lots with direct
motor vehicle access onto collector or arterial streets in the
districts where they are permitted uses, except in the HC District,
where they shall also be permitted on local streets.
(2) Screening. All outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by
fence or wall with a minimum height of four feet and screened with
an evergreen planting that shall reach a height of at least six feet at
maturity. Such play areas shall not be placed in the front or side
yard setback area.
(3) License. Day-care facilities must be licensed by the appropriate
state agency and a copy of the license provided to the Borough.
A. On-lot facilities shall consist of sewer laterals, telephone lines, water
connections, and so on, that connect the use on the lot to the utility or
essential services. On-lot essential services shall be considered
accessory uses or structures that are customary to the primary use.
B. Area facilities shall consist of telephone transfer stations, electrical
transmission connectors, and other small structures or facilities
necessary for area dissemination of the utility or essential services.
These shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The lot shall be capable of meeting minimum area requirements or
shall be legally part of another conforming lot so that, in the event
the facility is no longer necessary, the lot will be usable according
to the district regulations;
(2) The proposed facility is necessary;
(3) The proposed facility will be landscaped or designed to conform
with its surroundings and the neighborhood; and
(4) Access to the facility will be adequate.
C. Plants or other major facilities for generating, storing or treating shall
meet all requirements for the district in which they are located. These
shall be permitted only in the Industrial District.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the siting
and operating of golf course facilities within the Nittany Valley Region
while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to the
§ 575-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-61
1:601
§ 575-62. Home occupations.
neighborhood in which the facility will be located against possible
detrimental effects.
B. General site requirements.
(1) Minimum tract size for a golf course shall be 200 acres.
(2) No golfing green or fairway shall be closer than 100 feet to any lot
line, except for miniature golf facilities, where the underlying
zoning district setbacks shall apply.
(3) Golfing tees, tee boxes, and greens for the same fairway or range
may not be separated by a street. Access drives shall be located in
such a manner as to provide maximum site distances for motorists.
(4) Driving ranges shall have screens or fences of a height and location
sufficient to prevent golf balls from landing on adjoining properties.
(5) Site boundary areas, if wooded, shall remain wooded to the
greatest extent practicable.
(6) An illumination plan shall be required. Lighting on the site shall use
full cutoff fixtures with shielding in appropriate areas to limit
spillover onto adjacent properties.
(7) Accessory and incidental uses (including pro shop and eating and
drinking establishment) shall be permitted; however such uses
shall only continue as long as the golf course is in operation.
(8) A minimum of four off-street parking spaces per hole shall be
provided. In addition, one off-street parking space per 200 square
feet of restaurant and/or retail space shall be provided.
A. Home occupations. A home occupation may be conducted in a dwelling
by the occupants of the dwelling, subject to the following regulations.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments are not regulated as a home
occupation; see § 575-56.
B. Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses by right after a
home occupations permit has been approved. The fee for the home
occupations permit shall be set by Bellefonte Borough Council through
resolution. All home occupations shall be conducted according to the
performance standards established in this section.
C. The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for enforcement of the following
performance standards regulating home occupations. Upon
determination by the Zoning Officer that any of the standards are being
violated, the Zoning Officer shall send a notice of violation to the
persons conducting the home occupation and landowner pursuant to
Section 616.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10616.1. The persons receiving said
§ 575-61 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-62
1:602
notice may appeal the determination of the Zoning Officer to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
D. The standards regulating the conduct of home occupations are as
follows:
(1) Unobtrusiveness. Home occupations shall be conducted
unobtrusively and shall not impinge upon neighbors nor adversely
affect the residential character of the premises or the
neighborhood.
(2) Employees. Home occupations shall be carried on only by members
of the family who reside in the dwelling unit, plus not more than
one full-time additional employee or equivalent, except in the R-1
District, where no employees shall be permitted.
(3) Area. Home occupations may be conducted in the dwelling unit,
garage or outbuildings on the premises. However, the total space
devoted to home occupations, including storage or materials, shall
not exceed 25% of the finished floor space of the principal dwelling
unit.
(4) Display. There shall be no use of show windows, displays or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or
clients, except as permitted by in Article XXI, Signs, of this chapter.
(5) Storage. There shall be no exterior storage of materials for the
home occupation.
(6) Alterations. No exterior alterations, additions or changes to the
residential character of the dwelling unit shall be permitted in
order to accommodate or facilitate a home occupation.
(7) Servicing. No repetitive servicing by truck or service vehicles for
delivery of supplies or materials to the home occupation shall be
permitted.
(8) Sale of goods. Occasional sale of tangible goods produced on the
premises is permitted, provided that the number of customers
coming to the premises to inspect or purchase such goods does not
average more than 10 per week. Such tangible goods shall be
limited to articles produced solely on the premises, such as works
of art, sculptures or products of a hobby (such as, but not limited
to, ceramics, model trains, and so forth).
(9) Client, patient or customer visit. No business of any type shall be
conducted as a home occupation that involves more than an
average of 10 visits per week to the premises by clients, customers
or patients.
(10) Traffic. Home occupations shall not create additional traffic
patterns or parking problems for neighbors by conducting a
business that requires more than one street-parking space more
§ 575-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-62
1:603
than what the home would need if the occupants did not engage in
a home occupation.
(11) Parking. No more than two additional off-street parking spaces may
be created on the premises for home occupations. Such additional
parking spaces shall be located behind the dwelling unit and
effectively screened from view by neighbors and shall be
approachable via existing driveways. Paving of front or side yard
setbacks to provide for additional parking spaces for home
occupations shall be considered obtrusive and damaging to the
character of the neighborhood and is not permitted.
(12) Noise, fumes and so forth. No home occupation shall create noise,
fumes, smells, vibrations or other effects that are heard, observed,
smelled or felt beyond the property line.
(13) Guide. In general, all home occupations are permitted that meet
the above performance standards. As a guide or help, the following
is a partial list of uses that are generally permitted or not permitted
as home occupations:
(a) Examples of uses generally permitted as home occupations:
[1] Domestic service, such as babysitting (with no more than
five children who are not regular members of the
household). See supplemental regulations for day-care
facilities.
[2] Occasional personal service, including hairstyling but
excluding beauty salon services.
[3] Professional offices requiring infrequent client visits, such
as architecture or very specialized or otherwise limited
practice of law, engineering or accounting.
[4] Teaching and tutoring.
[5] Catering services provided off site.
[6] Information services conducted by computer network or
mail.
(b) Examples of uses generally not permitted as home
occupations.
[1] Vehicle repair, maintenance or inspection (other than on
the personal vehicles of occupants of the premises).
[2] Retail or wholesale sale of goods produced off premises.
[3] Commercial printing.
[4] Antiques store.
§ 575-62 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-62
1:604
§ 575-63. Nuisance standards.
All uses of land and structures shall be prohibited that:
§ 575-64. Portable storage units.
[5] Industrial production.
[6] Medical or dental clinic.
[7] Realty or insurance office.
[8] Beauty salons.
A. Produce heat or vibration perceptible by human senses beyond lot line;
B. Produce glare from any process that emits harmful ultraviolet rays,
including arc welding and acetylene-torch cutting, perceptible beyond
lot line; and
C. Produce electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emissions injurious to
human beings, animals or vegetation, or that interfere with the use of
any other property.
A. Intent. The following conditions are intended to provide for the use of
portable storage units for temporary storage within the Nittany Valley
Region while providing reasonable protection to the municipality and to
the neighborhood in which the units will be located against possible
detrimental effects.
B. General requirements. Portable storage units shall not be permitted as
permanent accessory structures in any zoning district. Such units shall
be permitted as a temporary use in the following districts, subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Portable storage units may be located in any residential zoning
districts and in the C-1 District. Such units shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the front property line.124
(2) Portable storage units may be allowed in nonresidential zoning
districts so long as the unit is placed in the rear or side yard area of
the site. Under no circumstances shall a portable storage unit be
placed in an area fronting a street or road or in a grass/landscaped
area or in the front parking lot of a commercial establishment. The
placement of portable storage units in fire lanes, passenger loading
zones, commercial loading zones, or public rights-of-way shall be
strictly prohibited.
(3) Placement of portable storage units shall occur with the
concurrence of the Zoning Officer after demonstrating that the
specific location can sufficiently accommodate the unit and
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-64
1:605
continue to provide adequate parking and public safety access
and provide for the general health, safety and welfare of nearby
residents. Under no circumstances shall a unit be placed so as to
interfere with any use of a sidewalk, bike path, or public right-ofway.
(4) No more than one portable storage unit per site may be permitted
in any residential zoning district. Such units shall be no larger than
eight feet wide by 16 feet long by eight feet high.
(5) No more than two portable storage units per site may be permitted
in any nonresidential zoning district. Such units shall be no larger
than eight feet wide by 40 feet long by eight feet high.
(6) Portable storage units shall not remain at any site within a
residential zoning district in excess of five consecutive days or in
excess of 10 days in any calendar year. No portable storage unit
shall remain at any nonresidential site in excess of 14 consecutive
days or in excess of 30 days in any calendar year.
(7) The owner and/or operator of any site on which a portable storage
unit is placed shall be responsible for ensuring that the unit is in
good condition and free from evidence of deterioration,
weathering, discoloration, rust, holes, etc.
(8) No form of waste, refuse or hazardous material shall be stored
within a portable storage unit.
(9) A portable storage unit shall have no signage other than a serial
number identifying the unit, the name, address and telephone
number of the person or firm engaged in the business of renting or
otherwise placing the unit.
(10) A permit shall be required for the placement of a portable storage
unit on any property within the municipality. Application for a
permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer. Said application shall
include the signature of the property owner or the owner's agent in
order to ensure that the owner has full knowledge of, and consents
to, placement of the portable storage unit on his or her property
and consents to conform to the provisions of this article.
§ 575-64 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-64
1:606
ARTICLE XIV
Use Regulations
§ 575-65. Uses not permitted are prohibited.
The use of land and structures shall be limited only to the primary and
accessory uses permitted in each zoning district, unless specifically
permitted, exempted or otherwise modified by this or other articles of this
chapter. All other uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. In addition
to the regulations stipulated for each use elsewhere in this chapter, the
following use regulations shall apply.
§ 575-66. Historical Architectural Review Board review.
In cases where a use regulation occurs within the boundaries of the
Historical Architectural Review Board District and involves construction or
alteration of buildings, the use activity may be subject to the guidelines,
standards and approval processes of the Bellefonte Historic District
Ordinance/Historical Architectural Review Board.
§ 575-67. Primary uses.
In the residential districts, no more than one primary use shall be permitted
in any single structure, nor more than one primary use in each of several
structures on each lot of record, provided that each structure shall meet all
other regulations of this chapter.
§ 575-68. Accessory uses.
All accessory uses, except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall
comply with the lot setback, yard setback, and maximum height
requirements for the primary use to which it is accessory.
§ 575-69. Accessory structures.
All accessory structures, except where otherwise permitted by this chapter,
shall comply with the lot setback, yard setback, and maximum height
requirements for the primary structure to which it is accessory. Accessory
structures may include, but are not limited to, the following. (See the R-2
Town Residential District standards for additional information pertaining
specifically to that zoning district.)
A. Small accessory structures. Small buildings of not more than 225
square feet in ground-floor area and not more than 10 feet in height are
permitted in the side and rear yard setback areas, provided they are not
placed closer than five feet from any lot line. Two abutting property
owners may erect a common accessory structure across or abutting
upon a common lot line in the rear yard setback area, provided that
such property owners supply the Zoning Officer with a copy of a written
agreement for erection and use of the structure, which agreement has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
§ 575-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-69
1:607
§ 575-70. Retail outlets.
Industrial uses may include a retail factory outlet for the sale of those
products produced on the premises, provided that the floor area of such
outlet does not exceed 25% of the total floor area of the primary structure
or, if there is more than one use in the primary structure, 25% of the
particular use, whichever is less. Wholesale distribution use may include
retail sales to the general public as an accessory use, provided that total
accessory uses do not exceed 25% of the total floor area of the use. Any
such retail outlet use must comply with the parking requirements.
§ 575-71. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools are permitted as accessory structures in any district,
provided that outdoor pools capable of containing water 18 inches or more
in depth shall meet the follow requirements:
B. Private garages. Private detached garages may be erected in rear
yards, provided that:
(1) If a corner lot, the setback from the street side shall conform to
front yard setback requirements.
(2) All other setbacks shall be five feet from the property lines unless
access is from an alley, in which case the setback shall be 20 feet,
except in the case of existing garages, which may be extended
along existing setback lines, or unless 40% or more of the
properties fronting on said alley along a block face has been
improved with buildings erected, altered or enlarged within the
twenty-foot setback, in which case the garage may be erected,
enlarged or altered up to the average setback distance of the 40%
or more of existing lots.
(3) No private detached garage shall exceed 15 feet in height.
C. Attached garages and carports. Attached garages and carports shall be
considered as a part of the main building and shall conform to all
regulations.
A. Setbacks. Swimming pools may not be located in any front yard or any
side yard setback area but may be located in the rear yard setback area,
provided that no part of the pool (measured from the water edge),
excluding paved area, accessory structures and fencing, shall be
located within 20 feet of the rear property line, nor closer to a side
property line than a distance equivalent to the side yard setback for an
accessory structure within the applicable district.
B. Fencing. All outdoor swimming pools below ground level shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than four feet in
height, which shall be constructed so as to exclude openings, holes, or
gaps larger than four inches in either height or width. If the wall of the
pool is above ground, the required fence or wall may be securely affixed
§ 575-69 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-71
1:608
§ 575-72. Automobile service stations.
In addition to the district regulations specified, all automobile service
stations shall meet the following regulations:
§ 575-73. Religious institutions.
Religious institutions shall be located only on lots with direct motor vehicle
access onto collector or arterial streets in the districts where they are
permitted uses.
§ 575-74. Townhouses.
In addition to the district regulations specified, the following regulations
shall apply to all townhouses:
to the top of the pool wall so that the total height of the wall of the pool
and the fence or wall shall be not less than four feet.
C. Gates and doors. All gates or doors opening through such required
fence or wall shall be equipped with a self-latching device capable of
being locked for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times
when not in use.
D. Lighting. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises so
as not to become a nuisance or annoyance to other property owners.
A. Enclosure. The dismantling of motor vehicles shall be performed only
within a completely enclosed building, and all dismantled motor
vehicles and parts thereof shall be stored within such building.
B. Fuel pumps. Fuel pumps may be located within the front yard setback
area, provided such are at least 30 feet from any lot line.
C. Access. The proposed structure shall not have an entrance or exit closer
than 200 feet to a public school, public library, church, theater or any
other public gathering place, hospital, playground or fire station.
D. Rights-of-way. No public garage or gasoline service station shall be
constructed, altered or enlarged except with provision for rendering all
services on the premises and not on the public streets.
E. Buffer. Buffer plantings shall be provided to screen the use from
adjacent residential properties. See Article XX, Landscaping.
A. Setbacks. When two or more attached dwelling units are proposed to be
placed upon a lot in single ownership, or on two or more abutting lots
under joint ownership, the front, side, and rear yard setback areas
stipulated in the district regulations are required only from the lot lines
that abut the property of another. Within the lot, however, the minimum
horizontal distance between facing walls of any two buildings shall be
40 feet.
§ 575-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-74
1:609
§ 575-75. Apartment houses.
In addition to the district regulations specified, the following regulations
shall apply to all apartment houses:
§ 575-76. Schools and nurseries.
Public and private nurseries, kindergartens, elementary, secondary and
postsecondary schools. Such schools shall locate in the districts where
they are permitted uses only when adjacent to the following street
classifications:
B. Number of units. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09082009-01]
(1) R-1 Zoning District: no more than six dwelling units attached side
by side by the use of a common wall.
(2) R-4 Zoning District: no more than 15 dwelling units attached side
by side by the use of a common wall.
C. Living area. Each dwelling unit shall consist of a minimum of 1,000
square feet of habitable living area.
D. Access. Each dwelling unit shall extend from ground to roof, with a
minimum of two independent outside entrances, at least one of which is
located on an opposite or abutting unit elevation. [Amended 9-8-2009
by Ord. No. 09082009-01]
E. Design. R-1 District only: The vertical plane of each dwelling unit shall
vary at least four feet, at both the front and back, from each adjacent
unit. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09082009-01]
F. Roofline. R-1 District only: Units shall be distinct at the roofline either
by variations in heights by at least 16 inches or by extension of common
fire walls at least four feet above the mean roofline of each unit.
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09082009-01]
G. Architecture. The Zoning Officer shall inform the landowner that the
desire of the Borough is that each dwelling unit be architecturally
distinct, yet all be similar in overall style.
H. Screening. Before a building permit will be issued, the landowner shall
submit to the Zoning Officer a landscape design that will include trees
and vegetation designed to screen and to make the premises attractive
to residents and neighbors.
A. All apartment houses shall meet the requirements of the Bellefonte
Borough International Property Maintenance Code.
A. Nurseries, kindergartens, and elementary schools shall be located only
on lots with direct motor vehicle access onto collector streets.
§ 575-74 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-76
1:610
§ 575-77. Uses omitted and prohibited.
This chapter is intended to apply to all conceivable uses and structures.
Under no circumstances, however, shall the following uses be permitted in
any district in the Borough:
§ 575-78. Minimum setback.
Where a lot abuts a street (including private streets) with right-of-way of
less than 50 feet in width, the front yard setback shall be measured from a
line parallel to and 25 feet from the center line of the street cartway.
§ 575-79. Fences.
Fences, hedges and freestanding walls are permitted in any yard setback
area unless otherwise restricted or prohibited by other provisions of this or
other ordinances.
B. Secondary and postsecondary schools shall be located only on lots with
direct motor vehicle access onto collector or arterial streets.
A. Any dumping, depositing or filling with refuse, garbage or building
debris not in accordance with state or Borough regulations or this
chapter.
B. The removal of topsoil and sod, except as part of the construction,
grading or alteration of an approved building, street, construction site
or other structure; the normal preparation and maintenance of lawns;
mining and quarrying; or the removal of sod as part of a recognized
farm or garden use.
C. The raising and keeping of horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, or other typical
farm animals, even as household pets, in a residential district, unless as
part of a permitted farm use meeting the requirements of the district in
which it is located. The keeping of backyard chickens, as well as
beekeeping is permitted in accordance with Chapter 193, Animals,
§ 193-1, Keeping of farm animals, and Article II, Chickens. [Amended
6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 060418-01]]
A. All fences in any front yard setback area or in any side yard setback
area facing a street shall not exceed a height of four feet. Fences in
other side yard setback areas and back yard setback areas shall not be
taller than six feet two inches high, measured from grade.
Measurements shall be made at each end of the fence and in the center
of the fence, which measurements, when averaged, shall not exceed
maximum allowable heights. Measurements shall be made
perpendicularly to the ground, which shall not be mounded solely to
increase the elevation of the fence. For the purposes of this chapter, the
end of the fence shall mean that point of the fence that deviates at an
angle from the section of fence being measured. Circular fences shall
be measured at three equidistant points on the circumference.
§ 575-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-79
1:611
§ 575-80. Projections.
Balconies, bay windows, chimneys and flues, cornices and eaves, fire
escapes, gutters and downspouts, sills, and unenclosed porches may project
into the specified yard setback areas of a lot but not more than three feet.
§ 575-81. Corner lots.
On a corner lot, the side yard abutting the street shall have a setback area
equal to the depth of the front yard setback area required for the use, and
shall be governed by all front yard setback requirements of this chapter. The
owner shall choose what shall be rear and side yards.
§ 575-82. Through lots.
On a through lot, the rear yard setback width shall be either the rear or
front yard setback width designated for the use, whichever is greater.
§ 575-83. Front building lines.
Maintaining established front building lines, with the exception of the R-2
Town Residential Zone–Infill Development Standard. In any residential zone
where 40% or more of the property upon one side of a street between
two street intersections has been improved with buildings at the time of
the passage of this chapter, all buildings or structures hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged on such frontage shall be so constructed that the front
building shall not be nearer to the street right-of-way than the average
distance of front building lines established on said 40% or more of existing
lots. When the said side of the street has not been improved or built upon to
the extent of 40% at the time of the passage of this chapter, no building or
structure shall be built or placed in such zone having the front line nearer to
the street right-of-way line than the minimum in such residential zone set by
this chapter. Corner lots shall conform to front building lines of all adjoining
streets.
§ 575-84. Exceptions to maximum height requirements.
No structure shall exceed the height limitations specified in this chapter,
except as allowed below.
B. On corner lots in residential zones, hedges, fences or other obstructions
to view are prohibited within a triangle extending 25 feet along the
street lines from a vertex at the intersection of the street lines. Such
hedges, fences and other obstructions to view may be permitted,
provided that, between the heights of three feet and eight feet above
the street level, there shall be a clear view across the triangle.
[Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord. No. 06152015-02]
C. Spite fences are specifically prohibited.
§ 575-79 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-84
1:612
§ 575-85. Mobile home placement.
Mobile homes and trailers are prohibited in all districts except within an
approved mobile home park.
§ 575-86. Wind energy systems. [Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No.
02022009-01]
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions, the following use
is specifically prohibited in all zoning districts:
§ 575-86.1. Arenas, stadiums and commercial auditoriums. [Added
4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 041618-01]
Arenas, stadiums and commercial auditoriums shall comply with the lot
setback, yard setback, and maximum height requirements for the zoning
district, except where otherwise permitted, as follows.
A. Exceptions. The maximum height requirements shall not apply to
belfries, bulkheads, cupolas or domes not used for human occupancy,
nor to chimneys, skylights, church spires, flagpoles, masts, aerials and
antennas, monuments, utility poles and ventilators, and ornamental or
necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided they are erected only to
such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve,
provided they are not intended for human occupancy as dwellings, and
provided that all such structures and appurtenances to structures shall
be erected in conformity with the laws, ordinances and regulations
relating to same.
A. The installation, erection or use of a wind energy system, wind turbines,
and/or associated towers for wind energy conversion.
A. Accessory structures to sports fields and athletic facilities. Accessory
structures customary to sports fields and athletic facilities, such as, but
not limited to, scoreboard structures, field house, restroom,
concessions, and/or storage buildings used to support sports fields and
athletic facilities for public or private schools shall be permitted in the
front and rear yard setback areas, provided they are not placed closer
than 20 feet from any lot line. Such structures shall be accessory to and
solely used as support facilities for sports fields and athletic facilities
and shall be located in close proximity and on the same property as the
sports fields and athletic facilities to which they are accessory. Said
accessory structures shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
B. Maximum height for lighting fixtures. Maximum height for lighting
fixtures customary to sports fields and athletic facilities shall not
exceed 90 feet in height.
§ 575-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-86.1
1:613

ARTICLE XV
Illumination
§ 575-87. Arrangement of lighting.
The illumination of any lot, use or structure shall be arranged in such a
manner that the direct rays of the light source shall not enter any dwelling
unit or fall within the right-of-way of any public street or highway.
§ 575-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-87
1:615

ARTICLE XVI
Outdoor Storage
§ 575-88. Requirements for outdoor storage.
The outdoor storage of materials shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A. All outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, and products, except that
finished products for retail sale to the public, in any district, shall be
completely screened from view from any public right-of-way by a sightobscuring
evergreen planting, fence or wall of at least six feet high;
B. All discarded organic rubbish or garbage stored outdoors shall be
placed in watertight, verminproof containers, except for privately used
one-family compost piles; and
C. Hazardous and flammable materials must meet DEP and EPA
guidelines, and evidence of such must be proven by the landowner.
§ 575-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-88
1:617

ARTICLE XVII
Waste and Sewage Disposal
§ 575-89. Sewage permit prerequisite.
All methods and plans for the disposal of sewage and wastes shall be
designed in accordance with regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection. A sewage permit issue by the Bellefonte
Authority shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a zoning permit.
§ 575-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-89
1:619

ARTICLE XVIII
Motor Vehicle Access
§ 575-90. Intent.
The following conditions are intended to provide motor vehicle access
regulations to protect the health, safety and welfare of the municipality.
§ 575-91. General regulations.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with motor vehicle access to a private street. The intent
of the following regulations is to provide safe and convenient access for
servicing, fire protection, traffic circulation and required off-street parking:
A. On arterial streets, access for each lot shall be limited to not more than
two driveways for the first 300 feet of frontage or fraction thereof and
one driveway for each additional 300 feet of frontage. On all other
streets, access shall be provided by not more than one driveway for the
first 50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof and one driveway for each
additional 50 feet of frontage. Single-family detached residential units
shall only be served by a single driveway.
B. No driveway shall be closer to the side or rear property line than five
feet, unless the two adjoining property owners mutually agree to a
common driveway in such form and manner acceptable for recording in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Centre County, Pennsylvania,
binding their heirs and assigns to the easement so created.
C. Residential districts. The principal purpose of a driveway in a
residential district is to provide vehicular access to a garage or carport
area. If a garage or carport area does not exist or is not intended for
construction, driveways shall be located in the side yard to the greatest
extent practicable.
D. Driveways which provide access individually to single-family and twofamily
dwellings on individual lots shall have a throat width of not less
than 10 feet or greater than 20 feet, and curb returns are not required.
A single driveway which provides joint access to no more than two
dwelling units on an individual lot shall have a throat width of not less
than 15 feet nor greater than 24 feet, and curb returns are not required.
Driveways which provide access to all uses other than single-family and
two-family dwellings shall have a throat width of not less than 15 feet or
greater than 24 feet, and the curb return radius shall not be less than
13 feet or greater than 55 feet.
E. In the R-4, HC and HI Districts, all driveways shall enter a public street
right-of-way at least 100 feet from its intersection with another public
street, except for intersections of two or more arterial streets, in which
case the minimum distance shall be at least 200 feet. In all other
districts, all driveways shall enter a public street right-of-way at least
§ 575-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-91
1:621
50 feet from its intersection with another public street of any
classification. For all cases cited above, the distance in which access
is prohibited shall be measured from the tangent of the curb return of
the intersecting street cartway to the tangent of the curb return of the
driveway.
F. Distance between driveways.
(1) When the use on a lot is single-family detached dwelling, singlefamily
semidetached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings or
two-family semidetached dwellings, and if two or more driveways
of the same lot, any of which serve more than one dwelling, enter a
public street right-of-way, the distance between the entrances of
the driveways shall be at least 50 feet, measured between the inner
edges of the driveway.
(2) When the use on a lot is other than single-family detached dwelling,
single-family semidetached dwellings, two-family detached
dwellings, or two family semidetached dwellings, and if two or
more driveways of the same lot enter a public street right-of-way,
the distance between the entrances of the driveways shall be at
least 75 feet, measured between the inner edges of the driveway.
G. Driveways to corner lots or through lots shall gain access from the
street of lower classification when the lot is bound by streets of two
different classifications.
§ 575-91 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-91
1:622
ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 575-92. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to:
§ 575-93. Application.
Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided and maintained for
each use and structure hereafter established, erected, altered or extended
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 575-94. General regulations.
A. Ensure adequate parking and loading facilities to serve the use or uses
of the property;
B. Ensure that any parking facility is designed so as to provide proper
circulation, reduce hazards to pedestrians, and protect the users of
adjoining properties from nuisance created by the use of the facility;
C. Reduce congestion in the streets and contribute to traffic safety; and
D. Encourage shared parking facilities and alternative modes of travel that
will reduce overall impervious coverage and reduce dependence on the
single-occupancy automobile.
A. Use. All newly constructed and reconstructed off-street parking spaces
shall be used solely for the parking of motor vehicles by residents,
visitors, patrons or employees.125
B. Location. It is the intent of this chapter that newly constructed and
reconstructed parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
use they serve, except as provided for in the shared parking provisions
of this article.126
(1) If the newly constructed or reconstructed off-street parking spaces
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot as the building they
serve, such spaces may be provided on other property located not
more than 500 feet away from the subject property, as measured
from lot line to lot line along the nearest pedestrian route.
(2) Up to 50% of nonresidential spaces may be provided at distances
greater than 500 feet if dedicated shuttle bus or van service is
provided from a remote parking facility.
(3) Newly constructed or reconstructed off-site parking for any
property in the Central Business District may be provided in the
Waterfront Business District, and newly constructed or
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-94
1:623
reconstructed off-site parking for any property in the Waterfront
Business District may be provided in the Central Business District,
regardless of distance from lot line to lot line, provided that a
minimum of 1.5 parking spaces are provided for every one required
parking space.
C. In all instances, the total number of spaces provided shall not be less
than the sum of spaces required for all the uses.
D. Means of pedestrian access from the parking space to the uses they
serve shall be provided such that pedestrians are not required to
traverse property owned by other than said property owners, except
where public sidewalks may provide the access. Pedestrians shall not
be required to cross an arterial street except at a signalized
intersection along the pedestrian pathway.
E. A lease, easement or other form of agreement shall be executed among
said property owners assuring use of the required parking spaces are
located on the same lot as the use they serve and recorded in the office
for the recording of deeds of Centre County.127
F. Unless utilizing the shared parking provisions on adjoining parcels, all
parking spaces and lots open to the sky (i.e., not in garages or carports)
shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any property line, except for
the Highway Commercial, which shall be located no closer than 30 feet
from the property line.
G. All covered parking spaces and lots, including garages and carports,
shall not be located within any yard setback area.
H. For any lot of record at the time of adoption of this subsection which is
divided by a zoning line and where said zoning line separates
commercial and residential zones, the owner of such lot may use the
area of the lot which is zoned residential to locate the parking required
or proposed for the commercially zoned portion of the lot. If the owner
elects to use the area zoned residential for parking, such parking area
shall not be within 100 feet of any property line adjacent to the
residential zoned portion. All other parking regulations for commercial
areas shall apply.
I. In order to promote and provide for more flexibility within the current
zoning regulations and to maintain an aesthetically pleasing visual
appearance of both the road corridor and individual businesses and
properties, the front yard parking setback area for Highway
Commercial Districts may be reduced by 10 feet, at the discretion of the
municipal governing body, by reducing the maximum impervious
surface coverage ratio by 5%. This reduction may only be permitted
when the developer can demonstrate to the municipal governing body
the following:
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-94 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-94
1:624
§ 575-95. Provisions to reduce required off-street parking spaces.
In an effort to reduce impervious coverage, traffic congestion and allow an
increase in landscaped green space area and/or building size, the following
shall be considered:
(1) That the reduction in setbacks and impervious area will allow the
developer to provide open space in sensitive areas, such as
wetlands and steep slopes, or to provide additional buffering to
adjacent properties.
(2) That the reduction is not requested solely to help enhance the
visibility or desirability of the business.
J. No parking shall be permitted in residential districts within the front
yard, as defined by the width of the residential structure, less the width
of a side attached garage. Parking is permitted in the corner portion of
the side yard located in the front yard setback.
K. Parking of self-propelled motor vehicles (not including recreational
vehicles) is prohibited on the lawn or in yard areas for all residential
uses in all districts except for the rural zoning districts. This does not
include the incidental parking of vehicles for washing or cleaning.
A. Shared parking spaces that are accessible by neighboring properties or
uses may be permitted when use of the spaces does not occur during
the same daily time period. The applicant must provide justification
showing calculations of the peak parking use for the spaces that would
have overlapping users during their respective hours of operation or a
mix of uses with different peak hours of traffic generation (e.g.,
development proposals combining retail or professional office uses with
residential uses). The hours of operation must show that sufficient
spaces would be available for the shared parking purpose. As a result,
the number of parking spaces could be reduced no more than 1/2 of the
total required for the particular use(s) participating in shared parking.
Should the use change in the future and its associated off-street
parking, the parking must be provided as required or shared additional
parking be pursued.
B. When increasing the passengers per vehicle to sites with high
employment would decrease parking demand, relief in the required
parking spaces may occur. The parking spaces may be reduced by a
factor of 50% if the applicant for land development plan approval
provides a transportation management program to utilize one or a
combination of the following modes to reduce single-occupant vehicles
that is based on substantiated projections of reduction in demand:
(1) Shared ride/carpooling.
(2) Vanpooling.
(3) Subscription bus service(s); CATA bus.
§ 575-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-95
1:625
C. To qualify for the above, the applicant must provide evidence to the
approval of the municipal governing body that:
(1) The applicant shall establish an approved carpooling program;
(2) Applicant will obtain or lease to qualified employees vans, buses or
high-passenger-capacity vehicles for the purpose of providing
transportation of additional passengers (vanpooling);
(3) Applicant will operate or hire vans, buses or other high-passengercapacity
vehicles to provide exclusive or nonexclusive commuter
transportation of employees from residential areas, other transit
terminals, such as park and ride; or
(4) Applicant shall contribute to the public bus service to add routes,
shelters, amenities or fare contributions that would be generated
by those employees to utilize the bus service.
D. Additional programs.
(1) In addition to programs to increase vanpooling and carpooling are
examples that follow:
(a) Applicant will employ working day policy known as "flextime"
where employees are given some latitude on starting and
quitting times.
(b) Applicant will provide adequate lunch facilities on the site.
(c) Applicant will provide preferential parking.
(2) As a part of the request to reduce parking spaces, the applicant
shall show to the satisfaction of the Bellefonte Borough Council
that the actions proposed shall reduce the parking demand by the
amount requested. All shared parking arrangements are subject to
the approval of the Borough Council.
E. At the option of the approval by the municipal governing body, a
reduction of off-street parking spaces may be considered as follows that
would pertain only to parking at the site fronting arterial and/or
highway roads:
(1) The buffer yard in the front contains unique natural features, as
determined by the municipal governing body, that may require an
area to be wider than the minimum front buffer.
(2) The buffer yard in the front contains features that contribute to the
community character of the municipality, as determined by the
governing body, that may require an area to be wider than the
minimum front buffer.
(3) The requirements of a corridor overlay zone that may provide for a
wider than minimum buffer.
§ 575-95 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-95
1:626
§ 575-96. Existing facilities.
Parking spaces and lots serving structures and uses in existence at the date
of the adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of
this article as long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, provided
that any parking facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in
the future be reduced below such requirements, or if already below such
requirements, be reduced further.
§ 575-97. Change in requirements.
Whenever there is an alteration or extension of a use or structure which
increases the parking requirements according to the parking calculation
requirements below, the total additional parking required for the alteration
or extension shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of that
section.
§ 575-98. Construction.128
(4) Opportunities to preserve stands of existing trees using creative
landscaping designs would be helpful to enhance the appearance of
pedestrian areas as well as breaking up the monotony of a large lot.
The Planning Commission may recommend, and the governing
body may approve, the reduction in off-street parking spaces
associated with increasing the front buffer yard. The area removed
from parking must be sufficient to provide the required parking.
The area removed from parking may be returned to parking at a
future date should the operator of the use experience a parking
shortage based on demand after the use has been in operation for a
period exceeding two years. The requirement of land development
plan submission and approval must follow in order to return the
area to parking.
A. All newly constructed and reconstructed off-street parking spaces,
aisles and driveways shall be paved with an all-weather material. For
spaces and aisles which are not part of a parking lot, as herein defined,
this may include gravel or other crushed stone. However, for parking
lots, the paving material shall be limited to asphalt, concrete or similar
hard surface material with all parking spaces designated with a fourinch
contrasting stripe painted the entire length of each space in
accordance with the dimensional requirements stipulated below.
B. All newly constructed or reconstructed off-street parking spaces and
aisles for private recreational areas shall be constructed, at a minimum,
with six inches of crushed and compacted stone. Private and/or public
recreation areas shall be exempt from such other construction
regulations.
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-99
1:627
§ 575-99. Required newly constructed and reconstructed off-street
parking spaces.129
All uses and structures shall provide off-street parking spaces in an amount
equal to, or greater than, the number listed below. The total number of
parking spaces necessary for two or more uses on the same lot shall be the
sum of that required for each use.
A. Dimensions. Each required off-street parking space shall be at least 9.5
feet wide and 18 feet long if set at an angle to the access aisle, or eight
feet wide and 24 feet long if parallel to the access aisle.
B. Number and computation. In computing the required number of spaces,
all fractional numbers more than 1/2 shall be increased to the next
highest integer. When computation is based on the number of
employees, the number employed during the largest work shift shall be
used.
(1) Residential uses.
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Residential
Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(per dwelling unit unless
otherwise noted)
Single-family detached dwelling
unit (on a lot less than 10,000
square feet)
2 spaces
Single-family detached dwelling
unit (on a lot 10,000 square feet
or greater)
3 spaces
Duplex 2 spaces
Townhouse 2.25 spaces
Multifamily 2.5 spaces (1 space per unit in
Central Business and
Waterfront Business Districts)
Age-restricted housing (55 and
older, any type)
1 space per unit (plus additional
spaces based on office and
other service areas if
applicable)
Group home 1 space per 300 square feet
gross floor area
Personal care boardinghome 1 space per unit
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-99 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-99
1:628
(2) Commercial uses. Any portion of a building used for office, repair/
service, retail, and restaurants requires parking as pertains to that
individual use, as if it were a freestanding use.
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Commercial
Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(spaces per gross floor area
unless otherwise noted)
Retail (general) 1 space per 200 square feet (no
spaces required in Central
Business and Waterfront
Business Districts)
Supermarket/grocery stores 1 space per 200 square feet
Furniture, appliance, carpet,
musical instrument stores
1 space per 350 square feet
Sales of construction
equipment, farm equipment,
feed, boat and marine vehicles,
mobile-/motor-home vehicles,
motor vehicles, and monument,
burial vault and casket sales
1 space per 350 square feet of
office, sales and service area
plus 1 space per 3,000 square
feet of outside sales area
Automobile service station 1 space per pump, 6 spaces per
repair/service bay, and
additional spaces based on
retail space
Barbers and beauticians 2 spaces per chair
Car wash 4 spaces per stall, plus 1 space
per vacuum if applicable
Funeral home 1 space per 3 seats based on
maximum building occupancy
Bowling alley, miniature golf
course
5 spaces per alley, 2 spaces per
golf tee
Billiard parlors, amusement
enterprises
2 spaces per table or machine
Business, professional and
financial offices (including mail
order)
1 space per 250 square feet (1
space per 500 square feet in
Central Business and
Waterfront Business Districts)
Medical, dental and veterinary
offices/hospitals
1 space per 200 square feet
§ 575-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-99
1:629
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Commercial
Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(spaces per gross floor area
unless otherwise noted)
Arenas, stadiums, auditoriums,
theaters, dance halls
1 space per 4 fixed seats;
otherwise 1 space per 4 persons
based on maximum building
occupancy
Eating and drinking
establishments (apply dance
hall to dance floor area)
1 space per 50 square feet of
inside seating area, plus 1 space
per 100 square feet of outside
seating area (no spaces
required in Central Business
and Waterfront Business
Districts)
Hotels or motels 1.2 spaces per room
Radio and/or television studios 1 space per 250 square feet
Post office 1 space per 200 square feet
Mining and quarrying 1 space per 250 square feet of
office use
Horse riding stables and
academies
1 space per 2 stalls
Animal kennels 1 space per 500 square feet
Cemeteries 1 space per 350 square feet of
public area in mausoleum or
similar structure
Caterers 1 space per 200 square feet
Shoe repair, tailors,
seamstresses
1 space per 200 square feet
Public and private garages for
the storage of motor vehicles
1 space per 250 square feet of
office
Tanning salon 1 space per bed
Laundromat 1 space per three washers or
dryers
Rural agricultural service
establishments
1 space per 250 square feet
Greenhouses open to the public 1 space per 250 square feet of
sales area
(3) Industrial uses. Any portion of a building used for office, repair/
service, retail and restaurants requires the parking as pertains to
§ 575-99 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-99
1:630
that individual use, as if it were a freestanding use, in addition to
the following:
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Industrial
Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(spaces per gross floor area
unless otherwise noted)
All industrial uses except those
specified below
1 space per 350 square feet
plus 1 space per 1,000 square
feet of outdoor operations
(excluding storage); (1 space
per 1,000 square feet in Central
Business and Waterfront
Business Districts)
Auto wrecking, junk and scrap
establishments
1 space per 5,000 square feet of
indoor/outdoor storage area
plus required office/repair/
service area
Freight and trucking terminals,
moving and storage, parcel
delivery and express transfer
stations, depots and wholesale
distribution warehouses
1 space per 2,000 square feet
(4) Public, quasi-public, and transportation uses. Any portion of a
building used for office, repair/service, retail and restaurants
requires the parking as pertains to that individual use, as if it were
a freestanding use, in addition to the following:
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Public, Quasi-
Public and Transportation Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(spaces per gross floor area
unless otherwise noted)
Ambulance, emergency, fire and
rescue, taxi and limousine
service
2 spaces per vehicle plus 1
space per 350 square feet
Bus passenger station (parkand-
ride lots, vanpooling lots,
etc.)
1 space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area or lot area
sufficient to support program
Child day-care center 1 space per 350 square feet
(minimum of 3)
Churches and other places of
worship
1 space per 4 seats based on
maximum occupancy
§ 575-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-99
1:631
§ 575-100. Parking lots.
For the purposes of this chapter, parking lots are defined as facilities
providing off-street parking space for five or more motor vehicles. All
Table of Required Parking Spaces per Use — Public, Quasi-
Public and Transportation Uses
Use
Parking Spaces Required
(spaces per gross floor area
unless otherwise noted)
Clubs, lodges, fraternal
organizations, community
centers, health and athletic
clubs, studios for instruction in
music, performing arts,
photographic and craft studios,
martial arts, dance and
gymnastics facilities
1 space per 3 persons based on
maximum occupancy
Golf courses and driving ranges 4 spaces per hole, 2 spaces per
tee on driving ranges
Hospital 1 space per 400 square feet
Nursing homes, personal care
homes, and other convalescent
homes
1 space per room
Libraries, museums, art
galleries, government buildings
1 space per 500 square feet
with bus/van parking areas of 1
space per 2,000 square feet
(apply auditorium standards to
auditorium areas); (no spaces
required in Central Business
and Waterfront Business
Districts)
Institutions of higher education,
high schools, vocational/
technical and business training
schools
1 space per 300 square feet for
classrooms, offices, cafeteria,
plus additional spaces based on
components (e.g., arena,
theater, etc.)
Nursery, kindergarten,
elementary, and middle schools
1 space per 1,000 square feet
Private recreation areas 25 spaces per established field/
activity area
C. Handicapped parking. The size and number of these spaces shall be
required as specified in the municipal building code. The signage for
each space must contain the handicapped symbol, state that violators
will be towed or fined and the minimum and maximum fine.
§ 575-99 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-100
1:632
parking lots shall meet the design and maintenance standards specified
below. All applications for a zoning permit to use land, in whole or in part, as
a parking lot as herein defined shall be accompanied by a land development
plan.
§ 575-101. Loading regulations.
Except in the Central Business District, space for the loading and unloading
of vehicles shall be provided when required below. Each required space
shall be at least 12 feet in width, 45 feet in length and have a vertical
clearance of at least 14 feet. Spaces shall be located no closer than 10 feet
A. Dimensions.
(1) All parking spaces shall comply with the dimensions specified in
§ 575-99A above. The minimum dimensions of all aisles providing
access to parking lot spaces shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of Parking Space to Aisle
(degrees) One-Way Two-Way
Parallel 12 20
30° (150°) 12 20
45° (135°) 15 20
60° (120°) 18 20
90° 24 24
(2) No portion of any parking space shall intrude into the required
aisle width. For aisles providing access to parking spaces set at
angles other than those specified above, the required aisle width
shall be that of the nearest specified angle of parking. If equidistant
from specified angles, the greatest aisle width of the two nearest
angles shall apply.
B. Obstructions. Parking lots shall be designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from all unoccupied parking spaces without
requiring the moving of any other parked motor vehicle.
C. Ingress and egress. Entrance and exit driveways and aisles linking
parking lots to public streets shall comply with the standards for motor
vehicle access stipulated in Article XVIII, Motor Vehicle Access, of this
chapter. Parking spaces shall be designed to prevent motor vehicles
from backing onto a two-way public street in order to leave the lot.
Where access to the parking spaces is from a one-way street or lane,
backing into the one-way public right-of-way in order to leave the lot is
permissible.
§ 575-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-101
1:633
from a public right-of-way and five feet from any other lot line and shall be
paved with an all-weather material.
§ 575-102. Parking for vehicles for sale or rental and for vehicle
storage.
Motor vehicles, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, boats and
marine craft held for sale or rental may be displayed or stored only in
accordance with the terms of this section:
A. One off-street loading space is required for all nonresidential uses with
a floor area of at least 5,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square
feet or more; one additional space shall be provided for each additional
20,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
B. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be used for loading and
unloading purposes except during hours when business operations are
suspended.
C. All required loading and unloading spaces shall be located on the same
property as the use they serve.
D. The provisions of §§ 575-97 and 575-98 above, pertaining to off-street
parking space shall also pertain to all required off-street loading and
unloading spaces.
A. Motor vehicles, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, boats
and marine craft held for sale or rental may be displayed or stored only
on the lot of the principal place of business of the owner of the sale or
rental business or on an adjacent separate lot, but only if the adjacent
separate lot is used for no other purpose than the display or storage of
said items.
B. All areas used for such display or storage must be located in accordance
with the setback requirements set forth in this chapter for parking lots.
All screening required of parking lots shall apply to display and storage
parking areas.
C. Areas used for display or storage of said items must be constructed of
an impervious surface, unless a pervious surface is approved by the
Municipal Engineer and, in both cases, in accordance with the
specifications of the Municipal Engineer.
D. Areas used for display or storage of said items may not be used in
calculating required off-street parking.
E. No motor vehicle, motorcycle, mobile home, recreational vehicle, boat
or marine craft may be displayed or stored in an area or manner other
than set forth on an approved land development plan.
§ 575-101 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-102
1:634
ARTICLE XX
Landscaping
§ 575-103. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide landscaping requirements which:
§ 575-104. General requirements.
A. Enhance and promote the image of the community.
B. Protect the public health, safety and welfare by:
(1) Screening and buffering incompatible land uses.
(2) Minimizing noise, air, water, dust and visual pollution.
(3) Preserving property values and the character of neighborhoods.
(4) Reducing the heat and glare absorbed and radiated by
development.
(5) Helping control soil erosion.
(6) Increasing traffic safety.
C. Increase the variety of plant materials used in landscape plans.
D. Improve the aesthetics of the site through seasonal diversity of
plantings.
A. Required buffers shall be reserved solely for open space and
landscaping. No proposed building addition, structure, parking area or
any other type of physical land improvement shall be located in a
required buffer, provided that driveways or roads may cross required
buffers if necessary to provide access to the building site. Sidewalks,
bikeways and pedestrian paths may also be located within required
buffers.
B. All selected trees and shrubs must be listed on the official municipal
plant list.
C. All landscaping, trees and planting materials adjacent to parking areas,
loading areas or driveways shall be properly protected by barriers,
curbs or other means from damage by vehicles. In addition, the tree or
shrub shall be planted a minimum of three feet from any curb.
D. Plant materials with seasonal diversity should be selected and
distributed throughout the site.
E. Unless otherwise regulated by this chapter, any vacant portion of a lot
not in use shall be planted with such vegetation as grass, ground cover,
trees and shrubs, except for gardens left vacant in nongrowing seasons.
§ 575-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-105
1:635
§ 575-105. Conflicting requirements.
In the event that one or more of the sections of this article is applicable and
there is a conflict among them, the more restrictive section requirement
shall apply.
§ 575-106. Landscaping plan.
When a site or land development plan requires the installation of
landscaping subject to the requirements of this article, a landscaping plan
shall be submitted along with the site or land development plan. The
landscaping plan shall show the following:
§ 575-107. Maintenance.
§ 575-108. Standards.
All landscape material planted shall meet or exceed the following standards
at the time of planting:
A. The location of all buffer yards and planting areas shall be graphically
depicted.
B. The plan must graphically depict the distribution, mature height and
spread of all required plant materials.
C. The plan must show a table which identifies the required and proposed
number of each plant species being provided for each type of buffer,
screen or other use (i.e., the number of plants within each flexible
buffer yard, corridor overlay buffer, parking lot, general site). The table
shall also identify the botanical and common name of each plant, the
mature height and spread, and the symbol used for the plant.
D. The plan must identify the specific size and species of materials, both
vegetative and fencing, which will be used for screening of trash
collection and storage areas.
A. The owner or his agent shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair
and replacement of all landscaping materials and screening fences or
walls to maintain conformance with the landscaping requirements.
B. Any plant material that is 25% dead or more shall be considered dead
and must be replaced.
C. Replacements shall be made during the first spring or fall planting
season following the death of the plants.
D. Replacements shall be of the same size and type (canopy, understory,
shrub) of plant as shown on the plan.
E. All parking lots and buffer yards shall be kept free of litter and trash.
§ 575-105 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-108
1:636
§ 575-109. Use of existing vegetation.
§ 575-110. Preservation of existing vegetation.
Existing site vegetative tree growth of four-inch trunk diameter or larger is
encouraged.
A. All canopy trees shall reach a minimum height of 20 feet at maturity
and shall have a caliper of at least two inches at planting. Canopy trees
are to be planted such that the majority of the canopy is located on the
site of the applicant's land development.
B. All evergreen trees shall reach a minimum height of 20 feet at maturity
and shall be a minimum of six feet tall at planting.
C. All understory trees shall reach a minimum height of 10 feet at maturity
and shall have a caliper of 1 1/2 inches at planting.
D. All deciduous or evergreen shrubs used for general or parking lot
landscaping must be a minimum of two gallons at planting.
E. Where the plantings identified in Subsections A through D, immediately
above, would result in an inappropriate or impractical design due to
underground utilities, overhead wires or other factors, the following
substitutions may be made:
(1) Two understory trees (one-and-one-half-inch caliper) may be
substituted for one canopy tree.
(2) Two evergreen trees may be substituted for one canopy tree.
(3) One evergreen tree may be substituted for five shrubs.
A. Where an existing hedgerow or forested area is located within a
proposed buffer yard, the use of existing vegetation is encouraged to
the extent that a suitable buffer will be provided. One existing canopy
tree of at least four-inch caliper may be substituted for one new tree.
The existing tree must be listed on the municipality's official plant list
or approved substitution list.
B. Existing understory trees and shrubs may be substituted for new
understory trees or shrubs. The existing trees and shrubs must be listed
on the municipality's official plant list.
C. In an area where the canopy trees will not allow for the planting and
growth of understory trees, four shrubs could be planted in lieu of each
required understory tree.
D. Prior to plan approval, the plan for tree substitution must be verified by
the Zoning Officer.
§ 575-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-111
1:637
§ 575-111. Use of existing features.
Lots separated by a bona fide drainageway, creekway or stream channel
may not substitute such condition for a portion of any corresponding buffer
yard width.
§ 575-112. Screening of trash collection and storage areas.
All trash collection and storage areas shall be screened from all adjoining
properties and streets with vegetative materials and/or fences of at least
eight feet in height at the time of installation.
§ 575-113. Access and visibility.
No tree, shrub, fence, wall or similar item shall be installed in the sight
triangle of any corner, street intersection or accessway intersecting a public
right-of-way that would cause an obstruction to visibility.
§ 575-114. Flexible buffer yard.
A. Purpose. Flexible buffer yards are intended to aid the municipality in
protecting community character by separating incompatible uses either
within the same zoning district and/or between adjacent zoning
districts. The purpose of the flexible buffer yard requirements is to
alleviate problems which could be encountered by a single standard.
The requirements of this article can reasonably accommodate the
characteristics of each site and the range of land uses.
B. Procedure. The following procedure shall be used to determine the type
of buffer yard required between two uses located on separate but
abutting parcels:
(1) Step one. Identify the land use classification of the proposed use
and of all existing uses located on separate adjoining lots by
referring to the Land Use Intensity Classification Chart as follows:
Land Use Intensity Classification Chart
Group I
Agricultural
Single-family detached residential use(s)
Nonagricultural residential lot
Stormwater detention basin
Group II
Public/private recreational areas
Townhouses, multifamily housing, duplexes
Churches and other places of worship
Schools
§ 575-111 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-114
1:638
Land Use Intensity Classification Chart
Group III
All uses not identified in Group I or II. If there is a question as
to which group a use should be classified under, the municipal
Zoning Officer shall determine the group based on the most
comparable land use to the use listed in the application for a
zoning permit. The use group of vacant land adjacent to the site is
determined by identifying the least-intensive use permitted within
the applicable zoning district.
(2) Step two. Determine the buffer yard required between uses by
referring to the following Buffer Yard Table 1.
(a) The table set forth below displays the range of buffer yard
requirements associated with the site use from the use groups
found on the Land Use Intensity Classification Chart at
Subsection B(1) above. The letters "A" through "D" denote the
planting plan buffer option set forth in Buffer Yard Table 2. The
letter "N" means that no buffer yard is required.
Buffer Yard Table 1
Land Use Intensity
Classification of
Proposed
Development
Land Use Intensity Classification of
Adjacent Lot(s)
Group I Group II Group III
Group I N N N
Group II B A C
Group III D C A
(3) Step three. Determine the specific buffer yard to be used based on
the options for each buffer yard in the following table (Buffer Yard
Table 2).
(a) Table 2 below displays the range of buffer yard requirements
associated with each buffer yard and shows the minimum
planting units required per every 100 linear feet of distance
along a site's perimeter. Areas less than 100 linear feet and/or
fractions thereof are to be landscaped with the corresponding
ratio by 100 linear feet, rounded up to the nearest whole plant.
§ 575-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-114
1:639
Buffer Yard Table 2
Buffer
Yard
Required
Width
(feet)
Canopy
Tree
Understory
Tree,
Evergreen
Tree
Deciduous
or
Evergreen
Shrub
A 30 6 2 —
25 3 4 —
15 2 6 —
B 30 1 4 5
25 2 5 8
15 2 6 9
C 30 2 5 9
25 2 7 12
15 1 8 15
12 1 4 8 with
fence/wall
D 30 2 6 12
25 2 7 17
15 2 8 26
12 1 3 18 with
fence/wall
(b) The installation of a fence or berm shall satisfy a portion of the
buffer yard requirements of Buffer C and D as identified above
if the fence consists of at least 50% fence material distributed
evenly, not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height.
A perimeter wall shall also satisfy a portion of the buffer yard
requirements of Buffer C and D as identified above if the wall is
not less than four feet nor more than six feet in height. When
landscaping is being provided to buffer against a different use
group than is on the site, the required plant material must be
evenly distributed within each one-hundred-foot section of the
buffer area. The even distribution of plantings is intended to
screen objectionable views. When landscaping is being
provided to buffer against the same use group as exists on the
site, the required plant material may be grouped or unevenly
distributed within each one-hundred-foot section of the buffer
area.
(4) Step four. Determine the planting stock to be used as landscape
materials for the buffer yard in question by referring to the
municipality's official plant list.
C. Placement of buffer yard width. The landscaped buffer yard area shall
be established along the length of, and contiguous to, any lot line or
§ 575-114 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-114
1:640
§ 575-115. Interior and exterior parking lot landscaping.
demarcation of land use, such as a leasable area. The width of the area
determined from Buffer Yard Table 2 of this article shall be measured
at right angles to the lot line of the applicant's land development.
A. All parking lots shall meet the location requirements stipulated in
Article XIX, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter. All raised
yards surrounding the parking lot shall be bordered by a curb six inches
high along the sides of the yard area abutting the parking lot, including
spaces and aisles. Where the yards are not raised, separate stops shall
be provided at the end of each parking space abutting the yards. Where
walkways terminate at curbs, ramps shall be provided. Parking setback
areas shall be planted with grass or similar vegetative material and may
include shrubs, fences or walls.
B. Planting areas shall be installed at the end of all parking bays abutting
an aisle or driveway. The planting areas shall be bordered by a curb six
inches high wherever it abuts a space or aisle and shall be at least 9.5
feet wide and extend the length of the parking space and/or bay. Each
planting area shall be planted with a combination of suitable ground
covers, grass and/or mulch and a minimum of one canopy tree.
C. Utility poles and light standards are permitted within the planting
areas, provided they are separated from the spaces and aisles as
detailed in Article XIX, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this chapter.
Utility poles and light standards are also permitted within the parking
lot, provided the pole is surrounded on all sides by a six-inch concrete
curb. The back of the curb must be a minimum of three feet away from
the edge of the pole. No poles are permitted within a required parking
space or drive aisle.
D. When parking bays incorporate more than 10 parking spaces in a
continuous row, a raised island shall be incorporated within the parking
bay for every 10 parking spaces. The raised island shall be bordered by
a curb six inches high minimum wherever it abuts a space or aisle and
shall be 9.5 feet wide and extend the length of the parking space and/or
bay. Each raised island shall be planted with a combination of suitable
ground covers and/or grass and a minimum of one canopy tree. No
islands are required in parking lots that are less than 60 feet in width as
long as perimeter planting is used around the entire parking lot with
the exception of where the parking lot abuts the building. Wherever a
building adjoins a parking lot perimeter, islands shall be required.
E. In order to provide flexibility in design, reduce heat, glare and visual
expansiveness, the following option may be considered in conjunction
with interior landscaped islands: provision of a continuous landscaped
strip between every four bays of parking in lots that contain eight or
more bays in one area. The strip shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and
shall include a vehicle overhang of 2 1/2 feet when parking spaces are
adjacent to the strip. The stall length with the overhang strip may be
§ 575-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-115
1:641
§ 575-116. Commercial district planting requirements.
reduced to 16 feet. The strip shall contain a landscaped area of 10
feet minimum width and shall be planted with shade trees at a ratio
of at least one tree for every 45 feet of the strip length, inclusive of
driveway widths. These trees shall be planted no less than 25 feet nor
greater than 50 feet apart. A combination of suitable ground covers
and/or grass shall cover the remainder of the strip. If the landscaped
strip provides direct access to a building entrance, a minimum fivefoot-
wide sidewalk shall also be included in the strip. In this event,
the landscaped strip will be required to be 20 feet in width, with
the sidewalk in the middle of the strip. The required trees can then
be planted alternately on each side of the sidewalk at the required
distance.
F. In the event an existing parking lot is being enlarged or revised, these
regulations will apply only to the new section of the parking lot.
A. In the HC District, the off-street parking located within the front yard
setback area shall be provided with a twelve-foot-wide buffer yard
between the parking lot and property line fronting any street right-ofway.
B. The planting shall provide shade and a view-restrictive screen for
parking areas. For evening uses, the screen is intended to function to
block headlight glare affecting vehicles off site. Headlights of parked
vehicles must be obscured from the public right-of-way.
C. One of the following options shall be used for the perimeter planting:
(1) A minimum ten-foot-wide landscaped strip shall be planted with a
minimum of one canopy tree or evergreen tree and 15 shrubs per
35 linear feet of frontage along the parking area (excluding
driveway openings).
(2) A berm/earth mound, the top of which is at least two feet higher
than the elevation of the adjacent parking lot pavement. The slope
of the berm shall not exceed 25% (4:1) for lawn areas. Berms
planted with ground covers and shrubs may be steeper. However,
no slope shall exceed 50% (2:1). Berms shall be graded to appear as
naturalistic forms not causing any soil erosion problems and
planted with a minimum of one canopy tree and 10 shrubs per 35
linear feet of frontage along the parking area (excluding driveway
openings).
(3) A six-foot-wide landscaped embankment strip and a minimum
three-foot grade drop from the required yard area into any adjacent
parking lot pavement. The resulting embankment shall be planted
with a minimum of one canopy tree and 10 shrubs per 35 linear feet
of frontage along the parking area (excluding driveway openings).
§ 575-115 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-116
1:642
§ 575-117. Invasive species.
Invasive species, as detailed below, shall not be permitted as a component
in a landscape plan, except for those species that are existing on the site
and are proposed for incorporation into the site landscaping.
At least 50% of the required shrubs shall be planted in the top half
of the grade drop area.
(4) A minimum of a five-foot-wide landscaped strip with a minimum
three-foot-high brick, stone or finished concrete material wall to
screen any parking lot. The wall shall be located adjacent to, but
entirely outside, the minimum five-foot-wide landscaping strip. The
strip shall be planted with a minimum of one canopy tree and five
shrubs per 35 linear foot of frontage along the parking area
(excluding driveway openings).
D. No tree, fence, wall or similar item shall be installed in the sight
triangle of any corner, street intersection or accessway intersecting a
public right-of-way that would cause an obstruction to visibility.
A. Characteristics of invasive species. Invasive plants displace naturally
occurring vegetation and, in the process, upset nature's balance and
diversity. Invasive plants share the following characteristics:
(1) Rapid growth and prolific reproductive capabilities.
(2) Highly successful seed dispersal, germination and colonization
processes.
(3) Rampant spreading that takes over native species.
(4) Costly to control.
B. Prohibited species. In general, aggressive, nonnative plants have no
enemies or controls to limit their spread. Those listed below shall not be
permitted as a component of a land development plan, except for those
species that are existing on the site and are proposed for incorporation
into the site landscaping.
(1) Trees (botanic name; common name).
(a) Acer platanoides; Norway maple.
(b) Acer pseudoplatanus; Sycamore maple.
(c) Ailanthus altissima; Tree-of-heaven.
(d) Elaeagnus angustifolia; Russian olive.
(e) Populus alba; White poplar.
(f) Ulmus pumila; Siberian elm.
(g) Viburnum lantana; Wayfaring tree.
§ 575-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-117
1:643
§ 575-118. Plants native to Central Pennsylvania.
Native plants appropriately selected for the site conditions provide a
beautiful, hardy, low-maintenance landscape while benefiting the
environment. Once established, native plants save time and money by
eliminating or significantly reducing the need for fertilizers, pesticides,
water and maintenance equipment.
(2) Shrubs and vines (botanic name; common name).
(a) Berberis thunbergii; Japanese barberry.
(b) Elaeagnus umbellate; Autumn olive.
(c) Euonymus alatus; Winged euonymus.
(d) Ligustrum vulgare; European privet.
(e) Lonicera japonica; Japanese honeysuckle.
(f) Lonicera maackii; Amur honeysuckle.
(g) Lonicera morrowii; Morrow's honeysuckle.
(h) Lonicera tatarica; Tartarian honeysuckle.
(i) Lonicera x-bella; Hybrid honeysuckle.
(j) Lythrum salicaria; Purple loosestrife (herbaceous).
(k) Morus alba; White mulberry.
(l) Morus rubra; Red mulberry.
(m) Phylostachys aubea; Bamboo.
(n) Rhamnus cathartica; Common buckthorn.
(o) Rhamnus frangula; Glossy buckthorn.
(p) Rosa multiflora; Multiflora rose.
(q) Viburnum opulus; European highbush cranberry.
A. In addition to a wide variety of plant species native to Central
Pennsylvania, the following native plant list is well suited to the climate
of the Nittany Valley Region and should be considered for use in an
approved landscaping plan.
(1) Trees (botanic name; common name).
(a) Acer spp.; Maple species.
(b) Amelanchier spp.; Serviceberry species.
(c) Alnus rugosa; Hazel alder.
§ 575-117 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-118
1:644
(d) Carpinus caroliniana; American hornbeam.
(e) Carya spp.; Hickory species.
(f) Celtis occidentalis; Common hackberry.
(g) Cercis canadensis; Eastern redbud.
(h) Cornus alternifolia; Pagoda dogwood.
(i) Cornus florida; Flowering dogwood.
(j) Fagus grandifolia; American beech.
(k) Fraxinus spp.; White, black and green ash.
(l) Juniperus virginiana; Eastern red cedar.
(m) Liriodendron tulipifera; Tuliptree.
(n) Nyssa sylvatica; Black tupelo.
(o) Ostrya virginiana; American hophornbeam.
(p) Pinus strobus; Eastern white pine.
(q) Pinus resinosa; Red pine.
(r) Platanus occidentalis; American planetree.
(s) Populus spp.; Aspen species.
(t) Prunus spp.; Pin and black cherry; chokeberry.
(u) Quercus spp; Black, white, northern red, scarlet, pin and
chestnut oak.
(v) Rhus spp.; Sumac species.
(w) Salix discolor nigra; Pussy and black willow.
(x) Sassafras albidum; Common sassafras.
(y) Tilia americana; American basswood (linden).
(z) Tsuga canadensis; Canada hemlock.
(2) Shrubs (botanic name; common name).
(a) Alnus serrulata; Common alder.
(b) Aronia spp.; Red, black and purplefruit chokeberry.
(c) Comptonia peregrine; Sweetfern.
(d) Cornus spp.; Dogwood species.
(e) Corylus spp.; Filbert species.
§ 575-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-118
1:645
(f) Hydrangea arborescens; Smooth hydrangea.
(g) Hypericum prolificum; Shrubby St. Johnswort.
(h) Ilex verticillata; Common winterberry holly.
(i) Kalmia latifolia; Mountain laurel.
(j) Lindera benzoin; Common spicebush.
(k) Rhododendron arborescens; Sweet azalea.
(l) Rhododendron nudiflorum; Pinxterbloom azalea.
(m) Rhododendron roseum; Roseshell azalea.
(n) Rubus spp.; Blackberry, raspberry and thimbleberry.
(o) Sambucus spp.; Elder species.
(p) Vaccinium spp.; Lowbush and Highbush blueberry; Deerberry.
(q) Viburnum spp.; Mapleleaf, Hobblebush and Cranberrybush
viburnum.
§ 575-118 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-118
1:646
ARTICLE XXI
Signs
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 575-119. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Bellefonte Borough Sign Ordinance."
§ 575-120. General intent.
The following regulations (patterned after the Sign Guidelines adopted by
Council on December 3, 1984) are made in accordance with an overall
plan and program for the public safety, area development, preservation of
property values and the general welfare of the Borough of Bellefonte, and
are intended to aid in traffic control and traffic safety, preserve and protect
property values; lessen congestion of land and air space; provide against
undue concentration of signs that distract and endanger traffic safety and
flow; establish reasonable standards for commercial and other advertising
through the use of signs in order to maintain and encourage business
activity and area development; avoid uncontrolled proliferation of signs;
recognize the rights of the public in roads, streets, highways; preserve
the wholesome and attractive character of the Borough of Bellefonte; and
recognize that the general welfare includes a community plan that shall be
beautiful as well as healthy, spacious as well as clean, and well balanced in
its growth and development.
§ 575-121. Statement of community development objectives.
The community development objectives of this article are the goals,
objectives and policies stated in the Comprehensive Plan of 1992.
§ 575-122. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given in this section:
GROUND POLE SIGN — A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles or
braces placed in or upon the ground. Includes "sandwich" signs.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that provides artificial light directly, or
through transparent or translucent materials, from a source of light
connected with such sign, or a sign illuminated by a light focused upon or
chiefly directed at the surface of the sign.
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign that contains a message
unrelated to a business or profession conducted upon the premises where
such a sign is located, or which is unrelated to a commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign that is not a temporary sign.
§ 575-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-122
1:647
PREMISES — The area occupied by a business or other public enterprise.
When more than one business occupies a single building on the ground
floor, each business area shall be considered a separate premises. Business
or other public enterprises that occupy other floors also shall be considered
separate premises.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that projects from and is supported by a wall
of a building.
REVIEW BOARD — Shall refer to the Historical and Architectural Review
Board.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and maintained upon or above the roof of
any building.
SHOPPING CENTER — A cohesive unit of stores or other commercial
businesses arranged and constructed according to a plan and contained
within a separate parcel of land.
SIGN — Any structure, device, light or natural object, including the ground
itself or any part thereof, or any device attached thereto or painted or
represented thereon, which shall be used to identify, advertise or attract
attention to any object, product, place, activity person, institution,
organization, firm, group, commodity, profession, enterprise, industry or
business, or which shall display or include any letter, number, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as an
announcement, direction or advertisement and which is intended to be seen
from off the premises. The word "sign" shall include signs that are displayed
on or against display windows and glass entrance doors and are intended to
be seen from off the premises, excluding signs of a promotional nature that
are to be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 days.
SIGN AREA — Sign area is the area of the smallest geometric configuration
(triangle, rectangle or circle) what can wholly enclose the surface area of
the sign. All visible faces of a multifaced sign shall be counted separately
and then totaled in calculating the sign area. Three-dimensional signs shall
be treated as dual-faced signs, such that the total area shall be twice
the area of the smallest triangle, rectangle or circle that can be totally
circumscribed within the sign in the plane of its largest dimension.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign normally, but not necessarily, constructed of
paper, cloth fabric, or canvas, announcing or advertising a special, limitedtime
offer not normally available on the premises.
WALL SIGN — A sign that is attached directly to or painted upon a building
wall and that does not extend more than 12 inches therefrom nor extend
above the roofline.
§ 575-123. General regulations in all districts.
A. General regulations on signs in all districts. The following regulations
shall be observed in all districts within the Borough of Bellefonte:
§ 575-122 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-123
1:648
(1) Signs generally permitted. Signs listed in this section are permitted
in all sections of the Borough (with additional regulations placed on
those situated in the Historic District, the regulations of which can
be found below) and shall not require licenses or permits, and they
shall not be calculated when counting the number of signs on a
premises. However, such signs shall conform with the general
guidelines for signs enumerated herein.
(a) Property identification signs. Name and address of resident,
but not to include any commercial advertising, of not more
than 144 square inches in sign area for single-faced signs and
288 square inches for double-faced signs.
(b) Property use signs. "No trespassing" signs or other such signs
regulating the use of a property, such as "no hunting," "no
fishing," etc., of no more than two square feet in sign area.
Such signs shall be limited to one sign per 20 feet of lot
frontage.
(c) Real estate signs. Real estate signs not exceeding five square
feet in sign area in residential zones and the Central Business
District, and 16 square feet in all other commercial and
industrial zones, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the
premises upon which said signs are located. Such real estate
signs shall be removed within 10 days after the premises
advertised has been sold, rented or leased. Real estate signs
may be placed off premises for a period not to exceed 10 days
for purposes of advertising an open house or similar event.
(d) Community bulletin boards. Bulletin boards for public,
charitable or religious institutions, when located on the
premises thereto, and with a sign area of not more than 25
square feet if single-faced, nor more than 50 feet if doublefaced,
and used exclusively for noncommercial and nonpolitical
announcements.
(e) Directional signs. Signs regulating on-premises traffic, parking
or other functional subdivisions, such as lavatory facilities and
telephone, and signs denoting other sections of a building,
such as lubrication, office and so forth, when less than four
square feet in area and bearing no commercial advertising.
(f) Public information signs. Signs erected by a governmental
body, or under the directions of such a body, and bearing no
commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad-crossing
signs, safety signs, signs identifying public schools and
playgrounds and the like.
(g) Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting
the date of erection of buildings, not to exceed 144 square
inches.
§ 575-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-123
1:649
(h) Flags, pennants and insignia. The flag, pennant or insignia of
any government or religious, charitable or fraternal
organization.
(i) Special events. Temporary signs no larger than 25 square feet
in area, advertising auctions and special events or charitable
or public service groups. Such temporary signs must be
removed within 24 hours after the event and erected no sooner
than three weeks before the event.
(j) Residential subdivisions. Permanent residential- development
signs at major entrances designed to identify a residential
subdivision and containing no commercial advertising.
Maximum area: 25 square feet.
(k) Religious institutions. Signs identifying places of worship when
located on the premises thereof. The maximum area shall be 25
square feet, single-faced, or 50 square feet, double-faced.
(l) Recreation facilities. Slogans identifying a golf course or
country club or other recreational facility, when located on the
premises thereof and containing no commercial advertising.
Maximum area: 25 square feet.
(m) Garage sale, yard sale and other such signs. Such are
restricted to display only on the property at which the sale is
being conducted and are limited to a maximum size of five
square feet. They may not be erected earlier than 24 hours
before the beginning of the sale and must be removed within
24 hours of the end of the sale.
(n) Political signs. Political signs may not be erected earlier than
four weeks before the date of the election or referendum and
must be removed within 48 hours after the day of the election
or referendum; not to exceed six square feet in size and not be
attached to a tree or utility pole.
(o) Decals. Decals affixed to the windows or door glass that
indicate membership in a business group or which denote
credit cards accepted by the establishment. Such decals shall
not exceed 24 square inches.
(p) Community event signs. Temporary signs advertising
community activities — signs that are temporary in nature,
that relate to specific community activities (such as "Welcome
4-H," "Roll On, Raiders," and "Congratulations, Seniors"). Each
sign shall not exceed two square feet in area, and not more
than one sign for each activity shall be permitted for each
public entrance to the premises. Such signs shall be removed
as soon as the event or activity specified thereon has taken
place.
§ 575-123 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-123
1:650
(q) Temporary signs. All other temporary sign uses shall meet the
following criteria:
[1] Each premises in a commercial district is permitted to
display temporary signs, the total cumulative area of
which shall not exceed 30% of the area of each display
window or public entrance on the site. No single sign
larger than 10 square feet shall be permitted. No premises
shall be limited to less than 10 square feet of temporary
sign area.
[2] At any premises with more than one display window, the
occupant may choose to place all permitted temporary
sign area on any single window, provided that not more
than 50% of the display window so used is covered with
signs, and that no other temporary signs are displayed on
the premises.
[3] All such temporary signs shall be removed immediately
upon the completion of the event so advertised or
announced, provided that no temporary sign shall be
maintained for a period in excess of 28 days. For the
purposes of this subsection, no exterior sign shall be
considered a temporary sign. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to those listed in Subsection
A(2)(j).
(2) Signs prohibited in all districts. The following signs shall not be
erected anywhere in the Borough:
(a) Signs that incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving
illumination or with illumination that varies in intensity or
varies in color, and signs that have any visible moving part,
visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement of any
description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by
electrical pulsations or by actions of normal wind currents,
except when not visible from motor vehicles traveling on public
roadways. Hanging signs that simply swing in the wind, and
clocks and time/temperature signs, and barber poles may be
excepted if they comply with all other provisions of this article.
(b) Light sources that cast lights upon signs unless shielded by
opaque material so that the bulbs, floodlights or tubes are not
visible off the property on which the signs are located.
(c) Any sign or structure that constitutes a hazard to public health,
safety or welfare.
(d) Signs that, by reason of size, content, coloring or manner of
illuminating, obstruct the vision of drivers, either when driving
upon a roadway or when entering a roadway from another
drive or roadway, or obstruct or detract from the visibility or
§ 575-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-123
1:651
effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on public
streets and roads.
(e) Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or from a fire escape,
door, window or other required exitway.
(f) Signs that make use of the words "Stop," "Look," "One Way,"
"Danger," "Yield," or any similar words phrases symbols, lights
or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic.
(g) Signs on public property or public right-of-way, unless erected
by a governmental body or unless required to be so located by
order of a governmental body. No sign located on public
property or a public right-of-way shall bear any commercial
advertising or announcement.
(h) Signs painted on, attached to, or supported by a tree, utility
pole, stone or cliff or other natural object.
(i) String lights, other than temporary holiday decorations, that
are unshielded from view from the property in which they are
located.
(j) Searchlights, pennants, spinners, and streamers, except for
occasions such as grand openings, and then only with special
permission of the Zoning Officer or Council. Use shall be
limited to a fifteen-day period or by a time period specified by
Council.
(k) Roof signs.
B. Limit on number of signs per premises. No more than three signs may
be erected on any premises except when a premises is located on a
corner lot and has public entrances on two or more public ways, or
where a building has both a front and rear public entrance, in which
case one additional sign shall be allowed. In calculating the total
number of signs on a premises, temporary signs shall not be computed
in the total. A double-faced sign shall count as a single sign. Signs
enumerated in Subsection A(1), Signs generally permitted, shall not be
counted in calculating the total.
C. Limit on height of signs. No sign, or any part thereof, including braces,
supports or lights, shall exceed a height of 25 feet. Height shall be
measured from grade level directly below the face of the sign to the
highest part of the sign. This is subject to review on a case-by-case
basis.
D. Limit on sign area. The total sign area per premises shall not exceed
two square feet per lineal front foot of the main building on the
premises, except that no premises shall be limited to less than 20
square feet in total sign area. For corner lots, lineal front footage shall
§ 575-123 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-123
1:652
§ 575-124. Specific sign uses.
be considered the sum of the premises footage fronting the side and
front streets. In no case shall the total area of all signs on one premises
exceed 200 square feet. The total sign area for basement premises shall
not exceed 20 square feet.
E. Limit on content of largest sign. The largest sign on a premises shall not
advertise any particular article of merchandise unless it is the principal
product sold or manufactured on the premises.
F. Safety and maintenance.
(1) Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, anchors and wiring systems, shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with all local, state or national building,
electrical and fire prevention codes as they now exist, or as they
may hereafter exist. The National Electrical Code shall be used as
the standard for all wiring systems.
(2) All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept clean, neatly painted,
and in a good state of repair and maintenance.
A. Projecting signs.
(1) No sign may extend a distance of more than three horizontal feet or
exceed 864 square inches in area per side.
(2) No projecting sign may extend into the property of another or into a
public right-of-way, unless such right-of-way is a sidewalk and the
bottom of the sign is located not less than 7 1/2 feet from the
sidewalk.
(3) There shall be no more than one projecting sign per premises,
unless the premises is located on a corner lot or has public
entrances on two or more public ways, in which case one projecting
sign may be erected for and toward each public way.
B. Wall signs.
(1) No wall sign shall extend above the top of the wall upon which it is
placed.
(2) No wall sign or any part thereof shall project more than 12 inches
from the wall upon which it is mounted.
(3) No wall sign shall extend beyond the left and right extremities of
the wall to which it is attached.
C. Ground pole signs (including "sandwich" signs).
(1) Every ground pole sign and all parts, braces and supports thereof
shall be located entirely behind the property line and shall not
project over public right-of-way or other adjoining lands. However,
§ 575-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-124
1:653
ground pole signs may be permitted between the property line and
the building setback lines.
(2) No ground pole sign shall be larger than 25 square feet in sign area
on a single face, nor larger than 50 square feet of sign area for both
faces combined, nor in excess of 10 feet in any direction on the sign
face.
(3) A premises may erect and maintain one ground pole sign. However,
no individual business or other enterprise within a shopping center
may erect or maintain a ground pole sign.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, for any
property located on a corner lot or having public entrances to two
or more public ways, one ground pole sign may be erected for and
toward each public way.
D. LED/LCD freestanding signs.
(1) Every freestanding sign and all parts, braces and supports thereof
shall be located entirely behind the property line and shall not
project over public right-of-way or other adjoining lands. However,
freestanding signs may be permitted between the property line and
the building setback lines.
(2) No LED/LCD freestanding sign shall be larger than 75 square feet
in sign area on a single face, nor larger than 150 square feet of sign
area for both faces combined, nor in excess of 15 feet in width or 25
feet in height.
(3) A premises may erect and maintain one LED/LCD freestanding sign
per premises.
(4) After the effective date of this article, LED/LCD signs shall be
permitted only in the Highway Commercial (HC) District of
Bellefonte Borough. In addition, off-premises advertising signs
existing on the date of the enactment of this article may be changed
to LED/LCD only in the Highway Commercial District of Bellefonte
Borough.
(5) No LED/LCD sign shall be operated (brightness, timing, etc.) in
such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
(6) No LED/LCD sign shall incorporate continuous streaming or
moving message of any type. A sign may only change from one
message to another message, except that displays of time and
temperature may change more frequently.
(7) Signs which include new electrical connections, or in the case of
freestanding signs, include footers, must comply with all Uniform
Construction Code and/or such other building requirements which
may be applicable. In this case, a building permit application along
§ 575-124 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-124
1:654
with a fee as established by the Borough Fee Resolution will be
required before construction commences.
(8) Effective date. This subsection shall be effective upon adoption.
E. Home occupation signs. Home occupation signs shall not exceed one
sign per premises and shall not exceed 144 inches in size.
F. Bed-and-breakfast signage.
(1) The following regulations apply to signs used for bed-and-breakfast
establishments:
(a) Size. Signs may be double-faced, and may not exceed six
square feet on any one side.
(b) Material. Signs are to be made with wood, precision signboard,
or wrought iron.
(c) Height. Signs must be in scale with the building, subject to site
analysis by HARB.
(d) Mounting method. Signs can be mounted on the building, on
post(s), on brackets.
(e) Colors. Sign colors must be coordinated with the palette of the
house.
(f) Lettering. The printing style should reflect the period of the
building's construction.
(g) Lighting. Lighting is permitted, although the amount and style
is subject to site analysis by HARB.
(2) When the location for signage is in the regulated Historic District,
the HARB shall review each application on a case-by-case basis.
Design is encouraged to respond sensitively to the context of the
building it serves.
G. Banners. Temporary banners announcing special events of nonprofit
groups and organizations may be hung across Borough streets at
approved locations. Such banners are subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Banners must be constructed of air-relieved and weather-resistant
material.
(2) Banners shall not be permitted to hang lower than 15 feet and shall
not obstruct any other signage.
(3) Banners shall not exceed 65 feet in length, including corner ties.
(4) Banners shall not exceed four feet in height.
§ 575-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-124
1:655
§ 575-125. Signs in residential zones.
(5) Banners can be installed no more than two weeks prior to the event
and must be removed no later than one week after the event.
(6) Banners must be hung in a proper and safe manner. If the Borough
is required to make emergency repairs to the banner, or to remove
a banner damaged or destroyed by wind or the elements, the group
or organization will be billed for Borough time and equipment at
the prevailing rate.
H. Shopping center signs.
(1) Only ground pole signs that bear the name of the shopping center
may be erected on the lands occupied by the center, subject to the
provisions of Subsection C above.
(2) All other signs identifying each individual business shall be erected
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article.
A. Signs in low- and medium-density residential zones.
(1) All signs are prohibited in low- and medium-density residential
districts except those signs enumerated in § 575-123A(1), Signs
generally permitted, and § 575-124E, Home occupation signs.
(2) Illuminated signs (including those on soft-drink-dispensing
machines) are prohibited in all residential districts except for street
address signs, signs indicating doctors of medicine, signs
indicating churches and other places of worship, and signs
necessary for the public safety.
(3) No sign may be erected in a low- and medium-density residential
zone that exceeds 25 square feet of area on a single face or 50
square feet of area on a double-face sign.
B. Signs in the high-density residential zone.
(1) All signs are prohibited in the high-density residential zone except
those enumerated as follows:
(a) Signs permitted in the low-density and medium-density
residential zones.
(b) Wall signs denoting the name of an apparent building,
boardinghouse or rooming house, nonprofit club, funeral
home, or any other similar enterprise as hereafter may be
allowed in these zones. Such signs shall meet the requirements
established in §§ 575-123 and 575-124 above.
(2) Illuminated signs are prohibited with the exception of those
enumerated in Subsection A(2).
§ 575-124 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-125
1:656
§ 575-126. Signs in Historic District.
(3) Sign area restriction in the high-density residential zones are the
same as Subsection A(3).
A. General requirements. All signs within the Historic District shall comply
with the sign regulations that are applicable in the underlying zoning
district, unless excepted under the provisions of Subsection A(2)
hereunder, and with the additional special standards for signs
contained in this section.
(1) Certificate of appropriateness. A sign in the Historic District that
meets the requirements of the underlying district must still be
certified as appropriate in relation to the specific building on which
it is to be located and in terms of compatibility with signs in the
surrounding area. Compliance with the underlying zoning district
requirements does not guarantee approval of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(2) Signs not provided for. HARB may recommend and Council may
issue a certificate of appropriateness for a sign that is not
permitted by the regulations of the underlying zoning district if the
proposed sign is shown to be historically accurate by
documentation acceptable to HARB.
B. Special standards for the Historic District.
(1) Illumination. No sign in the Historic District, including those on
soft-drink-dispensing machines, shall be internally lighted.
Illumination of signs in the Historic District shall be either by neon
or by indirect lighting only, and shall be shielded or otherwise
arranged to prevent glare.
(2) Acceptable sign types. These include:
(a) Framed on a background;
(b) Painted on a building or mounted on a board;
(c) Individual letters cut out and mounted;
(d) Small plaques;
(e) Etched or painted signs on window glass, covering no more
than 20% of the glazing area; and
(f) Awning signs, provided the awning is of traditional material
(e.g., canvas) and design (e.g., retractable and sloping rather
than fixed or rounded).
(3) Placement. Signs shall be placed in traditional locations on building
facades.
§ 575-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-126
1:657
§ 575-127. Administration and enforcement.
(4) Installation. Installation should not obscure existing architectural
features.
(5) Colors. Sign colors should be historically accurate and should be
compatible with those on the building and adjacent buildings.
(6) Soft drink machines. Internally lit signs on soft-drink-dispensing
machines — commonly advertising the brand name of a product —
are prohibited in the Historic District.
(7) Banners. Temporary banners as established in § 575-124G above
shall not require a certificate of appropriateness.
A. Enforcement officer. The Bellefonte Borough Zoning Officer is hereby
designated as the enforcement officer of this article and shall have the
following duties and powers:
(1) Review all applications for sign permits, issuing permits for those
signs found to be in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Receive, investigate and process all complaints and notify all
persons of any violations of provisions of this article.
(3) Cause the removal of certain signs that are found in noncompliance
with the provisions of this article.
(4) Render, when called to do so, administrative interpretations
regarding the provisions of this article and their effect on the
display of any sign located or to be located in the Borough of
Bellefonte.
(5) Maintain all records necessary to the appropriate administration
and enforcement of this article, including applications for variances
and appeals.
(6) Provide and maintain a source of public information relative to all
matters arising out of this article.
B. Permits required. Except for signs enumerated in § 575-123A(1) above,
no person may erect, alter or relocate within Bellefonte Borough any
sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Zoning Officer and
paying the required fee.
(1) Permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted
to the Zoning Officer and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
(a) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
applicant, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be
erected or affixed, the owner of the sign, and the person to be
erecting or affixing the sign;
§ 575-126 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-127
1:658
(b) The location of the building, structure or zoning lot on which
the sign is to be erected or affixed;
(c) A sketch plan of the property involved, showing accurate
placement thereon of the proposed sign;
(d) Two blueprints or ink drawings or the plans and specifications
of the sign to be erected or affixed and the method of
construction and attachment to the building or in the ground;
such plans and specifications shall include details of
dimensions, color, materials and weight;
(e) If required by the Zoning Officer, a copy of stress sheets and
calculations prepared by or approved by a registered
structural engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, showing that the sign is designed for dead load
and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by
this and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Bellefonte;
(f) The written consent of the owner of the building, structure or
property on which the sign is to be erected or affixed; and
(g) Such other information as the Zoning Officer may require to
determine full compliance with this and other applicable
ordinances of the Borough of Bellefonte.
(2) Application fees. Each sign application required by this article shall
be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution
of Borough Council.
(3) Issuance of permits. Upon the filing of an application for a sign
permit, the Zoning Officer shall examine the plans, specifications,
and other submitted data, and the premises upon which the sign is
proposed to be erected or affixed. If it appears that the proposed
sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this article and in
conformance with the chapter and other applicable ordinances of
Bellefonte Borough, and if the appropriate permit fee has been
paid, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for the proposed sign.
For signs to be erected within the Historic District, a sign permit
shall not be issued until Council, after reviewing the
recommendation of the Historical and Architectural Review Board,
authorizes a certificate of appropriateness. The Zoning Officer may,
at his or her own discretion, issue a temporary permit for a sign
prior to the approval of a certificate of appropriateness by Council,
if the proposed sign appears to meet the requirements of this
article and the design guidelines promulgated by the Historical and
Architectural Review Board. Such temporary permits will be
subject to the review of the Historical and Architectural Review
Board and the approval of Council.
§ 575-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-127
1:659
(4) Revocation of permit. All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this article are mere licenses and, as such, are at any
time revocable for just cause by the Bellefonte Borough Council. All
permits issued pursuant to this article are hereby subject to this
provision.
C. Removal of certain signs. The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to
institute proceedings for the removal of the following signs:
(1) Unsafe signs. If the Zoning Officer finds that any sign is unsafe or
insecure or is a menace to the public, notice shall be given to the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial interest in the
building or premises on which such sign is located. Correction to
the condition that caused the Zoning Officer to give such notice
shall be effected through the procedures established in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Zoning Officer is
authorized to cause any sign to be removed summarily and without
notice, at the expense of the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial interest in the building or the premises on which such
sign is located, whenever the Zoning Officer determines that such
sign is an immediate peril to persons or property.
(2) Illegal signs. If any sign is erected in violation of the requirements
of this article, such sign shall be removed in accordance with the
procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
(3) Preexisting, nonconforming signs. Within three years of the date of
the passage of this article, all preexisting signs inconsistent with
the requirements herein shall be removed in accordance with the
procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.
(4) Obsolete signs. Any sign, whether existing on or erected after the
effective date of this article, that advertises a business no longer
being conducted or a product no longer being offered for sale in or
from the premises on which the sign is located, shall be removed
within 30 days upon the cessation of such business or sale of such
product by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
interest in the building or premises on which such sign is located. If
such sign is not removed within such thirty-day period, the sign
shall be removed in accordance with the procedures established in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
D. Violations and penalties. Failure to comply with any provision of this
article shall be a violation of this chapter.
(1) Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this
article occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a
complaint to the Zoning Officer stating fully the causes and basis
§ 575-127 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-127
1:660
thereof. The Zoning Officer shall record such complaint, investigate
and take appropriate action as provided by this article.
(2) Penalties. Penalties and remedies for violations of this article are
stipulated in Article VI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
E. Appeals. Any appeal from a decision or action of Council or of any
officer or agency of the Borough in matters pertaining to this article
shall be made in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
F. Zoning Hearing Board of Bellefonte Borough. The Zoning Hearing
Board, as authorized in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, is hereby vested with all jurisdiction and authority to
hold hearings and perform such functions as are authorized by Article
IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as it pertains to
the provisions herein.
G. Amendments. The regulations and restrictions set forth in this article
may, from time to time, be amended through action of Council in the
manner provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-127
1:661

ARTICLE XXII
The Official Zoning Map
§ 575-128. Official Map.130
The boundaries of the districts in which this Borough is divided shall be
shown upon a map entitled the "Bellefonte Borough Zoning Map." The
Map and notations, references, and other data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if it were fully described
herein.
§ 575-129. Adoption of Official Zoning Map.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the
President of the Borough Council, attested by the Borough Manager, under
the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of
the Borough of Bellefonte, Centre County, Pennsylvania," together with the
date of enactment of the ordinance. The Map shall be kept on file with the
Borough's Zoning Officer and shall be the final authority as to the current
zoning status of land and water areas in the Borough.
§ 575-130. Changes in Official Zoning Map.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map,
such changes shall be entered promptly on the Map. All changes shall be
certified by initialing of the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the
Borough Council President, together with a brief description of the changes
and the date of enactment of such changes under the word "Revised." No
amendment to this chapter that involves matter portrayed on the Official
Zoning Map shall become effective until after such changes and entry has
been shown on the Official Zoning Map.
A. The official zoning map is being revised to reflect that the R-4 High
Density Residential District covering Centre Crest and adjacent
properties is being re-zoned to R-2 Town Residential (infill). This rezoning
affects the following parcels:
32-103-,023-,0000
32-103-,200-,0000
32-103-,103-,0000
32-103-,102-,0000
32-103-,060A-,0000
32-103-,061-,0000
32-103-,060-,0000
32-103-,084-,0000
130. Editor's Note: A copy of the Borough's Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 575-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-130
1:663
§ 575-131. Preservation of previous maps.
The previous Official Zoning Maps or any significant parts thereof
remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining
to their adoption or amendment.
§ 575-132. District boundary lines.
The district boundary lines shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts, the following
rules shall apply:
32-103-,085-,0000
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall
be construed as following such municipal limits;
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines or railroad rights-ofway
shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks, or if
there are no tracks, to the center of the right-of-way;
E. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines, and in the event the stream or other body of water moves,
the boundary shall move with the center line of such;
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through E above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the Map to carry out the spirit and intention of the zoning
boundary designation;
G. Where physical features existing on the ground are found to be at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections A through F above, it shall
be the function of the Zoning Officer to make a determination; and
H. Where one or more district boundary lines divide a lot held in single
ownership, the regulations of one of the districts on either side of any
such boundary line may be chosen by the owner to apply to the portion
of such lot in the district on the other side of such line for a distance of
not more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary lines, provided that
lot or area and setback requirements are met for said portions.
§ 575-130 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-132
1:664
ARTICLE XXIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 575-133. Intent.
The intent of this article is to clearly define the policies and procedures
regarding municipal administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 575-134. Zoning Officer.
The Bellefonte Borough Council shall appoint a Zoning Officer, who shall
meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.131
The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any
construction or any use or change of use that does not conform to this
chapter. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be as follows:
A. To examine, record and file all applications for zoning permits, with any
accompanying plans and documents, and to issue such permits only for
lots, uses and structures that are in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. To receive applications for certificates of nonconforming uses, and to
investigate and issue or deny such certifications.
C. To post a schedule of fees in his or her office.
D. To receive, investigate and process all complaints and to notify persons
of any violations of provisions of this chapter.
E. To conduct inspections of property for which zoning permits have been
issued to ascertain if the construction or use is in conformity with the
provisions of the permit.
F. To maintain and present upon request zoning-related public records,
documents and materials.
G. To be responsible for keeping current copies of this chapter and the
Official Zoning Map for distribution to the public.
H. To present to the Zoning Hearing Board, in each case appearing before
the Board, all relevant facts and arguments in support of the Borough's
position, interpretation and procedures in the application of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
I. To institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement
when acting within the scope of the Zoning Officer's employment.
J. To perform other duties in the administration and enforcement of this
chapter as may be directed or as required by this chapter or the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 575-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-135
1:665
§ 575-135. Fees.
The Bellefonte Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of
fees and a collection procedure for all zoning matters provided for by this
chapter or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The schedule of
fees shall address all applications made pursuant to this chapter, including
those to be considered by the Borough Council, Planning Commission,
Zoning Hearing Board, and/or the Zoning Officer.
§ 575-136. Presubmission conference.
§ 575-137. Zoning permits.
A. Where prescribed by this chapter, applicants shall fulfill the following
presubmission requirements to ensure that any potential negative
impacts associated with certain development activities are properly
identified and mitigated by providing a forum for discussions between
the applicant and the municipality. In instances where a presubmission
conference is required, a meeting between the municipal staff and the
applicant shall be held prior to the submission of a formal plan. The
owner, equitable owner, and/or the owner's agent shall request such a
conference with the municipal Zoning Officer, the purpose of which
shall be as follows:
(1) To allow the petitioner to submit unofficial preliminary studies of
the concept of the proposed development for tentative review,
comments and recommendations.
(2) To review the Zoning Ordinance as it may relate to the proposed
development.
(3) To determine whether the proposal may have an undue adverse
impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) To identify strategies to mitigate such impacts.
B. The applicant shall, at a minimum, present a sketch plan detailing the
development proposal and a document identifying potential impacts
and detailing a strategy to mitigate said impacts. The municipality may
identify other potential impacts to be addressed prior to plan approval.
A. Permits required. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the
erection, extension or alteration of any structure or portion thereof and
prior to the use or change in use of a structure or land. No zoning
permit shall be required for normal maintenance activities and minor
repairs that do not constitute an erection, extension or alteration as
herein defined. Nor shall a zoning permit be required for a change from
one permitted use to another when such new use must meet the same
zoning requirements as the old use. No permit shall be granted by the
Zoning Officer for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter or, upon appeal, in compliance with a decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board or the courts.
§ 575-135 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-137
1:666
§ 575-138. Certificate of occupancy.
Upon completion of the erection, extension or alteration of a structure,
inside or out, or upon fulfilling the requirements of a change in use for
which a zoning permit was issued, the applicant shall apply for a certificate
of occupancy. The structure or the use for which the zoning permit was
issued may not be occupied or otherwise used until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
B. Application for zoning permits. To apply for a zoning permit, the
applicant shall submit an application for a zoning permit to the Zoning
Officer along with all required fees. When required by this chapter, site
plans and other information shall accompany the application.
C. Review of application. All applications for zoning permits shall be
granted or denied by the Zoning Officer within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the applications and fees for such. Whenever a site plan is
required as a part of the application process, the applications shall be
granted or denied by the Zoning Officer within 60 days from the date of
receipt of the site plan and fees for such. The Zoning Officer shall notify
the applicant in writing of all action taken on the application for a
zoning permit within said period. If the application is denied, such
notifications shall specify the provisions of this chapter with which such
application does not comply. Furthermore, the Zoning Officer shall
notify the applicant of procedures for appealing the denial. If for any
reason the Zoning Officer fails to notify the applicant of all action taken
within such period as herein specified, the application shall be
considered approved as submitted.
D. Permit expiration. A zoning permit shall be valid for a period of 12
months from the day of issuance or until a certificate of occupancy is
issued, whichever is first. A permit may be extended by the Zoning
Officer, upon proper application and payment of fees, for a period not to
exceed six months.
A. Within 15 days of an application for a certificate of occupancy, the
Zoning Officer or his designated agent shall inspect the premises and
determine if the action taken complies with the regulations of this
chapter. If it does, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within the
fifteen-day time limitation.
B. If the action fails to comply with the regulations of this chapter, the
Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the denial of a
certificate of occupancy and shall state the provision of this chapter
with which the action does not comply. The applicant may correct the
defects cited in the denial of the Zoning Officer for a certificate of
occupancy. If, upon notification by the applicant and inspection of the
premises, the Zoning Officer finds that the defects have been corrected
and that no additional defects have been created, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued within two working days.
§ 575-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-138
1:667
§ 575-139. Site plan review.
A site plan, as described below, shall accompany all applications for a
zoning permit whenever such applications propose the following:
C. Failure of the Zoning Officer properly to grant or deny an occupancy
permit in the manner and time period stipulated above shall constitute
approval of the application for a certificate of occupancy, and the
premises may be occupied or otherwise used as stipulated in the zoning
permit.
D. Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued in the manner prescribed above pending the
completion of a structure or the fulfillment of requirements for a
change in use to allow for partial occupancy and upon the posting of a
bond or certified check in an amount equal to the Zoning Officer's
estimate of work remaining to be completed for a permanent
certificate. The certificate shall be valid only until such time as the
action for which the zoning permit was issued is complete or for a
period of six months after issuance, whichever is less.
E. Upon expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the applicant
shall apply for a permanent certificate of occupancy, or in case the
action remains incomplete, may apply for one additional temporary
certificate of occupancy. If the action remains incomplete after all
additional temporary certificates have expired, the Zoning Officer shall
use the proceeds of the bond or certified check to complete the
necessary work. Any costs incurred by the Borough over and above the
amount of the bond or certified check shall be paid by the zoning permit
holder prior to occupying the structure or otherwise using the land.
A. A proposed use or structure located in or within 100 feet of a floodplain,
as stipulated in the Bellefonte Borough Floodplain Ordinance.132
B. A proposed use or structure on steep slopes, as defined herein.
C. A proposed use required to have a parking lot.
D. Whenever development is proposed involving the location of two or
more primary uses or structures on a single lot, including but not
limited to apartment complexes, mobile home parks, shopping centers,
and industrial parks.
E. Any highway commercial or industrial use.
F. A potable water well pump station facility in a residential zone.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 307, Flood Hazard Areas.
§ 575-138 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-140
1:668
§ 575-140. Submission and content of the site plan.
Four copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer along
with the application for a zoning permit. The site plan shall be drawn to a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger (one inch equals less than 50 feet)
and contain the following written and graphic information:
A. The name of the proposed development, identification by Centre County
Tax Map parcel number, the name and address of the legal owner of the
property (and equitable owner, if any), proof of ownership, and the
individual or firm preparing the site plan.
B. Date of the application for a zoning permit.
C. Graphic scale.
D. North point (specified as true or magnetic).
E. Key map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, showing streets and
roads, buildings, and motor vehicle access within 500 feet from the
exterior boundary of the lot.
F. Total size of the property and each lot and/or area to be leased.
G. The proposed use of the property.
H. Topographic contour lines for existing and design finish grades drawn
at vertical intervals of five feet, including elevation of each ten-foot
interval.
I. The total tract boundary with distances marked to at least the nearest
foot.
J. Location of the front, side and rear yard setback areas as required by
the applicable zoning district.
K. All existing and proposed structures, showing location and a statement
of the ground-floor area, any retail and service floor area, and height of
each.
L. All streams, floodplain boundaries, and slopes of 25% or more.
M. Location of all existing and proposed utilities and their easements,
including those within 50 feet of the boundaries of the site plan.
N. All existing and proposed street rights-of-way and cartways, including
those abutting the property.
O. All existing and proposed points of motor vehicle access to the property.
P. All existing and proposed parking, loading spaces, and parking lots, and
a statement of the surfacing materials to be used, and the calculations
used to determine the number of required parking spaces.
Q. Fire lane locations.
§ 575-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-140
1:669
R. The location, intensity and light pattern produced by all outdoor light
fixtures.
S. The location, caliper, height and/or foliage, as appropriate, and generic
names of vegetation to be used for landscaping.
T. The location of all buffer yards required by this chapter.
U. For development proposed within the floodplain, the following shall be
required:
(1) All stormwater management controls required by the Bellefonte
Stormwater Management Ordinance.133
(2) Soil and sedimentation control plan in accordance with 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, "Erosion and Sediment Control."
(3) A statement of existing soil types.
V. The location and cross section of all sidewalks and curbing required by
this chapter.
W. A statement of general utility information, and information required by
Act 172 of 1986 (73 P.S. § 176 et seq.), as amended.
X. A space labeled "Approved by" for the signature of the Zoning Officer,
and a space for the date of such approval.
Y. The location, face area, and height of signs as regulated by the
Bellefonte Borough Sign Ordinance (see Article XXI).
Z. A statement of current zoning classification of the lands.
AA. A space labeled "Approved by" for the signature of the Fire Chief and
the Borough Engineer, and a space for the date of each such approval.
BB. A statement of the existing building coverages, proposed building
coverages, and maximum building coverages (as allowed by the
applicable zoning district), and a statement of the existing impervious
coverages, proposed impervious coverages, and maximum impervious
coverages (as allowed by the applicable zoning district).
CC. Two sections through the site showing buildings, light fixtures, and
standards; one section to be from side yard to side yard, and the other
section to be from front yard to rear yard.
DD. Photographs or sketches of the front elevations for all buildings
proximate to the new building or addition.
EE. The following certification by the applicant's professionally licensed
engineer: "I, ____________________, hereby certify that this site plan
meets all design requirements of the Bellefonte Borough Zoning
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 490, Stormwater Management.
§ 575-140 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-140
1:670
§ 575-141. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be a violation of
this chapter.
§ 575-142. Appeals.
Any appeal from a decision or action of Council or of any officer or agency
of the Borough in matters pertaining to this chapter shall be made in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-143. Amendments.
The regulations, restrictions, and district boundaries set forth in the
ordinance may, from time to time, be amended through action of Council in
the manner provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Ordinance," and the professional licensed engineer's seal affixed to the
plan.
FF. Signed, notarized statement by the owner certifying ownership of the
property.
A. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint
with the Zoning Officer stating fully the causes and basis thereof. The
Zoning Officer shall record such complaint, investigate, and take
appropriate action as provided by this chapter.
B. Notice of violation. If the Zoning Officer finds that any provision of this
chapter has been violated, he or she shall initiate enforcement
proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided for by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Penalties. Penalties and remedies for violations of this chapter are
stipulated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-143
1:671

ARTICLE XXIV
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 575-144. Establishment of Zoning Hearing Board.
There is hereby created a five-member Zoning Hearing Board, whose
membership, organization, and procedures shall be those as set forth in
Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-145. Alternate members.
Council may appoint up to two alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board, who shall serve pursuant to Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-146. Hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
procedures provided in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 575-147. Powers and functions.
The Board shall have such powers and perform such functions as are
authorized by Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-148. Zoning appeals to court.
Appeals to court shall be governed by Article X-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 575-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-148
1:673

ARTICLE XXV
Definitions
§ 575-149. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 575-150. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this
article, unless a contrary intention clearly appears. All words and terms not
defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage.
A-FRAME SIGN — A single- or double-faced sign used only on a temporary
basis and commonly called a "sandwich board."
ACCESS — A way or means of approach for vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic
from a street, right-of-way, public area or community facility to a lot.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "person," "applicant," "subdivider," "developer" and "owner"
shall include an individual firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, public or private corporation for profit or not-for-profit,
political subdivision, agency or instrumentality of the commonwealth,
bureau or agency of the United States, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used or occupied."
F. The word "Borough" shall mean Bellefonte Borough.
G. The word "municipality" shall mean Bellefonte Borough.
H. The term "planning agency" and "planning commission" shall mean the
Bellefonte Borough Planning Commission.
I. The word "Council" shall mean the Bellefonte Borough Council.
J. The term "governing body" shall mean the governing body of Bellefonte
Borough.
K. The word "County" shall mean the County of Centre.
§ 575-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:675
ACCESS DRIVE — A driveway providing pedestrian and vehicular access
between a public or private street and a parking area within a land
development. (See also "street.")
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot as the principal use or
building.
ADAPTIVE REUSE — A process that adapts buildings for new uses while
retaining their historic features.
ADDITION — An addition to the floor area of an existing structure or
building, an increase in the size of a structure or building, or an increase in
that portion of a lot occupied by an existing use; an enlargement of a use,
structure or building.
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any business, establishment or use which
offers materials, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas." Adult-oriented businesses shall also mean
and include any establishment that regularly features, for economic gain
or other consideration, entertainment in any form that is characterized by
nudity or the depiction or display of sexual activities.[Amended 4-16-2018
by Ord. No. 041618-01]
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — Establishment where out-of home care is
provided to four or more elderly or disabled adults for part of a twentyfour-
hour day, excluding care provided by relatives. Care includes personal
assistance in the activities of daily living, the development of skills for
living, and providing social contact to reduce isolation and loneliness.
ADVERSE EFFECT — An activity or action that may be detrimental to
natural and/or cultural resources.
AGRICULTURE — The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry,
horticulture and gardening, including the keeping or raising of livestock
such as cattle, cows, hogs, horses, sheep, goats, poultry, rabbits, birds, fish,
bees, and other similar animals. This definition also includes noncommercial
greenhouses as well as the processing and retail sale of goods produced on
the farm. This definition shall also expressly include the incidental slaughter
of livestock which have been raised on the site.
AGRICULTURAL USE — Any use of land or structures for farming, dairying,
pasturage, forestry, or animal husbandry, including the sale of agricultural
products and services. Uses accessory to an agricultural use may include
barns, stables, corn cribs, silos and any other structure or building clearly
related to an agricultural operation.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water used, or intended to be used, for the
landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used,
or intended to be used, for airport buildings or air navigation facilities or
rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities.
ALLEY — A public way less than 33 feet in right-of-way width, designated as
an alley on a recorded plot or dedicated as such in a deed, whether privately
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:676
or publicly owned, primarily for secondary means of access to the rear or
sides of properties. In Bellefonte Borough, alleys have been designated as
"lanes."
ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, joists or rafters,
or enclosing walls. Any renovation to a building which would change its use.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE OR ENTERPRISE — A commercial establishment
which provides, as a principal use, amusement devices and/or games of
skill or chance (e.g., pinball machines, video games, Skee-Ball, electronic
or water firing ranges or other similar devices). This definition does not
include the use of two or less such devices as an accessory use.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any establishment offering veterinary services.
Animal hospitals can treat all types of animals and can include outdoor and
overnight boarding of animals.
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his/her heirs, successors,
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for zoning permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan,
or for the approval of a development plan.
APPROVED — "Approved" by the recognized authoritative agency or official
as specified in the respective regulations.
AREA — The two-dimensional measurement of space between known lines
or boundaries.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The sum of the floor areas of a building
as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and/or all areas
intended for the conduct of a use.
A.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The sum of the floor areas of a dwelling
unit as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and including
all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room, kitchen,
basement, bedroom, bathroom, family room, closets, hallways,
stairways and foyers, but not including cellars or attics, service or
utility rooms, nor unheated areas such as enclosed porches or garages.
B.
LOT AREA — The total surface area contained within the property lines
of a lot.
C.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:677
AUTOMOBILE SALES — Any building or land devoted to the retail sales
of motor vehicles, including accessory service and repair facilities, if such
service and repair area is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE — The retail repair, servicing, maintenance and
reconstruction of motor vehicles, but not including car washes per se.
AWNING SIGN — A sign made of cloth, metal or other material and affixed
to a building in such a manner that the sign may be raised or retracted to a
position against the building.
BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — A bank, savings and loan,
credit union, or other financial institution that provides retail banking
services to individuals and businesses. These uses include only those
institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money.
BALCONY — An unroofed platform projecting from the wall of a building
and enclosed by a parapet or railing.
BANNER — Any sign made of cloth, plastic or similar material used only on
a temporary basis.
BASEMENT — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground, and with a floor-toceiling
height of greater than 6 1/2 feet.
BEAUTY SALON — Commercial use providing for a variety of personal
services, including, but not limited to, hairstyling, coloring, manicures,
pedicures, tanning, etc. Such a use shall not be considered a home
occupation.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — A single-family detached residential
dwelling unit providing, for compensation, sleeping accommodations and
breakfast for transient guests in nine or less guest rooms pursuant to the
conditions of this chapter.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or attraction which is sold, offered or existing
elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. Billboards
offer space which is generally leased or rented by the owner thereof to
others for the purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial
message. For the purposes of this chapter, a billboard shall be considered
an off-premises sign.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections.
BLOCK FACE — The lots abutting on one side of a street between the two
nearest intersecting streets. Lanes or alleys do not constitute a street.
RETAIL SALES AREA — The total area of use which is devoted to
the display of goods and/or services, including aisles, to prospective
patrons.
D.
OUTDOOR STORAGE AREA — The total area of use devoted to the
storage of goods and/or materials in areas open to the sky and/or
outside of a primary or accessory building.
E.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:678
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land planted and maintained in shrubs, bushes,
trees, grass or other vegetative material and where no structure or building
is permitted except a wall or fence.
BUILDING — A structure, including any part thereof, having a roof and used
for a shelter or enclosure of persons or property, including but not limited
to any structure used for a residence, business, industry or other public or
private purpose, or accessory thereto, and including porches, greenhouses,
stables, garages, roadside stands, mobile homes, manufactured homes, and
similar structures, whether stationary or movable, but excluding fences and
walls part of landscaping, signs and awnings.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured within the outside
of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory
buildings on the lot, designated as either gross square feet or as a
percentage of the total lot area.
BUSINESS SERVICE USES — Business service uses may include the
following uses: advertising agency, credit reporting agency, data processing
service, equipment leasing, mailing service, management consulting, news
service, photography, protective service, public relations, reproduction
service, research and development, and stenographic service.
ACCESSORY, BUILDING — A detached subordinate building, the use of
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the primary
building, and located on the same lot as that occupied by the primary
building.
A.
ALTERATION, BUILDING — As applied to a building, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, including supporting members
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or an enlargement,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the
relocation of a building onto or within a lot.
B.
AREA, BUILDING — The total areas of the greatest outside dimensions
on a horizontal of the principal building and all accessory buildings.
C.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING — The linear length of all ground-floor walls
facing or exposed to any street right-of-way, plaza or arcade.
D.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from average grade to the
top of the habitable or occupiable space.
E.
LENGTH, BUILDING — The horizontal measurement of any continuous
building wall.
F.
PRINCIPAL, BUILDING — A building or structure where the principal
use is conducted on the lot where the building is located.
G.
SETBACK LINE, BUILDING — A line establishing the minimum depth
of the front, side and rear yard for the applicable zoning district as
measured from the street line.
H.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:679
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree at the height of six inches from the top
of the root ball, or in the case of a multi-stem tree, the caliper is determined
by the average of the stems.
CANOPY TREE — A tree, either single-stemmed or multistemmed, which
has a caliper of at least two inches at planting and is of a species which, at
maturity, can be expected to reach a height of at least 30 feet.
CAMPGROUND — A lot, tract or parcel of land upon which two or more
campsites are located or established, intended or maintained for occupation
by transients in recreational vehicles or tents.
CAMPSITE — A plot of ground within a campground intended for
occupation by a recreational vehicle or tent.
CAMPUS — A contiguous area of land constituting and making up the
grounds of a college, university, hospital or public/private school, containing
buildings and related uses. For the purpose of this definition, the contiguity
of any land area for such uses shall not be deemed destroyed by the
presence of public rights-of-way.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to a rigid structure, other than an awning,
that is permanently attached to a building; usually covering a sidewalk or
walkway.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums, and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within the
boundaries thereof.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — Any place receiving children for day care,
where the number of children receiving day care is in accordance with the
regulations governing child day-care centers.
CHURCH AND RELATED USES — A building, structure or group of
buildings or structures, including accessory uses, designed or intended for
public worship. This definition shall include rectories, convents, cemeteries
and church-related education and/or day-care facilities.
CLUBS, LODGES, AND FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS — The use of land
or structures by a nonprofit group not operating for the purpose of trade or
business, but operating for social and community service activities among
group members and their guests.
CLUB, PRIVATE — An organization catering exclusively to members and
their guests, or premises or buildings for social, recreational and
administrative purposes which are not conducted for profit, provided there
are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial
activities except as provided for the membership of such club. Clubs shall
include, but not be limited to, service and political organizations, labor
unions, as well as social and athletic clubs. Private clubs shall not include
adult-related uses, as defined in this chapter.
CLUSTER — A development design technique that concentrates buildings
on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation,
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:680
common open space, and/or preservation of environmentally sensitive
features or agricultural areas.
CO-LOCATION (TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES) — The use of
wireless telecommunication support facilities by more than one wireless
telecommunication provider.
COMMUNITY CENTER OR CLUB — The use of land or structures for
social and community service activities charitable, educational or religious
in nature for public rather than for private gain, including recreational
programs, counseling services and human service agencies and programs.
A group of individuals formally organized for a common interest.
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISEMENT — The display of the name of any
business or professional establishment, logo of such, or the description and/
or prices of items or services available.
COMMERCIAL PARKING (SURFACE OR STRUCTURE) — Primary business
where passenger vehicles may be stored, for a fee, for short-term, daily or
overnight off-street parking, and connected to a street by an access drive.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a
condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building, structure or
parking lot, including the placement of manufactured homes and mobile
homes.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign temporarily erected
during construction to inform the public of the developer, contractors,
architects, engineers, the nature of the project and/or anticipated
completion dates. Any sign offering land or space for lease or sale shall be
considered a real estate sign.
CONSTRACTORS/PROPERTY MAINTENANCE SIGN — A sign identifying
the individuals or companies involved in smaller construction and property
maintenance activities. The signs typically identify but are not limited to
those involved in remodeling, roofing, siding, landscaping, lawn care,
painting or pool cleaning.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A business which specializes in the retail sale
and/or rental of household products and foods. Convenience stores may
also include any of the following, provided that each use has obtained the
necessary respective approvals and it operates as an accessory use to the
convenience store:
Retail sales or rental of books, magazines, videos, software, and video
games, provided that adult-related uses are expressly prohibited.
A.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:681
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE) — A prison and its
related offices for the housing of inmates.
CURB RETURN — A curved curb connecting the tangents of two
intersecting curbs of streets or driveways.
DECK — A flat-floored, roofless area, usually built above grade and
adjoining a building.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units and/or amount of commercial
(including retail, office and/or industrial) gross floor area in relation to the
land area of the lot proposed for such use(s).
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes a subdivision of land or
a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes and mobile homes, streets and other
paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location, and setbacks of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions
of the development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written
and graphic materials referred to in these definitions.
DIRECT LIGHTING — Illumination of a sign which is effected by an artificial
source of light not contained within the sign itself, in which the light itself
travels without reflection on a straight path from the light fixture to the
intended surface to be illuminated.
Restaurants, including drive-through or fast-food operations, subject
to the requirements of this chapter, and provided that rest rooms are
made available to the public.
B.
C. Accessory amusements devices with no more than two such devices.
D. Automatic bank teller machines.
E. Film development dropoff sites.
F. Laundry, dry cleaning and tailoring dropoff sites.
G. Lottery sales counters and machines.
Propane fuel sales with no larger than twenty-pound tanks, which must
be stored outside of the building at all times.
H.
Dispensing of motor vehicle fuels, oils, compressed air, kerosene,
washer fluid, and other motor-vehicle-related items, subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
I.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:682
DIRECTIONAL SIGN, OFF-SITE — A sign, located off site and along an
arterial street, listing the names of one or more business establishments
with distance information designed to direct vehicular traffic. For the
purposes of this chapter, an off-site directional sign shall be considered an
off-premises sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN, ON-SITE — Any sign on the property which includes
information aiding in the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign which is located on the premises and lists the
name(s) and/or address of the occupant, the address of the premises and/
or the identification of a legal business or occupation which exists at the
premises (sometimes referred to as a "menu board").
DRIVEWAY — A corridor, extending beyond the front yard setback,
providing motor vehicle access from a street to a lot. The access point to the
driveway cannot be within the front house dimension.
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment or business
maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry
without the maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry-cleaning
equipment or machinery on the premises.
DRY CLEANING PLANT — A building, portion of a building, or premises
used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel,
or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only,
in volatile solvents, including, but not limited to, solvents of the petroleum
distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes
incidental thereto.
DWELLING — A building or structure or portion thereof arranged or
designed to provide living facilities for one or more families.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living and/or sleeping rooms arranged for
the use of one or more individuals living as a family, with cooking, living and
sanitary facilities.
DWELLING TYPES —
A. APARTMENT — A dwelling unit with multiple dwellings.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL — A building containing three or more
dwelling units, at least one of which must be located above or below the
remaining units.
B.
DUPLEX — (Two-family; single-family semidetached.) A freestanding
building containing two dwelling units for two families, arranged in a
side-by-side or over-and-under configuration.
C.
PATIO HOME — A single-family detached dwelling shifted to one side
of the lot, i.e., placed on the lot so that one side setback is 15 feet
and the other side setback is larger than if both side setbacks were
approximately equal.
D.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:683
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — Retail establishment selling
food and drink for consumption on the premises.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any building or part thereof or group of
buildings or structures designed, constructed or used for instruction in any
branch of knowledge.
ELDERLY/AGE-RESTRICTED AND/OR DISABLED PERSONS HOUSING —
A residential building or complex of buildings with dwelling units
specifically designed for the use of and occupied by any person(s) 55
years of age or older and their spouse and dependent relatives, or any
person(s) less than 55 years of age who has a record of or is regarded
as having a physical or mental impairment substantially limiting one or
more of the major life activities of that person(s) and their spouse and
dependent relatives and live-in caregivers. Impairment does not include
those exceptions listed in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ERECTED — Constructed or assembled.
EROSION — The removal of soil, stone and other surface materials by the
action of natural elements.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public and private utilities
necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal
structure, including but not limited to underground, surface or overhead
gas, electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater drainage, and
communications systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers,
wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins,
water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings
used or intended to be used for human habitation.
EVERGREEN TREE — A coniferous tree displaying year-round needles or
leaves, either single-stemmed or multistemmed, which is a minimum of six
feet tall at planting and is of a species which at maturity can be expected to
reach a height of at least 20 feet.
EXTENSION — See "addition."
FAMILY — One or more persons who live in one dwelling unit and maintain
a common household. A "family" may consist of a single person or of two or
more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption. It may
also include domestic servants and gratuitous guests, but not occupants of
a club, fraternal lodging or boardinghouses.134
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling containing one dwelling unit
and not attached to any other dwelling units.
E.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling containing at least three dwelling units,
but not more than 15 dwelling units, attached side by side by the use of
a common wall. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09082009-01]
F.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:684
FARM — A parcel of land with 10 acres or more devoted to or available for
the cultivation of land or other agricultural uses.
FENCE — A structure, solid or otherwise, which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection, confinement, or concealment.
FINANCIAL SERVICE USES — Financial service uses may include the
following: banks, commodity broker, credit union, insurance agent and
company, investment company, mortgage broker, real estate agency and
broker, savings and loan, and securities broker.
FINISHED LIVING AREA — All habitable interior space, excluding unheated
porches, unfinished basements, carports and garages.
FIRE TRAINING FACILITY — A publicly owned and operated facility used
for the training of fire protection personnel and other individuals directly
involved in providing firesafety services.
FLEA MARKET — An outdoor market where several persons lease or are
provided spaces to sell generally secondhand or antique items. An indoor
flea market shall be considered a retail store.
FLOOR AREA — The total area of a structure obtained by multiplying the
area of each floor as measured from the face of the exterior walls by the
total number of floors contained in the structure. Retail and service floor
area is that portion of the total floor area regulated to use by the customer
and employees to consummate retail sales and services, including display
areas for goods, but not including office space or storage areas.
FRANCHISE ARCHITECTURE — Building design that is trademarked or
identified with a particular chain or corporation and is generic in nature.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign that is not attached to a building and which
is supported permanently upon the ground by poles, pedestals or braces.
Such signs include what are commonly called "ground pole and monolith
signs."
FUNERAL HOME — A use which prepares the remains of deceased humans
for burial and cremation. This use may also conduct funeral services.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A structure or any portion thereof accessory to a
dwelling used for the housing of private motor vehicles. This definition
does not include a garage offering commercial automotive services to the
public or a garage where any provision is made for repairing or servicing of
vehicles for profit (see "motor vehicle service station or garage").
GASOLINE SALES STATION — The use of land and structure engaged in
the retail sale of any type of fuel (gasoline, diesel, kerosene or any type of
fuel that may be used in the future for the propulsion of an automobile),
including a stand-alone gasoline station or the provision of fuel as part of a
larger business. "Gasoline station" shall also refer to "filling station," "gas
station," "service station," "fuel center," and "petrol station."
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:685
GASOLINE STATION SERVICE AREA — The area which will be used for the
sale of gasoline, including service islands, pumps, customer service areas,
and any impervious driving, gassing and parking areas.
GASOLINE STATION WITHIN A SHOPPING CENTER — Any type of
gasoline station, as defined in this chapter, that is on the same parcel as a
shopping center.
GOLF COURSE — A recreational area primarily used for playing golf which
may include accessory facilities such as a driving range, pro shop,
restaurant, meeting space, and banquet facilities.
GRADE — The average elevation of the proposed finished grade line of the
ground at the front or street side of the proposed building.
GRADING — The act of excavating and/or filling land for the purpose of
changing natural slope.
GROSS AREA — The extent of surface area contained within the boundary
of a property, excluding existing street rights-of-way.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The sum of the floor areas of a building as
measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls and/or all areas intended
for the conduct of a use.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units in relation
to the total land area proposed to be used for residential purposes,
including rights-of-way, interior parking areas, access drives, private
streets, sidewalks, common open space, parks and playgrounds.
GROUP HOME — A facility, licensed and/or approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Welfare, providing shelter, counseling and other
rehabilitative services for fewer than eight residents, plus such minimum
supervisory personnel as may be required to meet standards of the licensing
agency. Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require a
minimal level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing care or
general supervision. Group homes must be licensed where required by any
appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any and all such licenses
must be delivered to the Borough prior to beginning the use.
HAIRSTYLING — Commercial personal service providing basic hair cutting
and styling services by a licensed or unlicensed practitioner. Such a service
provided by itself and not in conjunction with any other personal service
may be considered a home occupation.
HALFWAY HOUSE/REHABILITATION CENTER — A residence or
community center where social and community service activities in
accordance with regulations of the appropriate state agency(ies) are
provided for no more than eight residents and an unlimited number of
nonresident alcoholics, drug addicts, emotionally disturbed adults, former
convicts, or other adjudicated individuals.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:686
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — Any obstruction determined by the FAA
or PennDOT Bureau of Aviation to have a substantial adverse effect on the
safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
HEALTH/FITNESS CLUB — A commercial business that offers active
recreational and/or fitness activities. Such activities are provided only to
club members and their guests. Such facilities do not include golf courses.
HEALTH SERVICES — Establishments providing health care and treatment
beyond traditional office care. Such establishments include, but are not
limited to, surgical centers, radiological centers, medical and dental labs,
outpatient care facilities, blood banks, medical supplies and services
businesses. This definition does not include establishments providing
overnight care or stays of any kind.
HEIGHT-STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two successive
tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the
top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, when there is not a
ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
HEIGHT OF SIGNS — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level immediately below a sign to the highest point of the sign and
its supporting structure.
HISTORIC ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (HARB) — The quasigovernment
body appointed by a municipality to enforce the provisions of a
municipally designated historic district.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area within a municipality assigned, by the
municipal governing body, a special designation based on the historical
significance of structures and/or land for the purposes of preservation. Such
designation entitles the municipality to enact and enforce standards to meet
the preservation goals of the district.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession, occupation or trade
conducted for financial gain or profit and located entirely within an owneroccupied
residential dwelling or within a detached garage located on a
residential lot, which use is accessory, incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the residential
character or appearance of the dwelling or detached garage.
HORTICULTURE — The cultivation of a garden or orchard.
HOSPITAL — An institution, licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
which renders inpatient and outpatient medical care on a twenty-four-hourper-
day basis and provides primary health services and medical/surgical
care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other
abnormal physical or mental conditions. A hospital use can also include
attached and detached accessory uses, provided that all accessory uses are
contained upon the hospital property.
HOTEL — A facility which provides lodging to boarders for compensation,
excluding adult-related uses, as defined herein, which contains more than
eight guest rooms, and which may provide meals, meeting rooms and/or
facilities, and other services as part of the compensation.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:687
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that provides artificial light, directly or
through any transparent or translucent materials from a source of light
connected with such signs, or those that utilize direct or silhouette lighting.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface preventing the penetration of water
into the ground. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads and
sidewalks, whether paved or gravel, and any areas in concrete and asphalt
shall be considered impervious surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT AREA — An area of land, when specified in the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be considered a "buffer area" where grass, shrubbery,
trees or other types of plant material shall be planted. In no case shall these
areas be paved or covered with an impervious surface except for driveways,
sidewalks and bike paths which cross the buffer area.
INDUSTRIAL —
INDUSTRY — The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembly or
treatment of materials, articles or merchandise.
INFORMATION SIGN — A sign bearing no commercial advertisement but
which lists facilities such as telephones, rest rooms, emergency signs, etc.,
and/or public buildings, tourist attractions, parks, etc. (or otherwise directs
attention to an activity on the same lot where the sign is located).
INSTITUTIONAL CARE — Residential care provided on a twenty-four-hour
basis under nursing/medical supervision.
INTERCHANGE ACCESS ROAD — The highest order road serving an
interchange and providing access to the interstate highway.
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign which is located in the interior of a building or
hangs to the inside of a window. For the purposes of this chapter, interior
signs shall not be interpreted to include the use of objects which are
customarily sold on premises or are actual examples of stock-in-trade as
elements in a window display.
PARK, INDUSTRIAL — An area planned for the integrated design of two
or more primary industrial uses, structures or buildings on a lot held in
single ownership with a total gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or
greater.
A.
USE, INDUSTRIAL — Any use of land, buildings or structures for
construction, manufacturing, mining, transportation, junk, salvage
yards and materials, articles or merchandise. Uses may include:
bindery, bore holds, building contractor facility, junkyard, auto
wrecking, scrap yard, postal facility, and trucking and freight terminal.
B.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Any manufacturing use with no or low
environmental impacts and which is not detrimental to the environment
in which it is located by reason of the emission of smoke, noise, odor,
dust, vibration or excessive light beyond the limits of its lots, or by
reason of generating excessive traffic with attendant hazards, and
which does not include any open storage yards or outdoor processing
of materials.
A.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:688
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY — A facility providing, on a regular basis,
health-related care and services to individuals not requiring the degree
of care and treatment found in a hospital or skilled nursing facility, but
because of their mental or physical condition require care and services
(above the level of room and board) available only through institutional
facilities such as these.
JUNK — Used materials, discarded materials, or both, including, but not
limited to, wastepaper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings
and appliances, machinery, unlicensed and/or uninspected vehicles or parts
thereof, all of which are being stored awaiting potential reuse or ultimate
disposal.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of one or more
unlicensed wrecked or disabled vehicles, or the major parts thereof, shall be
deemed to constitute a "junkyard." (A disabled vehicle is a vehicle intended
to be self-propelled that shall not be operated under its own power for any
reason or a vehicle that does not have a valid current registration plate or
certificate of inspection.)
KENNEL — Any lot on which five or more animals (except relating to a farm)
are kept, boarded, raised, bred, treated or trained for a fee, including but
not limited to dog and cat kennels.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDLORD — A lessor, or person who acts as an agent for the lessor, of
any parcel of real estate or any improvements on real estate or any building
located in the municipality.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he/she is authorized
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:689
under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person
having a proprietary interest in land.
LANE — A public way less than 33 feet in right-of-way width, designated as
a lane on a recorded plot or dedicated as such in a deed, whether privately
or publicly owned, primarily for secondary means of access to the rear or
sides of properties.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE — A use engaged in the manufacture
(predominantly from previously prepared materials) of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging,
incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — Integrated living unit and working space with an
internal connection between the living unit and working space, occupied
and utilized by a person or a single family who shall be the owner(s) and/or
operator(s) of the associated business.
LOADING SPACE — An area located outside any street right-of-way set
aside for the use of motor vehicles to load and unload material for a period
of time.
LOT — A parcel of land, occupied or unoccupied by a primary building
and/or accessory building, fronting on a street or other public or recorded
private way; including yard setback and other open spaces required by this
chapter or as shown on a parcel of land.
AREA, LOT — The total horizontal area included within the rear and
side property lines and front street or proposed street lines.
A.
CLASSIFICATION, LOT —
(1) CORNER — A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection.
(2) INTERIOR — A lot with only one frontage on a street.
(3) THROUGH — A lot with front and rear street frontage.
B.
COVERAGE (MAXIMUM), LOT — The percentage of lot area occupied
by the ground-floor area of all primary and accessory buildings.
C.
DEPTH, LOT — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured in the direction of the side lot lines.
D.
FLAG, LOT — A lot whose frontage does not satisfy the minimum width
requirements for the respective zone but that does have sufficient lot
width away from the lot's frontage.
E.
F. FRONTAGE, LOT — The portion of a lot boundary abutting a street.
LINE, LOT — A boundary line of a lot; includes property line.
FRONT LOT LINE — The line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way.
(1)
G.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:690
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 square
feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such
term shall include any structure that meets all of the requirements of
this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies
with the standards established under this title. For the purposes of these
provisions, a mobile home shall be considered a manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured
homes.
MANUFACTURING USE — The processing and/or converting of raw
unfinished materials or finished materials or products, or any combination
of them, into an article or substance of different character or of use of
a different purpose. Additionally, the term "manufacturing" shall include
industries furnishing labor in manufacturing or in the refinishing of
manufactured articles. This use includes apparel and textile products,
chemicals and allied products, electric and electronic equipment, fabricated
metal products, food and kindred products, lumber and wood products,
machinery, paper and allied products, petroleum and coal products, stone,
clay and glass products, textile mill products, tobacco products,
transportation equipment and miscellaneous industries, including the
manufacture of jewelry, silverware, musical instruments, toys and sporting
goods, office and art supplies, costume jewelry, notions, etc. (also see
"industrial use").
MARQUEE — Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction which
projects from a wall of a building, usually above an entrance and/or across
a sidewalk towards the street.
MEDICAL AND/OR DENTAL OFFICE — An office or health facility providing
health services, including, without limitation, preventative and
rehabilitation treatment, diagnostic services, testing and analysis. This use
includes offices providing medical, dental, surgical, rehabilitation,
(2) SIDE LOT LINE — Any lines considered not front or rear lot lines.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line generally opposite of the front lot
line parallel to the street line.
(3)
H. SIZE, LOT — The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot.
WIDTH, LOT — The width of a lot measured between the two side
property lines at the building setback line. When a lot abuts on a curved
street, the width shall be determined by utilizing the arc distance.
I.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:691
podiatric, optometric, chiropractic and psychiatric services, medical or
dental laboratories incidental to these offices.
MENU BOARD SIGN — See "directory sign."
MINING and QUARRYING — The use of land for the purpose of extracting
rocks and minerals for sale, exclusive of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a structure or building for which a zoning permit has been
issued.
MIXED USE — The use of any lot or structure for a combination of
residential and nonresidential purposes.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling unit built to
national code, intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, arriving at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MODULAR OR SECTIONAL HOME — A type of dwelling meeting the
definition of "single-family detached dwelling," "single-family semidetached
dwelling," "townhouse" or "garden apartment" substantially in part but not
wholly produced in sections off the site and then assembled and completed
on the site. This shall not include any dwelling meeting the definition of
"mobile/manufactured home," nor shall it include any dwelling not resting
on a permanent foundation, nor any dwelling intended to be moved to a
different site once assembled, nor any dwelling not fully complying with any
and all applicable building codes. A modular home also shall not include
a building that includes only one substantial piece prior to delivery on the
site.
MORTUARY — See "funeral home."
MOTEL — A single-story facility, typically with access to individual rooms
provided from the exterior of the building, which provides lodging to
boarders for compensation, excluding adult-related uses, as defined herein,
which contains more than eight rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having
direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the
main lobby of the building, and which may provide meals and other services
as part of the compensation.
MOTOR VEHICLES —
LOT, MOBILE HOME — A lot in a mobile home park improved with
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the
placement of a mobile home.
A.
PARK, MOBILE HOME — A parcel or continuous parcels of land
designated and improved, containing two or more mobile home lots for
the placement of mobile homes.
B.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A licensed, motorized vehicle
designated for transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce,
A.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:692
MOVABLE SIGN — A sign which is erected upon a structure having wheels,
rollers or other means of facilitating movement from one location to
another.
MULCH — An organic or inorganic material used to cover the ground or a
planting bed (e.g., tree bark, stones). The depth of mulch should be no less
than two inches with periodic refreshing to maintain the two inches.
MULTI-SHOP ARCADE — Multiple shops under one roof with shared access
to the street.
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL — Commercial retail activities encompassing a
gross floor area no greater than 20,000 square feet within one building.
NONCOAL MINERALS — An aggregate or mass of mineral matter,
extracted by surface and subsurface mining, including but not limited to
limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag,
iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay. The definition does not include peat,
anthracite or bituminous coal or coal refuse.
freight, animals or passengers, and operated in conjunction with a
business occupation or home occupation, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, tractor-trailers and vans.
SALES AREA, MOTOR VEHICLE — An open area, other than a street
right-of-way, used for the display or sale or lease of new and used motor
vehicles, boats, trailers, farm equipment, construction equipment, and
accessories.
B.
SALES BUILDING, MOTOR VEHICLE — A structure used for the sale
or lease of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, and accessories.
C.
SERVICE STATION OR GARAGE, MOTOR VEHICLE — The use of land
or structures engaged in the retail sale of gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires and other motor vehicle accessories and may also
provide minor mechanical repairs and servicing of motorized vehicles.
D.
WASHING FACILITY, MOTOR VEHICLE — Any premises used for the
washing and/or cleaning of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and
accessories.
E.
WRECKING, JUNK AND SCRAP ESTABLISHMENTS, MOTOR VEHICLE
— The use of land structures for the storage, baling, packing, sorting,
handling, disassembling, purchase or sale of any material used for
salvage, scrap or reclaimed materials capable of being reused in some
form, including metals, fiber, paper, cloth and rags, rubber, rope,
bottles, machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes,
crates, pipe and pipe fittings and tires. Motor vehicles which are
inoperable and do not have current inspection stickers or a current
license, as required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and motor
vehicle parts are also included. Collection and storage of garbage or
other organic waste is prohibited.
F.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:693
NONCOAL SURFACE MINING ACTIVITIES — The extraction of minerals
from the earth, from waste or stockpiles or from pits or from banks by
removing the strata or material that overlies or is above or between them,
or otherwise exposing and retrieving them from the surface activity
connected with surface or underground mining, including, but not limited
to, exploration, site preparation, entry, tunnel, drift, slope, shaft and
borehole drilling and construction and activities related thereto. The
definition does not include mining operations carried out beneath the
surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mining openings.
The definition does not include the following:
NONCONFORMITIES — Any nonconforming lot, use of land or structures.
NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL — Any aspect of a land use that does
not comply with any size, height, bulk, setback, distance, landscaping,
coverage, screening, or any other design or performance standard specified
by this chapter, where such dimensional nonconformity lawfully existed
prior to the adoption of this chapter or amendment thereto.
The extraction of minerals by a landowner for the landowner's
noncommercial use from land owned or leased by the landowner.
A.
The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth or fill from borrow
pits for highway construction purposes for the Department of
Transportation, or the extraction of minerals under construction
contracts with the Department if the work is performed under a bond,
contract and specifications that substantially provide for and require
reclamation of the area affected.
B.
The handling, processing or storage of slag on the premises of a
manufacturer as part of the manufacturing process.
C.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — The area or dimension of a lot lawfully
existing prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district where
it is located by reason of such adoption or amendment.
A.
STRUCTURE OR BUILDING, NONCONFORMING — A structure or
building or part of a structure or building not complying with the
applicable provisions of a zoning ordinance or amendment thereafter
enacted, when such structure or building lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application
of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Such nonconforming structures or buildings include, but are not limited
to, nonconforming signs.
B.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use, whether of land, building or
structure, not complying with the applicable use provisions of a zoning
ordinance or amendment thereafter enacted, when such use lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation.
C.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:694
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A resident facility for the elderly
providing a wide variety of services depending on the individual's need,
including independent living units in association with the home.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality upon
completion of the construction of a new building or upon a change or
conversion of the structure or use of a building, certifying all requirements
and regulations as provided herein and all other applicable requirements
have been complied with.
OCCUPANT-OWNED BUSINESSES — Businesses owned by occupants of a
single-family residence, where a business activity is conducted off site but
managerial office functions and storage of equipment are conducted on the
residential site.
OCCUPY — When used in relation to residence, shall mean the same as
"reside in."
OFFICE — A place where the primary use is conducting the affairs of
a business, profession, service or government, including administration,
recordkeeping, clerical work, and similar business functions. An office shall
not involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling,
cleaning, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products, or the
sale or delivery of any materials, goods, or products which are physically
located on the premises. Office supplies used in the office may be stored as
an incidental use.
OFFICE PARK — A large tract of land planned, developed and operated
as an integrated facility for a number of separate office buildings and
supporting ancillary uses, with a total gross floor area of 50,000 square feet
or greater, with special attention given to circulation, parking, utility needs,
aesthetics and compatibility.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or directs the public to a
business product or service not present on the property where said sign is
located, including but not limited to billboards and off-site directional signs.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
ACTIVE, OPEN — Open space more usable for recreation. "Usable
area" is defined as land having slopes of less than 10%.
A.
AREA, OPEN — The required ground surface needing to remain
uncovered by building and/or paved areas, the extent of which is
expressed as a percentage of the lot size.
B.
COMMON, OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas
set aside for public facilities.
C.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:695
OVERBURDEN — The strata or material overlaying a noncoal deposit or
between noncoal deposits in its natural state and material before or after its
removal by mining.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of land, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase, whether or not such option or contract is
subject to any condition; a lessee, if authorized under the lease to exercise
the rights of the owner, or other persons having a proprietary interest in the
land shall be deemed to be an "owner" for the purposes of this chapter.
PARAPET — The extension of the main walls or a false wall of a building
above the roofline.
PARAPET SIGN — A sign affixed or applied directly to a parapet.
PARKING —
PASSIVE, OPEN SPACE — Open space used as green space or wooded
areas.
D.
AISLE, PARKING — A corridor used for access within a parking lot by
motor vehicles to the parking space.
A.
BAY, PARKING — The portion of an off-street parking area containing
an aisle and one or two rows of parking stalls.
B.
DECK, PARKING — A structure for motor vehicle parking or storage,
usually with partial walls, as opposed to a fully enclosed garage
building.
C.
EMPLOYEE PARKING — An off-street parking area used exclusively to
park employees' personal vehicles during working hours. For purposes
of this chapter, an employee is any person who works or provides
services for an employer for salary or wages or who provides services
as a volunteer for the employer, provided such person spends at least
four consecutive hours on any given day at the place of employment.
D.
INTERIOR SPACE, PARKING — A parking space not abutting the
perimeter of the off-street parking area.
E.
LOT, PARKING — A facility providing off-street parking space for five or
more motor vehicles.
F.
OFF-STREET PARKING — An area or structure located outside the
street right-of-way designed to be used for parking motor vehicles.
G.
PERIMETER, PARKING — The outer boundary of the hard surface area
of an off-street parking area.
H.
PUBLIC PARKING — An off-street parking area containing parking
spaces available to the public for the parking or storage of
noncommercial motor vehicles on a rental or free basis. When
permitted, such parking area may be the principal use of the land.
I.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:696
PARKS, PRIVATE — A recreational facility owned or operated by a nonpublic
agency and/or conducted as a private gainful business. This use shall
exclude adult-oriented uses, as defined herein.
PARKS, PUBLIC AND/OR NONPROFIT — Those facilities designed and
used for recreation purposes by the general public that are: 1) owned
and operated by a government or governmental agency/authority; or 2)
are operated on a nonprofit basis. This definition is meant to include the
widest range of recreational activities, excluding adult-related uses and
amusement arcades, as defined herein.
PAVED AREA — Any impervious paving or other durable surface for
driveways, dedicated walkways, and parking facilities, exclusive of building
area, the extent expressed as a percentage of the lot size. Paving material:
cement concrete, bituminous concrete, brick, paving block or other similar
material that cannot be deformed or scattered. Such material shall meet the
construction standards of the municipality.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED USES — A land use that is intended to encourage
walk-in customers and that generally does not limit the number of
customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general
public. A pedestrian-oriented use provides spontaneous draw from the
sidewalk and street due to visual interest, high customer turnover, and
social interaction.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — A wall below or partly below grade
providing support for exterior walls or other structural parts of a building.
Such wall being constructed of concrete or a combination of building units
or materials of brick, concrete, masonry units, stone or other approved units
bonded together with mortar.
PERMANENT SIGN — Any permitted sign which remains in place for more
than 60 days.
PERMITTED — Permitted by right without the approval of a conditional use
permit.
PERSONAL SERVICES — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public, which does not involve primarily
retail sales of goods or professional advisory services. Personal services
include barbershops and beauty shops, shoe repair shops, household
appliance repair shops and other similar establishments.
SPACE, PARKING — An area located beyond the street right-of-way for
parking one motor vehicle.
J.
STALL, PARKING — The area where one vehicle is to be parked; a
parking space.
K.
STRUCTURE, PARKING — Any building, either above grade, below
grade, or both, or any deck designated or used for the parking of motor
vehicles.
L.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:697
PLAN —
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number
of dwelling units or combination of residential and nonresidential uses. A
development plan which does not correspond in lot size, type of dwelling
or use, density or intensity, lot coverage, and required open space to the
regulations established in the applicable zoning district.
PLATFORM — Any horizontal flooring surface, usually higher than the
adjoining area.
POLITICAL CANDIDACY SIGN — Any sign which bears the name of a
candidate running for political office and may include other pertinent
information such as the political party in which the candidate belongs, title
and office the candidate is running for, and/or slogan or logos related to the
campaign.
PORCH — A roofed area, usually open on one or more sides, providing cover
over the entrance of a building or along some portion of the building face.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — Any container designed for the storage
of personal property that is typically rented to owners or occupants of
property for their temporary use and which customarily is delivered and
removed by truck. For the purpose of this chapter, a portable storage unit
may also be identified as simply a "unit."135
PREMISES — Any lot and any structure or building constructed thereon.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PROCESSING — A function involved in the manufacturing of goods or
products where the material used is not physically changed except for
packaging or sizing.
PRODUCT — Any article whose appearance or composition has been
changed or altered but not in a complete form for ultimate disposition.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan prepared for official recording as required by statute; a final plot.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A tentative subdivision or land development
plan, in lesser detail than the final plan, indicating the approximate
proposed layout of a subdivision or land development as a basis for
consideration prior to preparation of the final plan(s); a preliminary
plot.
B.
SKETCH PLAN — A plan of a subdivision or land development showing
the tentative street and lot layout, to be used for informal discussion
with the Planning Commission/municipal staff prior to preparation of
the preliminary and/or final plan(s). Submission of a sketch plan does
not constitute a formal plan submission; such plan is for discussion
purposes only.
C.
135. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:698
PRODUCTION — A function involved in the manufacturing of materials,
goods or products where it is physically changed.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE/PROFESSIONAL SERVICE USES — A recognized
profession, including but not limited to accountant, architect, city planner,
engineer, real estate, insurance, medical, dental, attorney, financial advising
or similar operation. Banks, automated teller machines, or other financial
institutions are not defined as professional offices.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which projects from and is supported by the
wall of a building.
PROPERTY — An area of land held in single and separate ownership, with
a tax parcel code assigned, which may have one or more businesses or
dwelling units located on it. "Property" includes "tract" and "parcel."
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a governmental unit or a
governmental agency.
PUBLIC UTILITY —
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign used to offer for sale, rent or lease one or
more properties upon which such sign is located.
RECREATION —
RECREATION FACILITY (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE) — An activity operated as a
business, open to the public, for the purpose of recreation or entertainment,
including but not limited to bowling alleys, drive-in motion-picture facilities,
FACILITY, PUBLIC SERVICE — A facility for the management and
distribution of utility services, including gas, electric, steam, water,
sewerage, telephone, cable television and similar services; for the
provision of municipal services such as road maintenance, refuse
collection, public transportation and public safety and emergency
services; for governmental offices.
A.
USE, PUBLIC UTILITY — A use defined as an electric-generating plant,
electric substation, energy storage facility, gas substation, gasworks,
power/telephone pole, pump station, sewer plant, sewer riser pipe,
stormwater management structure, telephone booth, telephone
exchange, water plant, water riser pipe, and water storage tower.
B.
AREA, RECREATION — A private or public space, including essential
buildings and structures, used for play and/or recreation by individuals.
A.
PARK, RECREATION — A tract of land designated and used for active
and passive recreation.
B.
USE, RECREATION — Recreational uses shall include the following:
amusement park, auditorium, arcade, athletic health spa, billiards
parlor, club dancing studio, golf course, music studio, swimming club,
target range, and theater.
C.
USE, COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A business unit conducting
indoor or outdoor recreation activities for use by individuals.
D.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:699
swimming pools, health clubs, miniature golf courses, museums, etc. This
definition does not include adult-related uses or amusement arcades, as
defined within this chapter.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle primarily designed and utilized as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, whether
self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, and including
travel trailers, recreational trailers, camping trailer, truck camper, motor
homes, and similar types of vehicles. It shall also include horse trailers
used for such purposes. The term shall not mean or include a mobile home,
manufactured home or seasonal dwelling.
REPAIR ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of repair services, excluding automotive and equipment repair.
Typical uses include appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch and/or
jewelry repair, or repair of musical instruments.
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM — A building dedicated for multifamily
residential use, within which each individual dwelling unit is owned by an
individual person or persons, with a requirement that the building itself
and all related facilities and common areas are owned and maintained by a
condominium property owners' association.
RESTAURANT — Any business or establishment that serves prepared food
primarily on nondisposable tableware but can provide for incidental carryout
service so long as the area used for carry-out service does not exceed
either 10% of the total patron seating area or 200 square feet (whichever is
less). Caterers shall be included in this definition.
RESTAURANT (DRIVE-THROUGH OR FAST-FOOD) — An establishment
that serves prepared food generally packaged in paper wrappers and/or
disposable plates and containers. Such food can be consumed either on or
off the site.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS — Retail stores are those businesses whose
primary activities involve the display and retail sales and/or rental of goods
and products to the general public for personal or household consumption
and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. This term shall
not include adult-related facilities, as defined herein.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any restaurant where food or beverages
are served to the occupants of a motor vehicle while seated therein,
either through a drive-in window or by service from an attendant
waiting on occupants within a motor vehicle.
A.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food or beverages with rapid turnover to
customers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within
the building or for carry-out off the premises and whose design or
principal method of operation includes the following: foods and
beverages are usually served in disposable or edible containers; it is
self-service, with customers expected to clean up after themselves; and
menus are posted.
B.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:700
RIDING STABLE AND ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are
kept for riding, driving or are stabled for compensation as part of a club,
association, ranch or similar establishment.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, purchase or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a
street, trail, accessway, waterline, sanitary sewer, and/or or other public
utilities or facilities.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected and maintained up on or above the roof of any
building, except for a parapet sign.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain, snow or other form of precipitation not
entering the soil but that runs off the surface of the land.
SCHOOL — A principal use in which supervised education or instruction is
offered according to the following categories:
SEASONAL DWELLING UNIT — Permanent single-family detached
dwellings or mobile homes utilized periodically during the year. Such use
may include occupancy during hunting or fishing seasons, vacations,
weekends and other similar periodic visits. Such use may not include
occupancy for more than 90 consecutive days.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings consisting
of individual, self-contained units leased to individuals, organizations or
businesses for self-service storage of personal property.
SHARED PARKING — Joint use of a parking area to serve more than one use
or to be used by one or more owners or properties.
SHOPPING CENTER — One store containing more than 20,000 square feet
of gross floor area, or two or more stores which are designed to function
as a unit, with shared vehicular access, off-street parking and signage and
with entrances to the store(s) generally accessed from the outside.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — A school that may offer a wide range of education
or instructional activities (excluding vocational-mechanical trade
schools as defined below) that may, or may not, be operated as a gainful
business by some person or organization other than the public school
district.
A.
PUBLIC SCHOOL — A school licensed by the Department of Education
for the purpose of providing elementary, secondary, and adult
education, and operated by the school district.
B.
VOCATIONAL-MECHANICAL TRADE SCHOOL — A school that may,
or may not, be operated as a gainful business that principally offers
training in any of the following occupations: truck driving; engine
repairs; building construction and general contracting; woodworking;
masonry; plumbing; electrical contracting; and other similar trades.
C.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:701
SHOPPING MALL — A cohesive unit of stores within a single building
measuring at least 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, with entrances to
the stores generally accessed from an enclosed corridor.
SHRUB — An ornamental plant with woody stems that is at least two gallons
at planting.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a support
structure or other surface that displays or includes any letter, word,
insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in the nature of an
advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction or which is
designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the
public.
SIGN AREA — The area of the sign face. All visible faces of a multifaced sign
shall be counted separately and totaled together in calculating sign area.
SIGN FACE — The surface area of a sign where advertising copy is
displayed.
SILHOUETTE LIGHTING — A special effect that lights a background, such
as a wall, and causes the object in front to appear as a silhouette.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind-energy-conversion system
limited to generation of not more than 20 kW, consisting of a wind turbine,
a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics.[Added 2-2-2009
by Ord. No. 02022009-01]
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY — The burial of nonhazardous and
nonmedical residential, industrial, institutional, commercial, or farm waste
in an area specifically permitted by the Pennsylvania State Department of
Environmental Protection.
SPOIL — Overburden and rejected material removed during surface
noncoal mining operations.
SPOIL PILE — The overburden and rejected material piled or deposited in
surface mining.
STABLE — A structure used for the shelter or care of horses, cattle or other
large animals.
STEEP SLOPE — Land whose slope is 25% or more.
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and
the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is
over six feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjacent
to the exterior walls of such story.
HALF STORY — A partial story situated under a roof. The wall plate
on at least two opposite exterior walls shall not be more than four feet
above the floor of such story.
A.
FIRST STORY — The lowest story or the ground story of a building.
The floor shall not be more than one feet below the average ground
B.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:702
STREET — A public or dedicated right-of-way 33 feet or more in width, or
a private right-of-way or easement, or a proposed right-of-way, widening or
extension of an existing street or public way on any approved plan, street,
avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct,
and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians, whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. This
definition is intended to include all man-made objects, and specifically
includes buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, pavement, satellite dishes,
paved parking areas, bridges, runways, taxiways, earth formations and
overhead transmission lines, and all other man-made objects.
level at the exterior building walls. The basement or cellar shall not be
considered the first story.
CARTWAY, STREET — The surface of a street, access drive or alley
available for vehicular traffic.
A.
CENTER LINE, STREET — A line midway between and parallel to
the two street or road property lines, or as otherwise defined by the
governing body.
B.
CLASSIFICATION, STREET —
ARTERIAL — A major street with fast or heavy traffic on
considerable continuity used primarily as a traffic artery
connecting two or more neighborhoods or areas. Primary arterial
streets extend through the entire urban area while secondary
arterial streets extend through only a portion of the area.
(1)
COLLECTOR — A major street which carries traffic from local
streets to arterial streets.
(2)
LOCAL — All streets not qualifying as arterial or collector streets
or alley, as defined herein, are considered local streets.
(3)
INTERNAL MARGINAL ACCESS — Any type of street or driveway,
public or private, that provides a means of conveyance for
automobiles into and through the site. An internal marginal access
street typically has all the components of a public street, such as
lane markings, turn lanes, shoulders, etc.
(4)
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY — An arterial highway meeting the federal
functional classification of interstate highway.
(5)
C.
LINE, STREET — The dividing line between a street and the lot,
including the right-of-way line and the front lot line.
D.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A corridor of land set aside for use, in whole
or in part, by a street.
E.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:703
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devices,
transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any modification, alteration,
reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an existing structure or
building to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value either:
a) before the improvement, modification, or repair is started; or b) if the
structure or building has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Municipal
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted pursuant to the MPC) of those
improvements required as a condition for final approval have been
completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the project will be
able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE MATERIAL (HARD) — A material such as cement, concrete,
bituminous concrete, brick, paving block, or other similar material not
easily deformed or scattered.
SUPERMARKET — A retail store selling a complete assortment of food and
food preparation materials, household items and other retail items. Sale of
additional products, when clearly incidental and subordinate to the retailing
of food and beverages, may include housewares, periodicals, tobacco and
both prescription and nonprescription drugs. Supermarkets contain a more
complete line of food products and have a minimum of 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
SYSTEM HEIGHT — With regard to a wind energy system, the tower height
plus the blade length.[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 02022009-01]
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — A business providing permanent tattoo, body
art, makeup, and/or body piercing services.[Added 4-16-2018 by Ord. No.
041618-01]
TAVERN — An establishment which serves primarily alcoholic beverages for
mostly on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board. Taverns may also serve food.
ALTERATION STRUCTURE — As applied to a structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, including supporting members
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; or an enlargement,
whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the
relocation of a structure or building onto or within a lot.
A.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure where the principal use is
conducted on the lot where the structure is located.
B.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:704
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — Telecommunication facility consists
of equipment, buildings, and structures involved in transmitting and
receiving electromagnetic waves.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY BUILDING — Building in which
electronic receiving and relay equipment for a telecommunication tower is
housed.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended for a limited period of display, no
longer than 60 days per calendar year.
TENANT — A person who has the use, either by himself/herself or with
others, of a dwelling unit or a business unit owned by a person other than
himself/herself for a period exceeding 30 days.
THEATER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS — The use of land and structures
containing an assembly hall and studios with or without stage, equipped
with curtains and permanent stage scenery or with mechanical equipment
adaptable, but not limited to, the showing of plays, operas, performances,
spectacles and similar forms of live or audiovisual entertainment, and for
instruction in the performing arts.
TOWER — Any ground-mounted structure designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone,
radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The
term includes the structure and any support thereto. Not included are
towers and supportive structures on residential dwellings for private
noncommercial amateur purposes, including, but not limited to, ham radios
and citizen band radios.
TOWER HEIGHT — With regard to a wind energy system, the height above
grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine
itself.[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 02022009-01]
TRAILER — A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis and
designated for travel, recreation or hauling.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) — The conveyance of
development rights, within and among areas specifically designated by the
municipal governing body, by deed, easement or other legal instrument
authorized by local law, to another parcel of land, within and among areas
specifically designated by the municipal governing body, and the
recordation of that conveyance among the land records of the municipality
and the county.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS EASEMENT — A legal covenant
that protects the subject land in perpetuity from development beyond any
development rights expressly reserved.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS RECEIVING AREA — The area,
specifically designated by the municipal governing body, within which
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:705
development rights transferred from a transfer of development rights
sending area can be used.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS SENDING AREA — The area,
specifically designated by the municipal governing body, from which TDRs
can be transferred.
TRUCK OR MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL — Any property used for the
origin and/or destination point of short- and long-distance hauling for the
purpose of storing, transferring, loading and unloading, in addition to truck
parking. This use would include solid waste disposal vehicles, tank trucks,
and livestock trucks.
TURBINE — The parts of the wind energy system including the blades,
generator and tail.[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 02022009-01]
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN — A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof
or marquee.
UNDERSTORY TREE — A tree, either single-stemmed or multistemmed,
which has a caliper of at least 1 1/2 inches at planting and is of a species
which, at maturity, can be expected to reach a height of at least 10 feet.
USE — Any purpose for which a lot, building or structure is designed,
arranged or intended to be used, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A secondary use customarily incidental and
subordinate to the primary use of the land or its structures, and located
on the same lot with such primary use, unless specifically permitted
elsewhere by this chapter.
A.
USE, CHANGE OF — Any change of use of land or of a building from
that of one zoning district classification to another, as defined by this
chapter.
B.
USE, CONDITIONAL — A use conditionally permitted in a zoning
district based on the location of the use within the zoning district and
upon compliance with specific conditions and criteria. Conditional uses
are approved by the municipal governing body. The governing body may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter.
C.
D. USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
E. USE, PRIMARY — The principal use of a lot, building or structure.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary reason for the structure or activities
on the lot. In any residential district, there shall be no more than one
principal use on each lot unless it is possible to show the use can
meet all requirements of this chapter and a subdivision ordinance to
establish each use on a separate, conforming lot.
F.
USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION — An exceptional use permitted in an
approved zoning district once specific criteria are been met. Special
G.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:706
UTILITY EASEMENT — An area of land granted or set apart by the owner
for the purpose of installation of public utilities, including but not limited
to sanitary sewer, waterlines, gaslines, electric lines, telephone lines,
television cables, or storm sewers, whether or not shown on an approved
plan.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of the MPC.
VEHICULAR ACCESS POINT — A vehicular access point approved by either
the state or local government with a permit.
VETERINARIAN'S OFFICE — A building used primarily for the treatment,
by a veterinarian, of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl. No outdoor boarding of animals is permitted.
VISITORS' CENTER — The use of the land, building and structure or part
thereof open to the general public and designed for the dissemination of
information. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to,
exhibits, maps, brochures, pamphlets and similar items.
VOLUNTEER — A person of his/her own free will, without monetary
compensation, providing services for clients.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a
building wall and which does not extend more than 12 inches from the
building or extend above the roofline. Lettering, logos or figures affixed
to or painted directly on a wall which is not part of a building shall have
separate requirements from that of signs affixed or painted upon a building
wall.
WAREHOUSING — Distribution facilities for handling goods with or without
maintenance facilities.
WHOLESALE —
exceptions are approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use permitted for a fixed period of time, with
the obligation and intent to discontinue the use at the end of such
time. Such uses do not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent structure.
H.
MINI WAREHOUSE — A structure containing separate storage spaces
of varying sizes leased on an individual basis (see "self-storage
facility").
A.
CLUBS, WHOLESALE — Establishments engaged in selling of
merchandise at reduced or "wholesale" prices to its club members only.
A.
SALES, WHOLESALE — Establishment engaged in selling merchandise
to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional
business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers
B.
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 575-150
1:707
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind-energy-conversion system consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics.[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord. No. 02022009-01]
WIND ENERGY TOWER — With regard to a wind energy system, the
structure on which the wind system is mounted.[Added 2-2-2009 by Ord.
No. 02022009-01]
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is affixed to or painted on the inside or
outside of any window or door window with the intent of viewing from the
outside of such building.
YARD — An open space of uniform width located on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings between the building or outer building of a
group and the nearest lot or street line, unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward, except as provided in this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT — All land and watercourses located within designated
zoning boundaries on the municipal Zoning Map; a zoning district.
ZONING AND OVERLAY MAPS (OFFICIAL) — The municipal maps setting
forth the boundaries of the zoning and overlay districts of this chapter and
adopted by the municipal governing body.
ZONING OFFICER — A person retained by the municipality to enforce the
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, with power to issue permits, to halt
illegal construction, and to interpret literally the meaning of the various
sections of the Zoning Ordinance, subject to appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such individuals
or companies.
BUFFER YARD — A yard covered with vegetation designed to provide
an area of separation between different zoning districts or uses.
A.
FRONT YARD — An area defined by the front property line and a line
parallel to the front property line intersecting the side property lines.
The distance separating these lines is called the "front yard," and the
depth is specified by the regulations for each zoning district.
B.
REAR YARD — An area defined by the rear property line and a line
parallel to the rear property line intersecting the side property lines.
The distance separating these lines is called the "rear yard," and the
depth is specified in the regulations for each zoning district.
C.
SIDE YARD — An area defined by the side property line and a line
parallel to the side property line intersecting the front and rear
property lines. The distance separating these lines is called the "side
yard," and the depth is specified in the regulations for each zoning
district.
D.
SETBACK AREA, YARD — An area bounded by a lot line and a line
drawn parallel to the lot line at a distance specified in the chapter for
front, side or rear yard setbacks.
E.
§ 575-150 BELLEFONTE CODE § 575-150
1:708
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1979 Code to 2012 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part Two - Administrative Code
Title Two - General Provisions
Ch. 202, Codified Ordinances
202.01, 202.02, 202.04, 202.05 and
202.06
Omitted
202.03 Ch. 1, Art. II
202.99 Ch. 1, Art. III
Ch. 204, Official Standards (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 206, Wards and Boundaries Ch. 159
Ch. 208, Claims Against the Municipality Ch. 18
Ch. 209, Programs and Services for
Handicapped Persons
REP
Title Four - Legislation
Ch. 210, Council
Sec. 210.01, Rules of Council Ch. 23, Art. II
Sec. 210.02, Compensation Ch. 23, Art. I
Sec. 210.03, Personnel Committee Ch. 23, Art. III
Ch. 212, Ordinances and Resolutions
(Reserved)
Omitted
Title Six - Administration
Ch. 220, Mayor Ch. 80, Art. I
Ch. 222, Manager Ch. 88, Art. I
Ch. 224, Solicitor Ch. 88, Art. IV
Ch. 226, Independent Auditor Ch. 88, Art. II
Ch. 228, Treasurer (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 230, Secretary REP
§ 575-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:709
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 232, Assessors (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 234, Tax Collection Ch. 120, Art. I
Ch. 236, Engineer (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 238, Building Official (Reference only) Omitted
Ch. 240, Police Department
Secs. 240.1 – 240.3, Establishment;
Authority of Chief; Subordinate
Classifications; Appointment of Special
Policemen by Mayor
Ch. 108, Art. I
Sec. 240.04, Collective Bargaining Ch. 108, Art. II
Sec. 240.05 (Reserved) Omitted
Sec. 240.06, Intermunicipal Police
Cooperation Agreements
NCM
Ch. 242, Fire Department Superseded by Ord. No.
040609-02; see Ch. 35
Ch. 244, Water Department (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 246, Refuse Collection Department Ch. 125
Ch. 248, Purchasing Ch. 116
Ch. 250, Real Estate Registry Ch. 441
Ch. 252, Educational Service Agency Ch. 30
Title Eight - Authorities, Boards and
Commissions
Ch. 260, Authorities Ch. 12, Arts. I and II
Ch. 262, Civil Service Commission
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. 264, Planning Commission
Secs. 264.01 – 264.04, Borough Planning
Commission
Ch. 103, Art. I
Sec. 264.05, Nittany Valley Joint
Planning Commission
Ch. 103, Art. II
Ch. 266, Zoning Hearing Board (Reference
only)
Omitted
Ch. 268, Park and Recreation Board REP
Ch. 270, Board of Historical Architectural
Review
Ch. 62
Ch. 272, Historical Site Commission REP
Ch. 274, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 133
Ch. 276, Air Pollution Control Board REP
§ DT-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § DT-1
1:710
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 278, Board of Health (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 280, Board of Housing Appeals
(Reference only)
Omitted
Title Ten - Employment Provisions
Ch. 290, Employees Generally
Sec. 290.01, Social Security REP
Sec. 290.02, Grievance Procedure REP
Ch. 292, Police Pension Fund Ch. 97, Art. I
Ch. 294, Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System
Repealed by Ord. No.
040609-01; see now Ch.
97, Art. II
Title Twelve - Judicial
Ch. 298, District Magistrate (Justice of the
Peace) and Court of Common Pleas
(Reference only)
Omitted
Part Four - Traffic Code Ch. 530
Part Six - General Offenses Code
Ch. 608, Animals Ch. 193
Ch. 616, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 249
Ch. 632, Junk, Junkyards and Abandoned
Vehicles
Repealed by Ord. No. 1210
Ch. 648, Minors Curfew Ch. 244
Ch. 656, Noise Control Ch. 372
Ch. 664, Offenses Relating to Property Ch. 429
Ch. 672, Radio Interference REP
Ch. 680, Safety
Secs. 680.01, 680.015, 680.03, 680.99,
Snow and Ice Removal
Ch. 495, Art. III
Sec. 680.02, Interference with Fire
Department at Scene of Fire
Ch. 302
Ch. 696, Weapons and Explosions Ch. 553
Part Eight - Business Regulation and Taxation
Code
Title Two - Business Regulation
Ch. 828, Mines, Collieries and Quarries Ch. 360
Ch. 830, Newspaper Racks Ch. 367
Ch. 836, Solicitors, Peddlers and Transient
Merchants
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:711
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
836.01 to 836.16, Solicitors, Vendors,
Peddlers and Transient Merchants
Ch. 410, Art. I
836.17, Panhandling Ch. 410, Art. II
Title Four, Taxation
Ch. 840, Earned Income Tax Ch. 508, Art. I
Ch. 848, Occupation Assessment Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 1179
Ch. 856, Local Services Tax Ch. 508, Art. IV
Ch. 864, Per Capita Tax Repealed by Ord. No. 1196
Ch. 872, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 508, Art. II
Ch. 880, Exoneration of Tax Collectors REP
Ch. 898, Local Taxpayer Bill of Rights
(Reference only)
Ch. 508, Art. III
Part Ten - Streets, Utilities and Public
Services Code
Title Two - Streets and Sidewalk Area
Ch. 1020, Streets and Sidewalk Areas Ch. 495, Art. II
Ch. 1022, Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
Construction and Maintenance
Ch. 495, Art. I
Ch. 1024, Excavations Ch. 495, Art. IV
Ch. 1026, Trees Ch. 520, Art. I
Title Four - Utilities
Ch. 1040, Utilities Generally Ch. 524, Art. I
Ch. 1042, Water Ch. 544
Ch. 1044, Sewers
Secs. 1044.01 – 1044.25, 1044.99 REP
Sec. 1044.26, Sewage Haulers REP
Ch. 1045, Joint Municipal Pretreatment Ch. 455, Art. II
Ch. 1046, Individual or Community
Sewage Disposal System
Ch. 455, Art. I
Ch. 1047, Pretreatment of Industrial
Waste
REP
Ch. 1048, Refuse Collection and Disposal Ch. 482, Art. II
Ch. 1049, Recycling Ch. 482, Art. I
Title Six - Other Public Services
Ch. 1060, Parks Ch. 405, Art. I
Ch. 1062, Farmers' Market Superseded by Ord. No.
070510 (see now Ch. 355)
§ DT-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § DT-1
1:712
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 1064, Bellefonte Swimming Pool REP
Ch. 1066, Alarm Systems Ch. 185, Art. I
Part Twelve - Planning and Zoning Code
Title Two - Planning
Ch. 1220, Comprehensive Plan (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. 1230, Subdivision Regulations REP
Title Four - Zoning (Reference only) Ch. 575
Part Fourteen - Building and Housing Code
Title Two - Building
Ch. 1420, National Building Code
1420.01 - 1420.04 REP
1420.05, Recovery of Costs for
Emergency Work
Ch. 263, Art. I
1420.06, Recovery of Costs for
Removing, Repairing or Securing
Properties Damaged by Fire
Ch. 290
Ch. 1428, Building Official Ch. 88, Art. III
Ch. 1434, Fences REP
Ch. 1436, Fire Limits Ch. 294
Ch. 1444, Flood Hazards Ch. 307
Ch. 1452, Historic District Ch. 330
Ch. 1460, Number of Buildings REP
Ch. 1462, Signs Ch. 313, Art. I
Ch. 1468, Permits and Fees REP
Ch. 1470, Condominiums REP
Ch. 1472, Drilling Water Wells Repealed by Ord. No.
12202010-02
Ch. 1474, Demolition of Structures Ch. 210
Ch. 1476, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 235, Art. I
Ch. 1478, International Property
Maintenance
Repealed by Ord. No.
12202010-02
Title Four - Housing
Ch. 1490, Public Housing Code Repealed by Ord. No.
12202010-02
Part Sixteen - Fire Prevention Code
Ch. 1610, A.I.A. Fire Prevention Code REP
Ch. 1620, Bureau of Fire Prevention Ch. 39
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:713
Chapter/Title From 1979 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. 1630, Wood-Burning Stoves
1630.01 to 1630.04, Inspections;
Regulations
REP
1630.05 to 1630.99, Future External
Fuel Burning Devices and Penalty
Ch. 384
Part Eighteen - Health and Sanitation Code
Ch. 1810, Administration REP
Ch. 1814, Air Pollution Ch. 180
Ch. 1826, General Health Nuisances Ch. 377, Art. I
Ch. 1888, Vegetation Repealed by Ord. No.
12202010-02
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation originally excluded from the 1979
Codified Ordinances.
The following ordinances were originally excluded from the 1979 Codified
Ordinances but have been included in the 2012 Code of the Borough of
Bellefonte.
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
1088 1-19-1994 Zoning: Signs Ch. 575
6-27-1994 Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 500
1113 9-9-1996 Zoning: Signs
amendment
Ch. 575
1141 2-15-1999 Taxation: Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
Ch. 508, Art. IV
3-17-2003 Stormwater
Management
Ch. 490
11-19-2007 Zoning Ch. 575
§ DL-2. Disposition of legislation reviewed for publication of 2012
Code of the Borough of Bellefonte.
The 1979 Codified Ordinances of Bellefonte was supplemented through
2008. The following ordinances were adopted after the last supplement to
§ DT-1 BELLEFONTE CODE § DL-2
1:714
the 1979 Codified Ordinances and were reviewed for inclusion in the 2012
Code of the Borough of Bellefonte.
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
02022009-01 2-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 575
1210-021620029-1-A62-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 12202010-02
040609-01 4-6-2009 Pensions: Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement
System
Ch. 97, Art. II
03162009-01 3-16-2009 Zoning: Signs
amendment
Ch. 575
040609-02 4-6-2009 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 35
04202009-01 4-20-2009 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 01052015
05182009-02 5-18-2009 Peddling and
soliciting: Solicitors,
vendors, peddlers and
transient merchants
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 04212014-01
06012009-01 6-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 530
1047.061509 6-15-2009 Sewers and sewage
disposal: Pretreatment
of industrial waste
amendment
Repealed effective
with adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, Art.
I
264-070609-017-6-2009 Planning Commission:
Borough Planning
Commission
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I
1060-072009-70-120-2009 Parks and recreation
areas: Regulations
amendment
Ch. 405, Art. I
09082009-01 9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 575
110209-001 11-2-2009 Sale of two general
obligation notes
NCM
12212009-01 12-21-2009 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
03152010-01 3-15-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 12202010-02
04192010-01 4-19-2010 Street name change NCM
05032010-01 5-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 575
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:715
Ord. No. Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
06072010-01 6-7-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement: Fire
protection services
NCM
070510 7-5-2010 Market Ch. 355
12062010-01 12-6-2010 Parks and recreation
areas: Regulations
amendment
Ch. 405, Art. I
12062010-02 12-20-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement: Municipal
health insurance
cooperative
NCM
12202010-01 12-20-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
12202010-02 12-20-2010 Property maintenance
and safety
Ch. 425
03072011 3-7-2011 Lease rental debt NCM
040411-01 4-4-2011 Tobacco: Possession
and use of tobacco by
minors
Ch. 513, Art. I
040411-02 4-4-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
Sidewalk, curb and
gutter construction
amendment
Ch. 495, Art. I
090611 9-6-2011 Solid waste: Refuse
collection and disposal
amendment
Ch. 482, Art. II
112111-001 11-21-2011 Eminent domain NCM
112111-002 11-21-2011 Taxation: Earned
income tax amendment
Ch. 508, Art. I
12192011-01 12-19-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
02202012-01 2-20-2012 Intergovernmental
agreement: Police
Records Management
System
NCM
§ DL-3. Disposition of legislation adopted following publication of
2012 Code of the Borough of Bellefonte.
The following ordinances have been adopted following the publication of
2012 Code of the Borough of Bellefonte.
§ DL-2 BELLEFONTE CODE § DL-3
1:716
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10152012-001 10-15-2012 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
11052012-001 11-5-2012 Shade trees amendment Ch. 520, Art. I
12172012-0112-17-2012 Tax rate 2013 NCM
3-18-2013 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 35
3-18-2013 Fire Prevention Bureau
amendment
Ch. 39
080513-01 8-5-2013 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 97, Art. I
(footnote only)
12162013-0112-16-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
02172014-012-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 575
04212014-014-21-2014 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 410
12152014-0112-15-2014 Parks and recreation
areas: regulations
amendment
Ch. 405, Art. I
12152014-0212-15-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
01052015-011-5-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 307
03162015-013-16-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 495, Art. III
06012015-026-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 530
06152015-016-15-2015 General fund obligation
note
NCM
06152015-026-15-2015 Property maintenance
and safety amendment;
Solid waste: refuse
collection and disposal
amendment; Streets and
sidewalks: pathways,
passageways and paths
maintenance and
obstruction amendment;
Zoning amendment
Ch. 425; Ch. 482,
Art. II; Ch. 495, Art.
III; Ch. 575
10192015-0110-19-2015 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 500
10192015-0210-19-2015 Sewers and sewage
disposal: joint municipal
pretreatment
amendment
Ch. 455, Art. II
§ DL-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-3
1:717
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08012016-018-1-2016 Animals amendment Ch. 193
08012016-028-1-2016 Parks and recreation
areas: regulations
amendment
Ch. 405, Art. I
08012016-038-1-2016 Street vacation NCM
10032016-0110-3-2016 General provisions:
general penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
10032016-0210-3-2016 Historic District
amendment
Ch. 330
10032016-0310-3-2016 Historical Architectural
Review Board
amendment
Ch. 62
06052017-016-5-2017 Property maintenance
and safety amendment
Ch. 425
110617-01 11-6-2017 Solar energy systems Ch. 478
041618-01 4-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 575
060418-01 6-4-2018 Animals Amendment;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 193; Ch. 575
071618-01 7-16-2018 Conversion or
Reparative Therapy
Ch. 238
080618-01 8-6-2018 Mobile Food Vendors Ch. 364
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
121718-2 12-17-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 575 15
052019-01 5-20-2019 Emergency Medical
Services Support
Tax
NCM 15
8-19-2019 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 35 15
11182019-0111-18-2019 Property
Maintenance and
Safety Amendment
Ch. 425 16
§ DL-3 BELLEFONTE CODE § DL-3
1:718