Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Change of Borough Name
[Adopted by Ord. No. 12-12-60C]
1.1. Ratification of legislation.
1.2. Effect of name change.
1.3. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
1.1.1. All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Borough of Bethel
be and the same are hereby ratified and reaffirmed, except that the
name of the municipality be and the same is hereby changed to
"Borough of Bethel Park."
1.2.1. The change of name from the Borough of Bethel to the Borough of
Bethel Park does not in any manner change the boundaries of the
municipality, increase its indebtedness or affect the corporate structure
in any way other than to amend the name from Borough of Bethel to
"Borough of Bethel Park."
1.3.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 1.3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted by Ord. No. 7-12-93A]
1.4. Adoption of Code.1
1.5. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
1.6. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
1.4.1. The ordinances of the Municipality of Bethel Park of a general and
permanent nature, as revised, codified, rearranged and consolidated
into titles, chapters and sections under the direction of the Municipal
Manager and constituting of Chapters 1 through 70, together with an
appendix are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Municipality of Bethel Park, Pennsylvania."
1.5.1. All ordinances of general and permanent nature, adopted by the
Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park and in force on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the "Code of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, Pennsylvania" are hereby repealed insofar
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Code as of the
effective date of this adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided.
1.6.1. The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
1. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Municipality of Bethel Park prior to the
effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought
for the enforcement of such right or liability.
2. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the
Municipality of Bethel Park or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture
which may result therefrom.
3. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding
pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this
ordinance brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
4. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore
granted or conferred by the Mayor and Council.
5. Any ordinance of the Municipality of Bethel Park providing or be
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
1. Editor's Note: The former Code adopted by Ord. No. 5-11-87A was repealed with adoption
of an updated Code book by Ord. No. 7-12-93A.
1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 1.6
1:5
1.7. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
1.8. Publication.
1.9. Copy of Code on File; Code book to be kept up-to-date.
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, sewer, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, or any portion thereof.
6. Any ordinance or resolution of the Municipality of Bethel Park
appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance
and delivery of any bond of the Municipality of Bethel Park or other
instruments or evidence of the municipality's indebtedness.
7. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or any lawful contract or obligation.
8. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
9. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
10. The annexation or detachment of territory.
1.7.1. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Municipality of
Bethel Park for adoption and revision as part of the Code of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, certain typographical and grammatical
corrections were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code of the Municipality of Bethel
Park. Pennsylvania as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such. Where typographical and
grammatical errors are discovered after the adoption of the Code, the
Municipal Manager shall correct such errors after the approval by
Council through a resolution.
1.8.1. The Municipal Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published
in the manner required, a summary copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the municipality for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this adopting ordinance coupled with the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
1.9.1. A certified copy of said Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
municipality. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Manager, or someone
authorized by him or her, to insert in their designated places all
1.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 1.9
1:6
1.10. Purchase of Code.
1.11. Rules of Statutory Construction.
1.12. Severability of Code provisions.
1.13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
1.14. Repealer.
amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the
Municipal Council to make the same a part of said Code when the
same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from
said Code provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the
Municipal Council. This copy of said Code shall be available for all
persons desiring to examine the same and shall be referenced as the
"Code of the Municipality of Bethel Park".
1.10.1. A copy of said Code shall be available for purchase at a fee
established by resolution of Council. Reprints of pages updated through
amendments and new ordinances will be also available for purchase at
a fee established by resolution of Council.
1.11.1. Title 1 of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statues, Chapter 19 (1 Pa
CS Ch. 19 Perm. Ed.) is hereby adopted by reference except when
inconsistent with other provisions of this Code or other ordinances
adopted by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
1.12.1. Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section and the holding of any section
or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
1.13.1. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section and the
holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other section or parts thereof.
1.14.1. That any ordinance or parts of ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance, be and the same are hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 1.14
1:7
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
1.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 1.14
1:8
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted by 11-19-79D]
2.1. Title.
2.2. Definitions.
2.1.1. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the
"Administrative Code of the Municipality of Bethel Park."
2.2.1. The following words, when used in this ordinance, shall, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
2.2.2. ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL — Those documents specifying
operational matters of municipal units, including but not limited to
descriptions of the duties and responsibilities of subordinate units,
rules and regulations and appropriate administrative procedures,
records and reports.
2.2.3. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE — All personnel in those units of the
municipality which are under the authority of the Municipal Manager.
2.2.4.CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Municipality of Bethel
Park of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and amendments thereto.
2.2.5. COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park
of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
2.2.6. LAW — All applicable laws of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and political subdivisions thereof.
2.2.7. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park of Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
2.2.8.ORDINANCE — All ordinances of the municipality, including the
Administrative Code.
2.2.9. PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association or corporation.
2.2.10. POLICE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE — All personnel in those units
of the municipality which are under the authority of the Chief of Police.
2.2.11. PUBLISH — To print in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality, in such form, time and places as required by applicable
law, the Home Rule Charter and by official ordinance.
2.2.12. RESIDENCE — An abode in which an individual resides
permanently.
2.2.13. UNIT — All governmental entities of the municipality.
2.2.14.Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter. Words used in the feminine gender or in neuter shall each also
2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.2
1:9
include the masculine as well as one another. The singular shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular.
2.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.2
1:10
ARTICLE II
Council Organization, Meetings and Procedure
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-19-79D]
2.3. Rules for Council provided in Charter.
2.4. Organization meeting; election of officers; presiding officer.
2.5. Meetings.
2.6. Conduct of business; order of business.
2.3.1. The powers, composition, terms of office, eligibility for office, filling of
vacancies in office, oath of office and salary, with respect to Council,
shall be provided in the Charter.
2.4.1. The Council shall organize at the first meeting in January of each
even-numbered year.
2.4.2. The first meeting shall include, as the first order of business, the
election of a President and Vice-President of the Council and other
officers as may be required by the Council or the Charter. The President
and Vice-President shall serve at pleasure of the Council. Until the
election is accomplished, the Mayor shall preside.
2.5.1. Provisions governing public meetings shall be as provided by law.
2.5.2. The Council shall meet in regular session at least monthly at such
time and place as shall be fixed by the Council for the following year at
the regular meeting in December.
2.5.3. Special meetings shall be held as provided in the Charter.
2.5.4. Emergency meetings shall be held as provided in the Charter.
2.5.5. Quorum and official action shall be as provided in the Charter.
2.5.6. Council members or its committees may conduct other meetings, as
deemed necessary, to gather data and information to conduct the affairs
of the Municipality.
2.6.1. The President and, during his absence or incapacity, the Vice
President shall preside over the meetings of the Council. In the event
that neither officer is present, a Chairman of the standing committees
shall serve as President Pro Tem to preside over the meeting. The order
of selection for the President Pro Tem presiding over the meeting is as
follows: [Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 11-9-09C]
1. General Policy and Finance Committee;
2. Planning and Zoning Committee;
3. Health, Safety and Welfare Committee;
2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.6
1:11
2.7. Rules of procedure.
2.8. Public participation.
4. Public Works and Maintenance Committee.
2.6.2. If, upon the call of the roll, a quorum is not present, the President
shall order a recess for a period of 15 minutes, and if a quorum has not
developed by that time, the President shall declare the meeting
adjourned.
2.6.3. The order of business for each regular meeting shall be established by
resolution approved by the majority of Council. [Amended by Ord. No.
11-13-95A]
2.7.1. The presiding officer shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of
business at each Council meeting and shall preserve order and decorum
at such meetings.
2.7.2. Every member of the Council and the public desiring to speak shall
address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall
confine remarks to the question under debate, avoiding all indecorous
language or reference to personalities. A member of the Council, once
recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is for the
purpose of calling such a person to order. If a member of the Council,
while speaking, is called to order, that person shall cease speaking until
the question of order is determined. When two or more members
request the floor at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the
one entitled to the floor.
2.7.3. The roll of members for any vote shall be called alphabetically, with
each successive roll call beginning with the member whose name
immediately follows that of the member who was called first on the
preceding roll call. A Council person who is present at the meeting shall
not abstain from voting unless he has disqualified himself from voting,
in accordance with Section 1404 of the Charter.
2.8.1. A citizen desiring to address the Council prior to action on agenda
items shall sign the roster provided listing the agenda items they wish
to discuss prior to the announced starting time for the meeting.
Discussion shall be limited to three minutes and shall be confined to
items on the agenda for the regular meeting, unless permission to
continue shall be granted by the majority vote of the Council members
present.
2.8.2. When a group of persons wishes to address the Council on the same
subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request
that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the Council and
to limit the number of persons addressing the Council on the same
matter so as to avoid unnecessary repetition.
2.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.8
1:12
2.9. Committees of Council.
2.10. Compensation and expenses.
2.11. Special Meeting and Hearing Costs and Expenses. [Added by
Ord. No. 3-11-85A]
2.8.3. Any person making offensive, insulting, threatening, insolent,
slanderous or obscene remarks or who becomes boisterous or who
makes threats against any person or against public order and security,
while in the Council Chambers, shall forthwith be barred by the
presiding officer from further audience at the meeting, unless
permission to continue is granted by the majority vote of the Council
members present.
2.9.1. The Council shall, at its organizational meeting, appoint standing
committees to assist with the carrying out of its function. The standing
committees may consist of, but are not limited to the following:
1. General Policy and Finance Committee.
2. Planning and Zoning Committee.
3. Health, Safety and Welfare Committee.
4. Public Works and Maintenance Committee.
2.9.2. The Council may appoint ad hoc committees to assist the Council in
gathering data and information to conduct the affairs of the
Municipality.
2.9.3. The Chairman of the committee shall be appointed by the President of
the Council.
2.9.4. The Chairman of the committee shall be responsible for the orderly
conduct of business at each committee meeting and shall preserve
order and decorum at such meetings.
2.9.5. If the Chairman of the committee is not present, then the President of
Council shall preside. If the President of Council is not present, then the
members present, by a majority vote, shall appoint a Chairman pro tem
to conduct the affairs of the committee.
2.10.1. Reimbursement shall be as provided in the Charter.
2.11.1. In the event that the Council at its sole discretion determines to hold
a special meeting or special public hearing at the request of a private
party, such private party as a condition precedent to such special
meeting or special public hearing shall pay the costs associated with
such special meeting or special hearing, including without limitation,
the cost of advertising the same, the cost of recording or transcribing
the same, the administration preparing the same, and any other costs
directly associated with such meeting or hearing.
2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.11
1:13
2.11.2. The Municipal Manager shall prepare a list of fees to be charged for
such special meeting or special public hearing based upon actual costs
to the Municipality. This schedule of fees shall be effective upon
adoption of a resolution by Council and may be changed, from time to
time, upon subsequent resolution of Council.
2.11.3. The Municipal Manager is authorized and directed to establish
reasonable rules, regulations and forms to be used by private parties in
requesting a special meeting or special public hearing and said rules
and regulations shall include, without limitation, procedures for the
assessment and collection in advance of advertising said meeting or
hearing of the fees therefor, provided, however, that where costs may
be dependent upon the length or conduct of the meeting, such rules,
regulations and procedures may provide for the collection of additional
fees upon the determination of the actual cost thereof. No refund of fees
shall be considered once expense is incurred in association with such
request for a special meeting or hearing.
2.11.4. Nothing in this section is intended to affect the process or procedure
used to collect fees pursuant to any other ordinance of the Municipality
or pursuant to any Commonwealth stature applicable to the
Municipality. If the provisions of this section conflict with any other
ordinance or stature in regard to the collection of fees, the provisions of
this section shall not apply.
2.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.11
1:14
ARTICLE III
Official Actions of Council
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-19-79D]
2.12. Actions.
2.13. Ordinances.
2.14. Resolutions or motions.
2.12.1. Official actions of the Council shall be taken by ordinance, resolution
or motion in accordance with the Home Rule Charter and applicable
law.
2.13.1. In addition to requirements provided by the Charter, acts of the
Council shall be by ordinance, which:
1. Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish or abolish any
unit of the municipality.
2. Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
for which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
3. Levy taxes, impose service charges and permit fees.
4. Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
5. Purchase, convey or lease land or buildings.
6. Involve land development and land use regulations.
2.13.2. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the
form required for final adoption. Any ordinance which repeals or
amends an existing ordinance shall set out in full the ordinance,
sections or subsections to be repealed or amended.
2.13.3. Copies of ordinances shall be available to all persons requesting
them upon payment of a reasonable reproduction charge.
2.13.4. The Council may adopt by ordinance any standard code of technical
regulations by reference thereto. Advertisement of such ordinances
shall be in summary form, setting forth the principle provisions of such
proposed code in such reasonable detail as will give adequate notice of
its contents and a reference to the place or places where such code may
be examined or obtained.
2.14.1. In addition to requirements provided by the Charter, acts of the
Council shall be by resolution or motion, which:
1. Relate a formal statement of legislative opinion or an exertion of
legislative power that does not otherwise require an ordinance.
2. Relate to a procedural action by the Council.
2.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.14
1:15
3. Authorize the borrowing of money.
2.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.14
1:16
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Manager
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-19-79]
2.15. Effects of Charter; powers and duties.
2.15.1. The qualifications, appointment and removal of the Municipal
Manager, prohibitions, powers and duties shall be as provided in the
Charter, including the power and duty to:
1. Designate an officer or employee to perform the duties of any office
or position in the administration, under the control of the Municipal
Manager, which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the
absence or disability of the incumbent.
2. Prescribe such rules and regulations as shall be deemed necessary
or expedient for the conduct and operation of administrative
departments and amend any rule or regulation of the
administrative service, unless contained in an ordinance or
resolution adopted by the Council.
3. Investigate or inquire, either personally or through a person
designated by him, into the operations of any department and may,
subject to the approval and authorization of the Council, employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations
or inquiries.
4. Conduct all labor negotiations in accordance with applicable laws
and, subject to the approval and authorization of the Council, may
employ professional service to aid in such negotiations.
5. Assume the duties of any department head if that person has been
found to be incapable of performing their duties or by dismissal of
the Council.
6. Assign any employee of the administrative service to any
department requiring the services of that employee, provided that
the employee can perform such duty.
7. Be responsible for the activities of the municipal departments,
except as provided by the Charter.
8. Be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
9. Attend all meetings of the Council and its committees, with the
right to take part in the discussion.
10. Perform the duties of the Secretary in causing appropriate records
to be made, preserved and certified as required by law or the
Municipal Council.
2.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.15
1:17
2.16. Powers and duties of Municipal Secretary delegated to
Municipal Manager.
11. Keep the Council and Mayor informed as to the conduct of the
municipal affairs.
12. See that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the municipality are observed.
13. Be the purchasing agent of the municipality and shall take all
precautions to ensure proper purchasing procedures are adopted
and followed.
2.15.2. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the municipality
shall be referred to by the Manager or his designate except such
complaints that regard services of the Police Department. He or an
officer designated by him shall investigate and the Manager shall
dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to
Council.
2.16.1. Any power, duty or function delegated to the Municipal Secretary by
statutory provisions or by any ordinance or resolution of the
municipality shall be deemed delegated to the Municipal Manager.
2.15 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.16
1:18
ARTICLE V
Departmental Organization
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-19-79D]
2.17. Administrative organization.
2.18. Municipal departments.
2.19. Department heads.
2.20. Duties of department heads.
2.17.1. The administrative service of the municipality shall be under the
direction and coordination of the Municipal Manager. Operational
departments of the government shall be created or abolished by an
affirmative vote of the Council and in accordance with the Home Rule
Charter.
2.18.1. The following departments are hereby created to operate under the
direction and control of the Municipal Manager: [Amended by Ord.
No. 7-16-84A]
Department Department Head
Department of Finance Finance Officer
Department of Community Development Director
Department of Public Works Director
Department of Engineering, Inspection
Code Compliance
Director
Department of Sewage Superintendent
2.18.2. The following departments are hereby created to operate with the
coordination of the Municipal Manager:
Department Department Head
Department of Police Chief of Police
Department of Law Municipal Solicitor
2.19.1. All department heads which operate under the direct supervision of
the Municipal Manager shall be appointed and removed by the
Municipal Manager, subject to the approval of the Council. Department
heads shall be selected solely on the basis of executive, administrative
and technical qualifications pertinent to the function, duties and
operations of their respective departments as prescribed by law.
2.20.1. Department heads, under the direct supervision of the Municipal
Manager, shall:
1. Direct, personally and through subordinates, the performance of all
functions, duties and operations assigned to and required of the
2.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.20
1:19
department and its subordinate units, by law, the Charter or
ordinance and such other activities as may be required by the
Municipal Manager, which are not in conflict with law, the Charter
or ordinance.
2. Develop and prescribe the internal organization of the department
and its subordinate units, subject to the approval of the Municipal
Manager and in accordance with applicable provisions of law, the
Charter or ordinance.
3. Assign duties and responsibilities to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify those assignments
consistent with and in response to the changing exigencies of
service, subject to the approval of the Municipal Manager.
4. Prepare and submit departmental budget requests in accordance
with schedules, forms and policies as prescribed by the Municipal
Manager.
5. Prepare and submit reports prescribed by the Municipal Manager
in a timely and orderly manner.
6. Cooperate with and furnish to any department or unit of the
municipality any information, service, labor, material and
equipment that may be necessary to perform a municipal function.
7. Be aware of and coordinate the activities of the department with
appropriate area-wide, regional and intergovernmental programs;
keep the Municipal Manager informed of the activities and policies
of such programs as they affect the department or the municipality;
and make analyses and recommendations regarding such activities
and policies when appropriate.
8. Administer and evaluate intergovernmental contracts and
agreements as these relate to departmental functions and
municipal ordinances.
9. Keep abreast of all laws and municipal ordinances and
administrative regulations relating to the functions of the
department.
10. Serve as a member of any committee or as a staff officer or provide
staff services to any authority, board, commission or committee to
which the department head may be assigned by the Municipal
Manager or as prescribed by the Charter or ordinance.
11. Establish and enforce rules and regulations for the use of municipal
facilities and services and issue such licenses and permits as may
be required by ordinance.
12. Develop and prescribe administrative procedures for the
department, as requested by the Municipal Manager.
2.20 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.20
1:20
13. Develop and maintain internal controls to assure maximum levels
of quality and quantity of service within budgetary limitations.
14. Recommend to the Municipal Manager such employee
development programs as deemed appropriate for department
personnel in terms of training and education.
2.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.20
1:21

ARTICLE VI
Departmental Responsibilities
2.21. Financial Officer.
2.22. Department of Finance.
2.23. Assistant to the Manager. [Added by Ord. No. 7-16-84A]
2.21.1. The Department of Finance shall be headed by the Financial Officer
who shall be responsible to the Municipal Manager for the performance
of the function of the department.
2.22.1. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for all activities
related to but not limited to the following:
1. Collection of property tax, wage tax and other taxes of a general
nature.
2. Development and maintenance of tax records.
3. Administration of tax claims and liens.
4. Financial management and accounting.
5. Investment of available funds.
6. Budgetary reporting.
7. Staff assistance to auditors.
8. Any and all related tasks as shall be assigned by the Municipal
Manager consistent with the Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.23.1. The Assistant to the Manager position shall be responsible to the
Municipal Manager and shall be responsible for all activities related to
but not limited to the following:
1. Administration of pension programs, compensation plans,
personnel policies, employee benefits, safety programs; serve as a
member of the pension advisory board.
2. Assistance with negotiations and preparatory information for labor
negotiations.
3. Coordination of contracts/agreements with public and/or private
agencies, i.e., neighborhood rehabilitation programs, recycling
center, etc.
4. Coordination of EMS subscription campaign, billing and
delinquency collections.
5. Data processing/information system design and installation.
2.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.23
1:23
2.24. Municipal Planner.
2.25. Department of Community Development.
6. Staff assistance to the Cable TV Board, complaint processing,
coordination of municipal programming.
7. Assistance with Annual Budget preparation and presentation.
8. Coordination and production of all publications for the
Municipality.
9. General research and report preparation as assigned by the
Municipal Manager.
10. Any and all duties and responsibilities assigned by the Municipal
Manager.
2.24.1. The Department of Community Development shall be headed by a
Municipal Planner, who shall be responsible to the Municipal Manager
for the performance of the function of the department.
2.25.1. The Department of Community Development shall be responsible for
all activities related to but not limited to the following: [Amended by
Ord. No. 7-16-84A]
1. Site and development plan review.
2. Development and maintenance of the Comprehensive Plan.
3. Staff assistance to the Planning Commission and Parks and
Recreation Board.
4. Capital Programming.
5. Capital improvements planning.
6. Coordination of long-range planning with other governmental
agencies.
7. Coordination of grant application.
8. Administration of community development programs.
9. Coordination of commercial and residential rehabilitation and
revitalization efforts.
10. Coordination of corridor studies.
11. Site plan compliance officer.
12. Zoning Officer, including the issuance of occupancy permits, zoning
compliance and violation relating thereto.
2.23 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.25
1:24
2.26. Public Works Director.
2.27. Department of Public Works.
2.28. Director of Engineering, Inspection, Code Compliance.
[Amended by Ord. No. 7-16-84A]
2.29. Department of Engineering, Inspection and Code Compliance.
[Amended by Ord. No. 7-16-84A]2
13. Any and all related duties as shall be assigned by the Municipal
Manager consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.26.1. The Department of Public Works shall be headed by a director who
shall be responsible to the Municipal Manager for the performance of
the function of the department.
2.27.1. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for all activities
related to but not limited to the following:
1. Construction and maintenance of streets, curbs and gutters.
2. Construction and maintenance of sanitary and storm sewers.
3. Refuse collection and disposal.
4. Maintenance of municipal parks, parklets, rights-of-way and
islands.
5. Maintenance of municipal buildings, grounds and equipment.
6. Erection and maintenance of traffic-regulating signs, signals and
highway markings.
7. Any and all related duties as shall be assigned by the Municipal
Manager consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.28.1. The Department of Engineering, Inspection and Code Compliance
shall be headed by a director who shall be responsible to the Municipal
Manager for the performance of the function of the department.
2.29.1. The Department of Engineering, Inspection and Code Compliance
shall be responsible for all activities related to but not limited to the
following:
2. Editor's Note: Code Enforcement Officer and Department of Code Enforcement were
deleted by Ord. No. 7-16-84A. Functions of this department were incorporated into
Engineering, Inspection and Code Compliance.
2.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.29
1:25
2.30. Sewage Plant Superintendent.
2.31. Department of Sewage Disposal.
1. Preparation of plans, specifications and bidding schedule for all
construction, maintenance and repair of highways, sewers and
other construction projects.
2. Supervision and inspection of all contract work performed on
municipal highways, sewers and construction projects.
3. Recommendations pertaining to site plans, development plans and
acceptance of improvements for all construction in the
Municipality.
4. Preparation and maintenance of all municipal road and sewer
maps.
5. Technical assistance to the Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing
Board and Parks and Recreation Board.
6. Housing, land and building inspection.
7. Zoning and building code enforcement.
8. Housing, land and building ordinance enforcement.
9. Revisions to municipal zoning and building codes.
10. Enforce the provisions of the Fire Code.
11. Any and all related duties as shall be assigned by the Municipal
Manager consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.30.1. The Department of Sewage shall be headed by a licensed
Superintendent who shall be responsible to the Municipal Manager for
the performance of the function of the department.
2.31.1. The Sewage Disposal Department shall be responsible for all
activities related to but not limited to the following:
1. Operation of the sewage treatment plant.
2. Chemical analysis and process monitoring as required by
applicable law.
3. Maintenance and repair of all equipment, buildings and grounds
located at the treatment site.
4. Coordination of activities with the appropriate federal, state and
local agencies.
2.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.31
1:26
2.32. Chief of Police. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-14-81M]
2.33. Department of Police.3
5. Recommendations pertaining to equipment modification or
installation and revisions to operating procedures necessary to
comply with federal, state and local regulations.
6. Staff assistance to the Municipal Authority.
7. Any and all related duties as shall be assigned by the Municipal
Manager consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.32.1. The Department of Police shall be headed by the Chief of Police, who
shall be responsible to the Council for performance of the function of
the Department. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the
Police Department shall be referred to the Chief of Police or his
designate. He or an officer designated by him shall investigate, and the
Chief shall dispose of such complaints and shall report thereon to the
Council. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for taking disciplinary
action, including the final act of suspension, in the Police Department in
accordance with Civil Service Rules and Regulations and the Home
Rule Charter. He shall have no powers to appoint, remove or reduce in
rank, but may recommend appointment, removal or reduction in rank of
personnel to the Council.
2.33.1. The Department of Police shall be responsible for all activities
related to but not limited to the following:
1. Prevention and suppression of crime.
2. Apprehension of offenders and suspected persons.
3. Enforcement of criminal laws and municipal ordinances.
4. Protection to persons and property.
5. Juvenile services and counseling.
6. Maintenance of records and files pertaining to crime and police
activities.
7. Detention of prisoners.
8. Traffic and pedestrian safety.
9. Animal control and licensing.
10. Police community relations and educational programs.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed Section 902 of Article IX of the Bethel Park
Civil Service Rules and Regulations to the extent of any conflicts with this ordinance.
2.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.33
1:27
2.34. Department of Law.
11. Any and all duties as shall be assigned by the Council or Chief of
Police consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home Rule
Charter.
2.34.1. The Department of Law shall be responsible for all activities related
to but not limited to the following:
1. Preparation and revision of municipal ordinances and resolutions.
2. Legal advice pertaining to municipal affairs as requested by the
Council, Municipal Manager or Chief of Police and the Mayor.
3. Litigation of all legal actions and claims brought by or against the
municipality, except where other legal counsel is retained.
4. Review or preparation of any contracts, agreements or other legal
documents as requested by the municipality.
5. Attendance at the regular monthly meetings of Council, as provided
for in Section 307 of the Bethel Park Home Rule Charter and in this
Administrative Code of Bethel Park and at those special meetings of
Council, as provided for in Section 308 of the Bethel Park Home
Rule Charter and in this Administrative Code of Bethel Park, where
such attendance is requested by Council or the Manager.
[Amended by Ord. No. 2-8-82C]
6. Any and all duties as shall be assigned by the Council or Municipal
Manager consistent with this Administrative Code and the Home
Rule Charter.
2.33 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.34
1:28
ARTICLE VII
Boards, Commissions, Committees and Authorities
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-19-79D]
2.35. Creation.
2.36. Membership.
2.35.1. The following boards, commission, committees and authorities are
hereby created:
1. Community Relations Commission.
2. Parks and Recreation Board.
3. Civil Service Commission.
4. Planning Commission.
5. Zoning Hearing Board.
6. Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board. [Added by Ord. No.
9-13-82A]*03
7. Emergency Medical Service Committee.
8. Municipal Authority.
2.35.2. Except, where otherwise provided by law, the Charter, ordinance or
designated by the Council, all boards, commissions, committees, and
authorities shall be advisory in nature and perform no administrative or
legislative function.
2.36.1. The appointment of members of all boards, commissions,
committees and authorities shall be made by the Council.
2.36.2. A member of any board, commission, committee or authority may be
removed by the appointing authority for cause.
2.36.3. The number of members and their respective terms on a board,
commission, committee or authority shall be made by the Council or as
otherwise provided by law.
2.36.4. The terms of no more than a simple majority of the membership shall
expire during the same calendar year.
2.36.5. Any vacancy on a board, commission, committee or authority shall
be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired
term. Such members shall be appointed within 60 days from the date of
the vacancy occurring.
2.36.6. During the period in which a vacancy exists, all members shall
continue to serve until a successor is appointed and qualified, except as
otherwise provided by law.
2.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.36
1:29
2.37. Organization. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-11-86B]
2.38. Intergovernmental participation, boards, commissions,
committees and authorities.
2.39. The Cable Television Board.4
2.36.7. The members of any board, commission, committee or authority
shall serve without compensation, except as otherwise provided by law,
the Charter or ordinance. Members may be reimbursed for all
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
2.36.8. All members of boards, commissions, committees or authorities
appointed by Council shall be residents of the municipality.
2.36.9. No Council member shall serve on any board or commission or be
eligible for appointment to any board or commission of the municipality
during his or her term of office, except in a liaison capacity. [Added by
Ord. No. 12-13-82B]
2.37.1. Each board, commission, committee and authority shall provide for
rules, regulations and bylaws governing its operation. Such rules and
regulations shall provide for the keeping of records pertaining to its
duties, the conduct of meetings and public hearings and a periodic
report to the Council and the Municipal Manager. All such rules,
regulations and bylaws shall be approved by the Council. Council may
initiate, amend or modify any rules, regulations or by-laws of any Board,
Commission, Committee or Authority in its sole discretion.
2.37.2. The Municipal Manager shall attach each board, commission,
committee and authority to an appropriate unit of the administrative
service for necessary staff, liaison and administrative assistance.
2.38.1. The municipality may participate with other governmental
jurisdictions for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
municipality. The participation by the municipality shall be in
accordance with appropriate legislation governing such
intergovernmental participation. Where there is no governmental
legislation authorizing such governmental participation, the
municipality may enter into such participation to the extent permitted
by law.
2.39.1. There is hereby created a Cable Television Board.
2.39.2. The purpose of the Bethel Park Cable Television Board and its duties,
which are illustrative and not exhaustive, include the following:
4. Editor's Note: Former Community Relations Commission added by Ord. No. 11-19-79D was
repealed by Ord. No. 1-9-84B and Ord. No. 3-12-84A. Former Cable Television Advisory
Board added by Ord. No. 1-9-84A was repealed by Ordinance No. 4-13-87C.
2.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.39
1:30
1. Receive, review and investigate citizen complaints regarding cable
television in the Municipality, as provided for but not limited to
Section 11[??], "Service Standards" in the Franchise Renewal
Agreement: and report thereon to Municipal Council.
2. Investigate and maintain records pertaining to the performance of
any cable television franchise to assure compliance with the
franchise agreement, and the periodic reporting of the same to the
Municipality, said reports to be no less than annually and due 90
days prior to the anniversary date of any cable franchise
agreement.
3. Keep abreast and inform the community and the Municipal Council
on legislation affecting the operation of cable television in the
community.
4. Review and provide the Council all information it believes to be
necessary and relative to any matter affecting cable operations as
regulated by the FCC, Security and Exchange Commission or any
other governmental regulatory agency.
5. Monitor the cable operator's compliance with the Franchise
Agreement.
6. Act as a coordinating agency between the system operator and the
Municipal Council.
7. Make recommendations to the Council, whenever necessary, to
ensure contract compliance by the system operator and to
represent the best interests of the Municipal Council and the
community at-large.
8. Administer and encourage the development and use of local (public
access) programming capabilities and resources.
9. Establish and enforce rules and regulations to be utilized by the
public concerning the use and/or operation of the public access
channel (Franchise Renewal Agreement Section 10-A).
10. Communicate the needs of the community to the operator.
11. Monitor and analyze new ideas and changes in the cable television
industry, especially as they relate to the Franchise Renewal
Agreement and the interests of the Municipality.
12. Conduct such testing as permitted or authorized by the Franchise
Agreement as the Board deems necessary; however, any testing
that requires the expenditure of municipal funds will be subject to
prior approval by the Council.
13. Conduct performance evaluation sessions as provided for in the
Franchise Renewal Agreement Section 20, A-B.
2.39 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.39
1:31
2.40. Parks and Recreation Board; function; duties. [Amended
3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 3-11-85B]
14. Inform the Council of any violation of the Franchise Renewal
Agreement, Section 17, which could result in the forfeiture or
termination of the Agreement between the Municipality of Bethel
Park and the system operator.
15. Review and develop such recommendations regarding cable
television as may, from time to time, be requested by the Municipal
Manager or Council.
2.39.3. The membership of the Cable Television Board shall consist of five
members. The terms of office shall be four years, except that of the
membership of the Board first appointed, one member shall serve until
the first day of January following the approval date of these duties, two
members shall serve until the first day of the second January following
the approval date of these duties; one member shall serve until the first
day of the third January following the approval date of these duties, and
one member shall serve until the first day of the fourth January
following the approval date of these duties. [Amended 3-14-1994 by
Ord. No. 3-14-94B; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 5-13-96C; 8-12-1996
by Ord. No. 8-12-96A; 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 5-12-97A; 4-22-2002
by Ord. No. 4-22-02; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 9-10-07]
2.39.4. The Municipality of Bethel Park Cable Television Board is granted
the authority pursuant to the Cable Act and the applicable FCC
regulations to review cable television rates and to enforce standards for
cable television service, installation and equipment within the
Municipality. [Added 1-10-1994 by Ord. No. 1-10-94A]
2.39.5. The Cable Television Board shall conduct hearings to determine the
reasonableness of rates per operator filings or consumer rate
complaints pursuant to regulations that will be established by the
Municipal Council regarding rate regulations. [Added 1-10-1994 by
Ord. No. 1-10-94A]
2.40.1. The Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services Board shall be
responsible for the periodic review of parks, recreation and leisure
services programs for the purpose of setting up programs and
recommending changes; and for advising the Council on parks,
recreation and leisure services needs, the use of facilities, programs,
activities and fee structures relating thereto. The Board may also advise
the School Board on matters pertaining to parks, recreation and leisure
services as deemed necessary.
2.40.2. The duties of the Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services Board shall
be to:
2.39 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.40
1:32
2.41. Civil Service Commission; function; membership; term;
duties.
1. Receive complaints dealing with parks, recreation and leisure
services programs or facilities and make recommendations
pursuant to them.
2. Make recommendations to the Council and School Board on rules
and regulations and practices concerning the utilization of
programs and facilities, schedule of fees for programs and
operation of concessions at park, recreation and leisure services
facilities.
3. Advise the Council and School District on needed facilities and
programs.
2.41.1. The Civil Service Commission shall conduct interviews for selection
and ranking for recommendations to the Council for vacancies in the
Police Department. The Commission shall conduct tests for promotions
within the Police Department. The Civil Service Commission shall
prepare procedures for the selection of persons to fill vacancies, for
promotions and for the discipline of civil service employees.
2.41.2. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three members, each
appointed for a three-year term, who shall not be officers or employees
of the Municipality.
2.41.3. The duties of the Civil Service Commission shall be to:
1. Grant a hearing to any civil service employee who has been
suspended, removed or reduced in rank, upon the request of said
civil service employee, in accordance with law and as provided in
Subsection A above.
2. Render a decision on every appeal brought before it within 30 days
of the receipt of the hearing transcript, which shall include findings
of fact and conclusions of law.
3. Adopt within 90 days of its organization rules and procedures
which shall govern appeals and the length of suspension.
4. Conduct tests for civil service employees and provide an eligibility
list to the Council to fill vacancies.
5. Conduct tests for civil service employees and prepare a list to the
Council for promotions.
6. Provide to the Council recommendations for changes to the rules
and regulations concerning the hiring and promotions of civil
service employees in the Police Department for consideration and
implementation as the Council deems appropriate. [Amended
6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 6-8-98B]
2.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.42
1:33
2.42. Planning Commission; function; duties.
2.42.1. The Planning Commission shall advise the Municipal Manager, the
Council and the Department of Community Development upon all plans
related to development in the Municipality. It shall function as the
planning agency for the Municipality in all matters prescribed by law
which are not assigned by this Administrative Code to the Department
of Community Development.
2.42.2. The duties of the Planning Commission shall be to:
1. Prepare and maintain the Comprehensive Plan for the development
of the Municipality and present the same to the Council for
consideration.
2. Maintain and keep files of all its records.
3. Perform any and all functions delegated to it by the Council in
accordance with this Code, the Home Rule Charter or applicable
law.
2.42.3. The Planning Commission, at the request of the Council or by official
action of the same may:
1. Make recommendations to the Council concerning the adoption or
amendment of the Official Map.
2. Prepare and present to the Council a zoning ordinance and make
recommendations on proposed amendments to it.
3. Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land
development and planned residential development regulations as
provided by applicable law.
4. Prepare and present to the Council a building code and a housing
code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto.
5. Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by applicable law.
6. Prepare and present to the Council an environmental study.
7. Submit to the Council a recommended capital improvements
program.
8. Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
9. Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
10. Hold public meetings and hearings.
2.42 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.42
1:34
2.43. Zoning Hearing Board; function; duties.
2.44. Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board. [Added 9-13-1982 by
Ord. No. 9-13-82A]
11. Require from other departments and agencies of the Municipality
such available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
12. In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations or land surveys with the consent of the owner.
2.43.1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be responsible for hearing appeals
on rulings by the Zoning Officer.
2.43.2. The Zoning Hearing Board shall perform those duties prescribed by
Act 247 of the State of Pennsylvania5 and the municipal codes,
including the duties to:
1. Conduct hearings and render decisions on appeals from the Zoning
Officer.
2. Hear challenges to the validity of any ordinance or map.
3. Hear requests for variances and render decisions thereon,
attaching such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of law, the Charter or
ordinance.
2.44.1. The Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board shall be responsible for
hearing appeals on rulings by the Building Official or Fire Official in
enforcing the Building Codes or the Fire Code of the Municipality.
2.44.2. The Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board shall perform the
following duties:
1. Duties relative to errors. Hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Official or Fire Official in the
enforcement or administration of the Building or Fire Codes.
2. Duties relative to code modification. The Board may vary or modify
the application of the Building or Fire Codes when it can be
demonstrated by competent expert testimony or evidence that the
provisions of the code in question should not fully apply to unusual
conditions or circumstances (provided, however, that financial
hardship shall not constitute unusual conditions or circumstances)
or that an equally good or better form of construction or method of
construction can be used.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
2.42 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.44
1:35
2.45. Emergency Medical Service Committee; function; duties.
3. Upon the Council's request or upon its own initiative, make
recommendation to the Council concerning amendments to the
Building and Fire Codes.
4. Upon the Council's request or upon its own initiative, prepare and
present to the Council proposed amendments to the Building and
Fire Codes.
2.44.3. The membership of the Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board shall
consist of three members. The terms of office shall be three years and
expire on December 31. When no new appointments are made by
December 31, the member shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed or the member is reappointed. No more than one
appointment shall expire each year. For the purpose of transition from a
five-member Board to a three-member Board, new appointments shall
be made for one, two and three years in order to stagger the term
expirations. [Amended 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 3-11-96A]
2.44.4. No appeal to the Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board shall be
heard by the Board unless the required fees as provided for in Section
34.13 of this Code are paid at the time an appeal is taken.
2.44.5. The Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq., shall govern the
practice and procedure of the Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the
Board and the Municipal Council from adopting rules and regulations
consistent with and in addition to the Local Agency Law pursuant to
Section 2.37.6
2.45.1. The Emergency Medical Service Committee shall participate in the
Emergency Medical Service Advisory Board as representatives of
Bethel Park with the Tri-Community Emergency Medical Service
System. The Committee shall keep the Council advised of the activities
of the Tri-Community Emergency Medical Service System.
2.45.2. The Emergency Medical Service Committee shall perform those
duties prescribed by the Municipal Council, including the duties to:
1. Represent the municipality as a member of the Tri-Community
Emergency Medical Service System.
2. Bring to the attention of the Council any problems that may arise
and solutions to those problems.
3. Pursue and encourage citizen participation in the emergency
medical service for the community.
6. Editor's Note: Former Section 2.44.6, regarding attendance of Board members, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-10-2002 by Ord. No.
6-10-02B.
2.44 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.46
1:36
2.46. Municipal Authority; function; duties.
2.47. Ad hoc boards or commissions.
2.46.1. The Municipal Authority shall be responsible for the construction of
the sewage treatment plant for the Municipality of Bethel Park. It shall
function as the Sewage Authority for the municipality.
2.46.2. The Municipal Authority shall perform those duties prescribed by
law, including the duties to:
1. Keep the Council apprised of the operations of the Authority.
2. Bring to the Council's attention any questions that may arise from
any changes in regulations which may affect the municipality.
3. Cooperate with any other governmental agencies as far as federal
regulations affecting the construction of the sewage treatment
plant.
4. Participate with the municipality to upgrade the sewer system.
2.47.1. The Council and Municipal Manager may appoint ad hoc boards,
commissions and committees to advise them on specific matters.
2.47.2. Membership.
1. The term of membership on any ad hoc board, commission or
committee shall be at the discretion of the Council.
2. Upon completion of its responsibilities, any ad hoc board,
commission or committee shall dissolve and the terms of its
members expire, unless the Board or commission is recreated and
its members reappointed for a period designated by the Council.
3. The members of ad hoc boards, commissions or committees need
not be residents of the municipality.
4. The filling of vacancies shall be in accordance with Section 2.36 of
this ordinance.
2.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.47
1:37

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
2.48. Oath of Office.
2.49. Code of ethics.
2.50. Interference with administrations.
2.51. Prohibited acts by officials and employees.
2.48.1. All Council persons, the Municipal Manager and department heads,
before commencing their official duties, shall take and sign an oath of
office as shall from time to time be prescribed by law. Such oath shall be
taken and signed before a Judge, Justice of the Peace or Notary Public
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This oath shall be filed in written
form with the Municipal Manager prior to assuming office.
2.49.1. All Council persons, the Municipal Manager and department heads
in the administrative service, before commencing their official duties,
shall affirm to a code of ethics as may be adopted by the municipality
from time to time. The signed affirmation of such code of ethics by
Council persons, the Municipal Manager and department heads shall be
filed with the Municipal Manager.
2.50.1. Except as otherwise provided in this Administrative Code and for the
purpose of inquiries and investigations, the Council or its members
shall deal with employees in the administrative service solely through
the Municipal Manager or his designee, and neither the Council nor its
members shall give orders to such employees, either publicly or
privately.
2.50.2. Except as otherwise provided in this Administrative Code and for the
purpose of inquiries and investigations, the Council or its members
shall deal with employees in the Police Department solely through the
Chief of Police or his designee, and neither the Council nor its members
shall give orders to such employees of the Police Department, either
publicly or privately.
2.51.1. General.
1. No elected official or any employee shall solicit any compensation,
gratuity or other thing of value for any act done in the course of
public service, except compensation for the position or employment
held in the municipality.
2. No elected official or employee shall compel another employee to
contribute to any fund other than required by law or ordinance.
3. No individual shall willfully make any false statement, certificate,
mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or
appointment under the personnel provisions of the municipality; or
2.48 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.51
1:39
2.52. Conviction of crime.
2.53. Surcharge requirements.
in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such provisions.
2.51.2. Elected officials.
1. No elected officials shall hold any other compensated position for
the municipality, except those elected officials who are employed
by the municipality as of the effective date of this ordinance. Such
personnel shall be permitted to continue in their elected capacity
until their present term of office expires.
2.51.3. Employees.
1. Employees are prohibited from engaging in partisan political
activity during working hours and at all times in municipal offices
and facilities, except at official polling places.
2. Employees shall not hold an elected office in any government unit
unless a leave of absence is taken without pay.
2.52.1. Any employee convicted of a felony or a crime or offense involving
moral turpitude shall, for a period of three years, be ineligible for
employment and, upon conviction thereof, while in the employment of
the municipality, shall forfeit such employment.
2.53.1. The amount of any balance or shortage or any expenditure or fund
made in a manner prohibited or unauthorized by law, which causes
financial loss to the municipality, shall be a surcharge against any
official or employee who, by malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance,
has permitted or approved such expenditure or shortage to occur, but
no elected or appointed official of a municipality shall be surcharged for
any act, error or omission in excess of the actual financial loss sustained
by the municipality, and any surcharge shall take into consideration as
its basis the results of such act, error or omission and the results had
the procedure been strictly according to law. The provisions hereof
limiting the amount of any surcharge shall not apply to cases involving
fraud or collusion of the part of the officers, nor to any penalty enuring
to the benefit or payable to the Commonwealth.
2.53.2. Any shortage or illegal expenditure in any report filed by the
independent auditor to the Council against any official or employee
shall constitute a surcharge, and unless appeal is taken, the Council
shall cause same to be entered in the Office of the Prothonotary of the
County of Allegheny as a judgment against the one surcharged in favor
of the municipality.
2.53.3. In those instances where the Council finds that shortage or
expenditure, as aforesaid, was not caused by malfeasance, misfeasance
2.51 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.53
1:40
2.54. Inquiries and investigations.
2.55. Police powers.
or nonfeasance of the official or employee responsible therefor, but
occurred despite the good faith of such persons, the shortage shall not
be entered as a surcharge, but the Council shall issue a special report
on the matter and shall hold a public hearing concerning the report
2.53.4. It shall be lawful for the municipality or any resident thereof on its
behalf or any official or employee whose account is settled or audited,
to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of the County of Allegheny from
the settlement or audit as shown on the report of the auditor to the
Council, not later than 40 days after public notice of the filing of the
report.
2.53.5. Judgments caused to be entered by the Council or by the Court after
hearing on appeal shall be enforced by appropriate proceedings.
2.54.1. The Council, the Civil Service Commission, Zoning Hearing Board
and the Municipal Auditors shall each have the power to conduct
inquiries and investigations in aid of the exercise of their powers and
performance of their duties.
2.54.2. The Council, the Civil Service Commission, Zoning Hearing Board
and the Municipal Auditors shall have the power to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and other
evidence at investigative hearings and, for that purpose, may issue or
cause to be issued subpoenas, signed by appropriate officials or
commission members and served as provided by law.
2.54.3. The official presiding at any hearing shall have the power to
administer oaths to witnesses.
2.54.4. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
official or board issuing same may, by petition, apply to the Court of
Common Pleas of the County of Allegheny for its subpoena to compel
the attendance of such person before the official, the commission or the
Court. Under failure to attend, the Municipal Attorney shall request
that such person be held in contempt of court and be punished therefor.
2.54.5. No person subpoenaed, as aforesaid, shall be required to respond to
the same until mileage and witness fees, equal to those then established
by law or ordinance, shall have first been tendered to the witness.
2.55.1. Police employed by the municipality shall be ex officio constables of
the Commonwealth and shall have the powers and prerogatives
conferred on police officers by law. Police, when acting as constables,
shall have the authority to serve and execute all criminal processes for
the violation of municipal ordinances which may be issued, and the fees
and costs collected in such capacity shall be paid into the municipal
treasury.
2.53 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.56
1:41
2.56. Time for taking action expiring on Sundays or holidays.
2.57. Equivalent functions.
2.58. Severability.
2.59. Repealer.
2.56.1. Whenever any time established by this ordinance for the taking of
any action expires on a Sunday or on a legal holiday, such time shall not
expire on said day but shall expire on the next business day.
2.57.1. Where law or ordinance prescribes certain functions to be
performed by a designated department head under the former form of
government, such function shall be performed by the equivalent
department head to which the respective functions have been assigned
by this Administrative Code.
2.58.1. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion hereof.
2.59.1. All ordinances, and parts of ordinances heretofore enacted, which
are inconsistent with any provision of this Administrative Code are, to
the extent of such inconsistencies, hereby repealed.
2.59.2. The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof by this Administrative
Code or by any other ordinance shall not revive any former ordinance or
part thereof which may have been repealed by such repealed ordinance
or part thereof.
2.59.3. Any ordinance or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.
2.56 BETHEL PARK CODE 2.59
1:42
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
2.59 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2.59
1:43

ARTICLE I
Municipal Authority
[Adopted by Ord. No. 37-5-50]
3.1. Intent.
3.2. Name.
3.3. Proposed Articles of Incorporation.
3.1.1. It is the desire and intention of the municipal authorities of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, to organize an authority under the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," approved May 2, 1945, Act No. 164, as
amended and supplemented, for the purpose of exercising any and all of
the powers conferred by said act.
3.2.1. The name of the proposed Authority is "Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park."
3.3.1. The proposed Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority are
as follows:
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended and supplemented, the Municipality of Bethel Park, Allegheny
County, a municipality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant
to an ordinance duly adopted by the municipal authorities of said
municipality signifying said municipality's desire and intention to form
an Authority, hereby certifies:
The name of the Authority shall be Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
The Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
approved May 2, 1945, Act No. 164, as amended and supplemented.
No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, or under the
act approved June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended and supplemented,
and is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality named
herein.
The name of the incorporating municipality is the Municipality of Bethel
Park, and the names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as
follows:
3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 3.3
1:45
Office Name Address
Burgess J.J. Shaw R.D. #3 Library, Pa.
President of
Council
C.V. Norcutt R.D. #2 Library, Pa.
Councilman L.J. Smith 7 Park Avenue R.D. #2 Library,
Pa
Councilman James C.
Simmons
744 Forest Road, Ruthfred
Acres, Bridgeville, Pa
Councilman Robert T. Hurst 211 Orchard Park Dr., R.D. #10,
Pittsburgh 27, Pa
Councilman John Boden Box 27 Mollenauer, Pa
Councilman John Chox Box 274 Covererdale, Pa.
Councilman C.S. Sproul Marshall Road, R.D. #9
Pittsburgh 28, Pa.
The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Authority are:
Name Address
Term of
Office
Jay Wells 3 Cambridge Road R.D. #9 Pittsburgh
28, Pa.
5 years
J. J. Williams 676 South Park Road Ruthfred Acres
Bridgeville, Pa
4 years
John P.
Stutsman
14 Comanche Road R.D. #9
Bridgeville, Pa
3 years
John S.
McCabe
McMurray Road R.D. #2 Bridgeville,
Pa.
1 year
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the incorporating municipality has
executed these Article proper officers thereunto duly
authorized and under its municipal seal this 26th day of July
1950.
Municipality of Bethel Park
By C.V. Norcutt
President of Council
By J.J. Shaw
Burgess
Attest:
Robt. M. Colteryahn
Secretary
3.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 3.4
1:46
3.4. Members appointed.
3.5. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
3.6. First projects.
3.7. Necessity and purpose.
3.8. Repealer.
3.4.1. The following persons are hereby appointed members of the Board of
the Authority with the following term of office:
Name Address
Term of
Office
Jay Wells 3 Cambridge Road R.D. #9
Pittsburgh 28, Pa
5 years
J.J. Williams 676 South Park Road Ruthfred Acres
Bridgeville, Pa.
4 years
John P. Stutsman 14 Comanche Road R.D. #9
Pittsburgh 28, Pa.
3 years
James J. Heger Chessbriar Drive Ruthfred Acres
Bridgeville, Pa
2 years
John S. McCabe McMurray Road R.D. #2 Bridgeville,
Pa
1 year
3.5.1. The Articles of Incorporation of the proposed Authority, in
substantially the form set forth in § 3-3 of this ordinance, shall be
executed on behalf of the Municipality of Bethel Park by the President
of Council and the Mayor of the Municipality of Bethel Park and under
its municipal seal, attested by the Secretary of the Municipality of
Bethel Park; and such officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to do all things necessary and appropriate to effect and
establish said proposed Authority in conformity with the provisions of
the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended and
supplemented.
3.6.1. The first projects to be undertaken by the Authority shall be the
acquisition, holding, construction, improving; maintaining and
operating, owning and leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee,
of public school buildings, playgrounds and other public school
facilities.
3.7.1. The adoption of this ordinance is deemed necessary for the benefit
and preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general
welfare, and will increase the general welfare of the people of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 3.8
1:47
3.9. When effective.
3.8.1. All ordinances and resolutions, and all parts of either thereof, which
are inconsistent herewith, shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
3.9.1. This ordinance shall become effective 10 days after being recorded
and advertised as required by law.7
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 3.10, Attendance requirements, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 6-10-02B.
3.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 3.9
1:48
Chapter 4
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS
3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 3.9
1:49

ARTICLE I
Bidding Procedures
[Adopted 2-13-1978 by Ord. No. 2-13-78A]
4.1. Definitions.
4.2. Publication of bid invitations. [Amended 3-10-1980 by Ord. No.
3-10-80B; 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 6-13-83A; 3-13-1989 by Ord. No.
3-13-89A; 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 3-13-00A; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No.
12-9-13B; 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2-11-19]
4.1.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
4.1.2. BEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER — A responsible bidder who, in a
competitive bidding situation, submits a bid which, as finally
determined by the Municipal Council, is the best bid available in terms
of price, product and/or service quality, adherence to specifications,
timeliness of delivery, serviceability and maintenance and other factors
that the Municipal Council may establish.
4.1.3. BOND — Any of the following: certified check, bank treasurer's check,
cashier's check or bidder's bond drawn to the order of the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
4.1.4.CHARTER — The Home Rule Charter of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
4.1.5. INVITATION TO BID — A request in writing stating the desired
commodity, specifications, place to receive a copy, municipal
regulations, requirements for bidders, whether bids shall be accepted
electronically and the contract awarded via competitive electronic
auction bidding, bond requirements and location and time for delivery
of sealed bids, as well as opening of bids. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 2-11-19]
4.1.6. SECURITY — Ten percent of the bid.
4.2.1. The contracts or purchases, except those hereinafter mentioned,
made by the municipality in excess of the base amount of $20,100 shall
be in writing and shall not be made except with and from the lowest
responsible bidder, and invitations to bid thereon shall be published in
one newspaper of general circulation within the municipality at least
two times at intervals of not less than three days for daily newspapers
of general circulation or, in the case of weekly newspapers of general
circulation within the Municipality, published once a week for two
successive weeks. The Municipal Manager shall inform the Municipal
Council of any contracts or purchases to be made by the municipality
involving expenditures between $5,000 and $20,100 or the base
amount as adjusted in accordance with Section 4.2.1.a before
authorizing such contracts or purchases.
4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4.2
1:51
4.3. Deposit and bond.
4.2.1A. Adjustment to the base amount specified in Section 4.2.1 at which
competitive bidding is required shall be made annually by the
Municipality on January 1 of each year to adhere to the "Final Adjusted
Base Amount for Public Bids" which is published as part of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry's "Consumer Price
Index Adjustment of Base Amounts on Bids" in the Pennsylvania
Bulletin prior to January 1 of the calendar year.
4.2.2. The first advertisement shall be published not less than 10 days prior
to the date fixed for the opening of bids.
4.2.3. Any published notice for bids shall contain full plans and
specifications or shall refer to the place where copies therefor can be
obtained and shall give the time and place of a public meeting where
bids shall be publicly opened and read but the contract not awarded. If
applicable, the notice shall state that bids shall be received by the
Municipality electronically and that the contract shall be awarded via
competitive electronic auction bidding.
4.2.4. In the preparation for the erection, construction or alteration of any
public building, when the entire cost of the work shall exceed the
bidding threshold specified in Section 4.2.1, the architect, engineer, or
other person preparing the specifications may, if so requested by the
Municipal Council, prepare separate specifications for the plumbing,
heating, ventilating and electrical work. If Council directs the
preparation of separate specifications, the Municipality shall solicit
separate bids upon each of the branches of work and shall award the
contract to the lowest responsible bidder for each of the branches. In
the alternative, Council may elect to solicit bids from a single prime
contractor for the erection, construction or alteration of a public
building, in which case the Municipality shall award the contract to the
lowest responsible bidder.
4.3.1. The bidder shall submit, along with the bid, a bid bond or deposit in an
amount not less than 10% of the bid; failure to do so may be grounds for
rejection of the bid.
4.3.2. The ten-percent bond or deposit will be returned to the successful
bidder upon the signing of the contract and posting of a performance
bond. The bidders bond or deposit will be returned to all unsuccessful
bidders within 30 days after award of the contract.
4.3.3. The successful bidder shall be required to enter into a written
contract with the municipality and to furnish a bond, acceptable to the
municipality, with sufficient corporate surety authorized to do business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, conditioned for the faithful and
full performance of the contract in the amount of the contract
prescribed by the bid specifications. In the case of contracts for a
period covering one year or less, said performance bond shall be for the
4.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 4.3
1:52
4.4. Conditions, terms, rules and regulations.
full amount of the contract In the case of multiple year contracts,
said performance bond shall be equal to an amount determined by the
Municipal Manager and stated in the bid specifications. In multiple
years contracts, the required performance bond shall be equal to at
least an amount covering one year of the contract. Furthermore, said
bond shall be renewed for the following year at least 90 days from the
expiration of the current year bond. Failure of the contractor to provide
a renewed bond as specified above shall result in a fine being levied
against the contractor for an amount equal to the sum total of 10%
of the first year contract amount plus the costs of advertising for new
bidders to complete the contract plus any costs for the new awarded
contract which exceeds the amount left of the existing contract. Bond
with surety must be furnished within 20 days from the date of award.
The Municipality reserves the right to reject any bond furnished where
it is to the best interest of the municipality to do so. [Amended
2-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2-10-92A]
4.3.4. Every invitation for bids shall contain a notice informing all bidders
that a noncollusion affidavit must be included in the bid package. A
copy of the noncollusion affidavit set forth in Exhibit A and the
instructions set forth in Exhibit B attached hereto and made a part
hereof shall be supplied with any plans and specifications provided by
the municipality to any prospective bidder. [Added 4-13-1987 by Ord.
No. 4-13-87A]8
4.4.1. Bid procedure. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 2-11-19]
1. Bids will be received in one of the following two manners, at the
discretion of the Municipality:
a. At 5100 West Library Avenue, Bethel Park, Pennsylvania,
15102, at the time designated in the invitation to bid; or
b. Where the Municipality determines that use of competitive
electronic bidding is in the best interest of the Municipality, a
contract for supplies or services, but not for construction or
design professional services, may be entered into by
competitive electronic auction bidding. Bids shall be accepted
electronically at the time and in the manner designated in the
invitation for bids. During the auction, each bidder shall have
the capability to view their bid rank or the low bid price.
Bidders may reduce their bid prices during the auction. At the
conclusion of the auction, the record of the bid prices received
and the name of each bidder shall be open to public inspection.
8. Editor's Note: Exhibit A and Exhibit B referenced above are on file in the Bethel Park
Municipal Building.
4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4.4
1:53
2. Any bidder may withdraw his bid at any time before the time set for
opening of bids. A bidder to any construction contract for the
construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration or repair of any
public building or other public improvement or for the provision of
services to or lease of real or personal property whether by lease or
concession from such contracting body, excepting highway work,
may withdraw his bid from consideration after the bid opening
without forfeiture of the certified check, bank cashier's check,
surety bid bond or other security filed with the bid if the price bid
was submitted in good faith, and the bidder submits credible
evidence that the reason for the price bid being substantially lower
was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was
actually due to an unintentional and substantial arithmetical error
or an unintentional omission of a substantial quantity of work,
labor, material or services made directly in the compilation of the
bid; provided: (i) notice of a claim of the right to withdraw such bid
is made in writing with the contracting body within two business
days after the opening of bids; and (ii) the withdrawal of the bid
would not result in the awarding of the contract on another bid of
the same bidder, his partner, or to a corporation or business
venture owned by or in which he has a substantial interest. No
bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall supply any material
or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for
any person to whom a contract or subcontract is awarded in the
performance of the contract for which the withdrawn bid was
submitted, without the written approval of the contracting body.
Bids shall be awarded by written notice to the lowest responsible
bidder within 30 days after bids have been opened unless extended
by the Municipality when in the best interest of the Municipality.
4.4.2. Bid contract and other requirements.
1. The bidder is responsible for submitting a bid that will conform to
all existing federal, commonwealth and municipal regulations.
Attention is called specifically to the state requirement relative to
licensing of corporations and regulation of partnerships and
fictitious names.
2. The proposal and bidding schedule shall be furnished in duplicate
one copy to be filled out, signed and submitted to the office of the
Municipal Manager of the Municipality of Bethel Park in
accordance with the appropriate specifications and one copy of the
bid proposal to be retained by the bidder. Bid proposals must be
submitted on official municipal forms.
3. Each proposal shall be clearly marked on the outside of an
envelope as a sealed bid. The name of the item for which the bid is
submitted also shall be indicated on the outside of the envelope.
4. All bidders must be recognized dealers in the materials or
equipment specified and be qualified to advise in their application
4.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 4.4
1:54
or use. A bidder, at any time requested, must satisfy the Municipal
Manager and the Council that he has the requisite organization,
capitol, plant, stock, ability and experience to satisfactorily execute
the contract in accordance with the provisions of the contract in
which he is interested.
5. All prices quoted shall be based upon delivery, after receipt of a
formal purchase order issued by the Purchasing Officer, to any and
all points within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel Park (unless
otherwise specified) with all charges prepaid to any point of actual
delivery.
6. All discounts offered must be for at least a period of 30 days to be
considered in the awarding of contracts, and discount periods shall
be from date of delivery, otherwise, bids should be net.
7. Price will be quoted without federal excise or transportation taxes
or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania sales tax. Where or when the
municipality is exempt from such taxes, an exemption certificate
will be issued to cover the amount of such applicable federal and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania taxes.
8. All trade names, catalog numbers or bids "as per sample" offered
on a bid shall meet the specifications. The decision of the Municipal
Council or its Municipal Manager as to the quality of the items shall
be final.
9. When requested, samples must be furnished free of expense,
properly marked for identification and accompanied by list when
there is more than one sample. The municipality reserves the right
to mutilate or destroy any samples submitted whenever it may be to
the best interest of the municipality to do so for the purpose of
testing.
10. The unauthorized use of any patented article is done entirely at the
risk of the bidder.
11. Only the latest model equipment, as evidenced by the
manufacturer's current published literature, will be considered.
Obsolete models of equipment not in production will not be
acceptable. Equipment shall be composed of new parts and
materials. In addition to the equipment specifically called for in the
specifications, all equipment catalogued by the manufacturer as
standard or required by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue
shall be furnished with the equipment. Where required by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, vehicles shall
be inspected and bear the latest inspection sticker of the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue. All costs of inspection,
transfer of license and other work necessary in the transfer of
vehicles shall be borne by the successful bidder.
4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4.4
1:55
12. The successful bidder on motor vehicle equipment will be required
to furnish, upon delivery of the vehicle, a written owner's service
warranty and other appropriate brochures.
13. Prospective bidders are required to examine the location of the
proposed work or delivery and determine, in their own way, the
difficulties which are likely to be encountered in the prosecution of
the same.
14. Unless otherwise specified and acceptable to the Municipal
Manager, all materials, supplies or equipment quoted must be
delivered within 30 days from the date of notification of award.
15. Submitting a proposal with the intention to sublet the contract
without advising the municipality may be cause for rejection of bids
or cancellation of the contract.
16. In case of error where extension of prices is requested, the unit
price quoted shall prevail.
17. The successful bidder shall submit a name and telephone number
of a person who can be reached in case of an emergency.
Emergencies shall mean those which may affect the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the municipality.
18. Each sealed bid shall contain a fully executed and notarized
noncollusion affidavit in exactly the form set forth in Exhibit A
attached hereto and made a part hereof. Any bid received without
such fully executed noncollusion affidavit shall be rejected. [Added
4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 4-13-87A]9
4.4.3. Qualifications and disqualifications of bidders.
1. The municipality reserves the right to disqualify as a bidder any
corporation, firm or individual who, for any cause, is in arrears to
the municipality or who has failed in any former contract with the
municipality to perform work satisfactorily, either as to the
character of the work, the fulfillment of guaranty or the time
consumed in completing the work.
2. Reasonable grounds for supposing that any bidder is interested in
more than one proposal for the same item will be considered
sufficient cause for rejection of all proposals in which he is
interested.
3. Rejection: reservation of right to reject any and all bids.
4. The municipality reserves the right to reject any and all bids or
quotations, to waive any minor discrepancies in the bids,
quotations or specifications when deemed to be in the best interest
9. Editor's Note: Exhibit A referenced above is on file in the Bethel Park Municipal Building.
4.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 4.4
1:56
of the municipality and also to purchase any part, all or none of the
materials, supplies or equipment specified.
5. Any alterations, erasures, additions or omissions of required
information or any change of specifications or bidding schedule is
done at the risk of the bidder and may result in the rejection of his
bid. In case of discrepancies or omissions or if the bidder is in
doubt as to the meaning of specifications or bidding schedules, he
should at once notify the Municipal Manager. Changes in
specifications will be issued in official supplements, and copies will
be sent simultaneously to any and all bidders.
6. The municipality reserves the right to reject any bid which includes
materials, supplies or equipment that do not meet the
specifications, even though the bidder lists the trade name or
names of such materials on the bid or price quotation form.
7. Failure of the bidder to sign the bid or to have the signature of an
authorized representative or agent on the bid proposal in the space
provided will be cause for rejection of the bid. The signature must
be written in ink. Typewritten or printed signatures are not
acceptable.
4.4.4. Miscellaneous.
1. Whenever the words "Municipal Manager" or the pronoun in place
thereof occurs in the contract, articles of agreement or
specifications, it is understood that the Municipal Manager is
acting only under the authority of and subject to the approval of the
Municipal Council.
2. No responsibility will attach to any municipal representative or
employee for the premature opening of a bid not properly
addressed and identified.
3. The estimated quantity given in the specification or advertisement
is for the purpose of bidding only. The municipality may purchase
more or less than the estimated quantity, and the bidder must not
assume that such estimated quantity is part of the contract.
4. All materials, equipment and supplies shall be subject to rigid
inspection under the immediate supervision of the Municipal
Manager or his designee. If defective material, equipment or
supplies are discovered, the contractor, upon being instructed by
the Municipal Manager, shall remove or make good such material,
equipment or supplies without extra compensation. The inspection
of materials by the municipality will in no way lessen the
responsibility of the contractor or release him from his obligation
to perform and deliver to the municipality sound and satisfactory
materials, equipment or supplies. The successful bidder shall pay
the cost of all tests on defective material, equipment or supplies or
4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4.4
1:57
4.5. Waivers and exceptions.
allow the cost to be deducted from any moneys due him from the
municipality.
5. Unless otherwise specified, the municipality reserves the right to
solicit bids on each item separately or on a lump-sum basis with
respect to a specific project, whichever method is to the best
interest of the municipality.
6. If, at any time, the Municipal Manager shall be of the opinion that
the contract or any part thereof is unnecessarily delayed or that the
rate of progress or delivery is unsatisfactory or that the contractor
is willfully violating any of the conditions or covenants of the
agreement or is executing the same in bad faith, the Municipal
Manager shall have the power to notify the aforesaid contractor of
the nature of the complaint. Notification shall constitute delivery of
notice, or letter, to address given in proposal. If after three working
days of notification the conditions are not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Manager, he shall thereupon have the
power to take whatever action he may deem necessary to complete
the work or delivery herein described, or any part hereof, and the
expense thereof, so charged, shall be deducted from any paid by
the municipality out of such moneys as may be due or any time
thereafter may become due to said contractor under and by virtue
of this agreement. In case such expense shall exceed the last said
sum, then and in that event, the bondsman or the contractor, his
executors, administrators, successors or assigns shall pay the
amount of such excess to the municipality on notice by the
Municipal Manager of the excess due.
7. The municipality reserves the right to participate with other
governmental agencies for the purpose of bidding when it is in the
best interest of the municipality, and such participation is
understood to comply with the intent and requisites of the Charter
and this ordinance with respect to competitive bidding.
8. The Municipal Manager from time to time upon the approval of the
Solicitor may modify the noncollusion affidavit set forth in Exhibit A
and the instructions based upon changes in the Antibid-Rigging Act
or case law interpreting that act. [Added 4-13-1987 by Ord. No.
4-13-87A]10
4.5.1.Waivers and exceptions shall be those stated in Section 1304, Article
13, of the Charter:
1. Labor or services rendered by a municipal officer or employee in
payment for services.
10.Editor's Note: Exhibit A referenced above is on file in the Bethel Park Municipal Building.
4.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 4.5
1:58
4.6. Repealer.
2. Contracts relating to the acquisition, sale or use of real property.
3. Contracts for professional or unique services.
4. Contracts for emergency repair of public works involving danger to
the health and safety of the public or of the municipal employees.
5. Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies
or political subdivisions.
4.6.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.
4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4.6
1:59
Chapter 5
COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION
4.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 4.6
1:60
ARTICLE I
Community Relations Commission
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-14-72C]
5.1. Short title.
5.2. Purpose.
5.3. Definitions.
5.1.1. This ordinance may be cited as the "Bethel Park Community Relations
Ordinance."
5.2.1. The purpose of the Community Relations Commission is to provide a
committee whereby any-one having a community problem concerning
discrimination in employment, housing, education or law enforcement
may obtain advice and guidance on the solution to the problem by legal
means, or by local cooperation and education.
5.3.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from context:
5.3.2.COMMISSION — The Bethel Park Community Relations Commission.
5.3.3. DISCRIMINATE and DISCRIMINATION — Any difference in
treatment based on race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or
place of birth, sex, age and political beliefs.
5.3.4.EMPLOYEE — Shall not include any person employed in the domestic
service of another or one employed by his parents, spouse or children.
5.3.5.EMPLOYER — Any person who employs four or more individuals in
the Municipality of Bethel Park. It shall include the municipality and its
departments, boards, commissions and agencies. Nothing herein shall
prevent any religious or fraternal organization which is not supported
in whole or part by any governmental appropriation from giving a
preference to members of said religious or fraternal organization.
5.3.6.EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person regularly undertaking with or
without compensation to procure opportunities for employment or to
procure, recruit, refer or place employees.
5.3.7.HOUSING ACCOMMODATION:
1. A building, structure or portion thereof which is used or occupied,
or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as a
home, residence or sleeping place by a person, family or group of
persons living together.
2. A parcel of real property or lot available for the construction of
commercial housing.
5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 5.3
1:61
3. Buildings or vacant property to be used, sold or rented for
commercial establishments.
5.3.8.HOUSING, COMMERCIAL — Having accommodations held or offered
for sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesman or agent or any other
person pursuant to authorization of the owner, by the owner himself or
by legal representatives.
5.3.9. LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization which exists for the
purpose in whole or in part of collective bargaining or of dealing with
employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment
or of other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment.
5.3.10. LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings
and loan association or any other person regularly engaged in the
business of lending money or guaranteeing loans.
5.3.11.OWNER — The owner, co-owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee,
assignee, manager, agent or other person having the right of ownership
or possession or the authority to sell, rent or lease any housing
accommodation, and includes the Municipality of Bethel Park, its
departments, boards, commissions and other agencies.
5.3.12.PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, labor
organization or other organization or association, including those
acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a
court or otherwise, partnerships, associations, the Municipality of
Bethel Park and its boards, commissions and other agencies.
5.3.13. PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, RESORT OR AMUSEMENT — Any
place which is open to, accepts or solicits the patronage of the general
public, including but not limited to inns, taverns, roadhouses, hotels
and motels, whether conducted for the entertainment of transient
guests or for the accommodation of those seeking health, recreation or
rest; restaurants, eating houses or any place where food is sold for
consumption on the premises; buffets, saloons, barrooms or any store,
park or enclosure where spirituous or malt liquors are sold; ice cream
parlors, confectioneries, soda fountains and all stores where ice cream,
ice and fruit preparations or their derivatives or where beverages of
any kind are retailed for consumption on the premises; drugstores,
dispensaries, bathhouses, swimming pools, barbershops, beauty
parlors, retail stores and establishments, theaters, motion picture
houses, music halls, skating rinks, amusement and recreation parks,
fairs, bowling alleys, gymnasiums, shooting galleries, billiard and pool
parlors; public libraries, kindergartens, primary and secondary schools,
high schools, academies, extension courses and all educational
institutions under the supervision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; garages and all public conveyances, as well as the
stations and terminals thereof.
5.3.14. REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any natural person, partnership,
corporation or other association which for a fee or other valuable
5.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 5.3
1:62
5.4. Commission established; membership; terms; meetings.
5.5. Powers and duties. [Amended by Ord. No. 6-18-73C]
consideration manages, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or
negotiates or offers or attempts to negotiate, the sale, purchase,
exchange or rental of the real property of another or holds itself out as
engaged in the business of managing, selling, purchasing, exchanging
or renting the real property of another or collects rent for the use of the
real property of another, and includes real estate salesmen or agents or
any other person employed by a "real estate broker" to perform or to
assist in the performance of his business.
5.4.1. There is hereby established in the Municipality of Bethel Park a
Commission on Community Relations to function within said
municipality and to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this ordinance.
5.4.2. The Commission shall consist of nine members who are residents of
the Municipality of Bethel Park, to serve four year terms. Initial
appointments to said Commission shall be made by the Bethel Park
Municipal Council for terms as follows: three members for four years;
three members for three years; three members for two years.
Commissioners may be appointed to successive terms of office and may
be replaced by Council for failure to attend meetings or for other good
cause after being notified by Council and being granted a hearing if the
member so desires. Each member of the Commission shall continue in
office until his successor has been appointed and qualified. [Amended
by Ord. No. 6-12-78F; by Ord. No. 4-9-79G]
5.4.3. The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman and may
elect such other officers as it may deem necessary. The Chairman may,
with the approval of the Commission, appoint such committees as may
be necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the Commission, and
the Commission may authorize such committees to take any necessary
action for the Commission.
5.4.4. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations for its own
organization, operations and procedures as the Commission shall deem
necessary to administer, implement and enforce this ordinance.
5.4.5. The Community Relations Commission shall meet monthly during
each calendar year and for any special meetings deemed necessary.
Five or more members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, and five votes consenting favorably to the
action are necessary. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-9-79G]
5.4.6. The members of the Community Relations Commission shall serve
without compensation but may be reimbursed for all expenses
previously authorized by the Council.
5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 5.5
1:63
5.5.1. The Commission shall have the power to:
1. Receive, investigate and act on complaints alleging discrimination
in the Municipality of Bethel Park against any person because of his
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, place of birth, sex,
age or political beliefs, and to seek the satisfactory conciliation of
such complaints. In addition to any action that the Commission may
take on such matters, if it is determined by the Commission that a
respondent is violating the law of the United States of America or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, such complaint may be
referred to the proper federal or state agency.
2. Certify, upon the request of any person, that a particular
occupation or position is exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance relating to unlawful employment practices if the
Commission finds that the occupation or position reasonably
requires the employment of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth or
sex, and that such certification is not sought as a means of
circumventing the spirit and purpose of this ordinance, the burden
of proving the facts required for such a finding to be in each
instance upon the person requesting the certification of exemption
from the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Study, investigate and conciliate by means of public hearings or
otherwise any conditions having an adverse effect on intergroup
relations in the Municipality of Bethel Park, and the study the
problems of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination as
they affect the public safety and general welfare of the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
4. Institute and conduct educational and other programs to promote
the equal rights and opportunities of all persons, regardless of their
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth, sex,
marital status, age or political beliefs, and to promote
understanding among persons and groups of different races,
colors, religions, ancestries, national origins or places of birth,
sexes, ages and political beliefs. In the performance of its duties,
the Commission may cooperate with interested citizens, private
agencies, the Bethel Park School District and agencies of the
federal, state and local government.
5. Issue reports of investigation and research in the field of
community relations, and to cooperate with and accept grants from
public and private agencies, including foundations, colleges and
universities, engaged in similar research.
6. Request other departments, boards and commissions of the
Borough government to assist in the performance of its duties, and
such departments, boards and commissions shall cooperate fully
with the Commission.
5.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 5.5
1:64
5.6. Procedure.
7. Render, from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written
report of its activities and recommendations to the Municipality
Council.
8. Recommend legislation to promote and ensure equal rights and
opportunities for all persons regardless of their race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin or place of birth, sex, marital
status, age or political beliefs.
5.6.1. A complaint charging that any person has engaged or is engaging in
any unlawful practice as set forth in this ordinance, may be made by an
aggrieved person or by an organization which has as one of its purposes
the combating of discrimination or the promotion of equal
opportunities, and any complaint may be amended by the complainant
or the Commission at any time before final action has been taken by the
Commission, in accordance with such rules and regulations as the
Commission shall prescribe.
5.6.2. The complaint shall be in writing, signed and verified, and shall
include the name and address of the person or persons alleged to have
committed the unlawful practice, a concise statement of particulars
thereof, and such other information any may be required by the
Commission in the exercise of its regulatory powers.
5.6.3. The commission shall make a prompt and full investigation of each
complaint of an unlawful practice.
5.6.4. If the Commission shall determine that there is no basis for the
allegations in a complaint, the complaint shall be dismissed and the
complainant notified in writing. Within 10 days from the receipt of such
notice, the complainant or his attorney may file with the Commission a
request for review, and the Commission shall provide the complainant
and his attorney an opportunity to appear before the Commission, a
member thereof, or a staff representative of the Commission. After such
a review, the Commission may reverse its decision, or if the Commission
or its representative determines that there is no basis for the allegation,
the dismissal of the complaint shall be affirmed and there shall be no
further review of such decision.
5.6.5. If the Commission determines, after investigation, that probable
cause exists for the allegations made in the complaint, it may attempt to
eliminate the unlawful practice by means of private conferences or
meetings with all parties after serving a copy of the complaint on the
person or persons alleged to have committed the unlawful practice. The
Commission shall not make public the details of such informal
proceedings, but it may publish the terms of any agreement when a
complaint has been satisfactorily adjusted.
5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 5.6
1:65
5.7. Records.
5.8. Severability.
5.6.6. If the Commission shall determine that a housing accommodation, as
defined in this Act, may be rented, sold or otherwise disposed of, before
determination of the case has been made, and the Commission believes
that there is probably cause to credit the allegations of the complaint
filed before it, and cannot be reconciled by conferences, the complaint
may be referred to proper legal authorities.
5.6.7. In case of any failure to eliminate the unlawful practice charged in the
complaint by means of informal proceedings, or in advance thereof, if in
the judgment of the Commission, the facts so warrant, the Commission
may hold a public hearing to determine whether or not an unlawful
practice in violation of the Act has, in fact, been committed.
5.6.8. Where a public hearing is held, the Commission shall require a
majority of its members to be present to conduct such a hearing. The
Commission shall serve upon the person charged with having engaged
or engaging in the unlawful practice, hereinafter referred to as
respondent, a copy of the complaint or amended complaint, and a notice
of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held not less
than 10 days after the service of the statement of charges. This hearing
shall be open to the public unless the complainant or complainants, the
respondent and a majority of the Commission all stipulate that the
hearing shall be conducted in private. The respondent shall have the
right to file an answer to the complaint no more than five days after
service thereon, to appear at the hearing in person and to be
represented by counsel at such hearing, and to present other evidence
and rebuttal to the charges made by the complainant. The complainant
shall have the right to be represented by private counsel. The
Commission shall not be bound by certain rules of evidence prevailing
in the courts of law or equity. The testimony taken at the hearing shall
be under oath and shall be transcribed.
5.6.9. If, upon all evidence presented, the Commission finds that the
respondent has not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its
findings of fact in writing and dismiss the complaint. If, upon all the
evidence presented, the Commission finds that the respondent has
engaged or is engaging in an unlawful practice, it shall state its findings
of fact in writing and shall make same available to the State Human
Relations Commission, if requested.
5.7.1. The transcribed testimony of Commission hearings, along with the
findings and recommendations of the Commission, shall be kept on file
with the official records of the Municipality Council.
5.8.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any provision,
sentence, clause, section or part thereof is held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such
5.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 5.8
1:66
5.9. Appeals.
5.10. When effective.
5.11. Repealer.
illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect
or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of the ordinance or their application to other persons or
circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that
this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts had
not been included therein, and if the person or circumstances to which
the ordinance or any part thereof is inapplicable had been specifically
exempted therefrom.
5.9.1. Any person aggrieved may appeal a finding of the Commission under
the local agency law, Act of December 2, 1968, P.L. 353, 53 P.S. 11301.
5.10.1. This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
5.11.1. Any other ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed so far
as the same affects this ordinance.
5.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 5.11
1:67
Chapter 6
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
5.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 5.11
1:68
ARTICLE I
Non-Police Employee Pension Plan
[Adopted 2-8-1965 by Ord. No. 2-8-65B; amended in its entirety
3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 3-12-07A]
6.1. Amendment of plan.
6.1.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park Non-Police Employee Pension Plan
(plan), which was previously established for the benefit of the Municipal
employees and which has been amended thereafter from time to time,
shall be, and hereby is, amended and supplemented in the following
respects:
1. Except as otherwise set forth, effective for employment
terminations on or after January 1, 2007, the plan shall be amended
in its entirety by deleting the provisions of said plan and
substituting the following in its place:11
11.Editor's Note: A complete copy of the current plan is on file in the municipal offices.
6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 6.1
1:69

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-10-1956 by Ord. No. 12-10-56B; amended in its
entirety 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 1-09-06]
6.2. Amendment of plan.
6.2.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park Police Pension Plan (plan), which was
previously established under the provisions of Pub. Law 1804, 53 Pa.
Con. State. Ann. 767 et seq., (sometimes referred to as "Act 600") for
the benefit of the Municipality's police employees and which has been
amended and restated by ordinances of the Municipal Council
thereafter pursuant to the Home Rule Charter of the Municipality, shall
be and hereby is amended and supplemented in the following respects:
1. Effective for participants who terminate employment on or after
January 1, 2005, the Plan shall be amended and restated in its
entirety by substituting the following in its place and thus, effective
for participants who terminate employment on or after January 1,
2005, supersedes all prior plan documentation.12 Benefits for
participants who terminated employment prior to January 1, 2005,
shall be governed by the plan in place prior to this amended and
restated plan.
12.Editor's Note: A complete copy of the current plan is on file in the municipality offices.
6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 6.2
1:71

ARTICLE III
Social Security
[Adopted 5-11-1953 by Ord. No. 101-5-53]
6.32. Purpose.
6.33. Authorization to execute plan and agreement.
6.34. System of payroll deductions.
6.35. Appropriations.
6.32.1. It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of the
Social Security System to employees and officers of the Municipality of
Bethel Park will be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the
municipality by providing that said employees and officers may
participate in the provisions of the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance
System, but will also be of great benefit to the Municipality of Bethel
Park by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best of
personnel, and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
6.33.1. The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as "Act No.
491," which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public
Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and
Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state
agency to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the
said Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System. The Municipality of
Bethel Park is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the state
agency a plan or plans, and agreement, required under Section 6 of said
enabling act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to
employees and officers of the Municipality of Bethel Park, and do all
other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers
under the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System.
6.34.1. The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction to be matched by payments by the Municipality of Bethel
Park, to be made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act
through the office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to
the fund or funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to
employees of the Municipality of Bethel Park. Such payments are to be
made in accordance with the provisions of the law and regulations
promulgated by the state agency and the Federal Social Security
Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest
at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as payments are
made.
6.35.1. Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Municipality of Bethel Park in the necessary amount to pay into the
contribution fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act and in
6.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 6.35
1:73
6.36. Amendment of plan and agreement. [Adopted 12-10-1956 by
Ord. No. 12-10-56G]
accordance with the plan or plans, and agreement. Authority is given
to the President and the Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park
to enter into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement
shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with Paragraph 218 of the
Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the
participation of this Municipality of Bethel Park shall commence as of
January 1, 1951.
6.36.1. Repeal of prior ordinance. Ordinance No. 5-21-56A, authorizing and
directing the proper officers of the Municipality of Bethel Park to enter
into a plan and agreement with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
the coverage of elected officials and appointed officials of the
Municipality of Bethel Park under Federal Old Age and Survivors'
Insurance, be and the same is hereby repealed.
6.36.2. Authorization for modification. The proper officials of the
Municipality of Bethel Park are hereby authorized to modify the present
plan and agreement in existence between the Municipality of Bethel
Park and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, providing for coverage of
employees of the Municipality of Bethel Park under Federal Old Age
and Survivors' Insurance, by authorizing the officials of the
Municipality of Bethel Park to delete Exclusion No. 7 and Exclusion No.
9 of Section 1(d) of the present plan and agreement now in existence
between the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Municipality of
Bethel Park; said deletion will thereby extend coverage under Federal
Old Age and Survivors' Insurance to elected officials and appointed
officials of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
6.36.3. Amendment. Such amendment, by deleting Exclusion No. 7 and
Exclusion No. 9 of Section 1(d) of the present plan and agreement, shall
provide for participation by elected officials and appointed officials of
the Municipality of Bethel Park commencing January 1, 1957.
6.36.4. Repeal of conflicting ordinances. Any ordinance or part of an
ordinance conflicting with this ordinance be and the same is hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
6.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 6.36
1:74
Chapter 7
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS 6.36
1:75

ARTICLE I
Fire Department
[Adopted by Ord. No. 9-1-50]
7.1. Official fire-fighting organization.
7.2. Powers and duties.
7.3. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
7.1.1. The Bethel Park Volunteer Fire Company, Incorporated, shall be and
shall operate as the official fire-fighting organization of the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
7.2.1. The Bethel Park Volunteer Fire Company, Incorporated, and its
officers and members, shall have the power and duty to do all & things
necessary and proper under the laws of Pennsylvania to carry out the
duties of the official fire-fighting organization of the Municipality of
Bethel Park.
7.3.1. Any ordinances or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 7.3
1:77
Chapter 8
OFFICES AND POSITIONS
7.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 7.3
1:78
ARTICLE I
Municipal Manager
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-7-56B]
8.1. Establishment.
8.2. Appointment; term of office. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-10-61B]
8.3. Qualifications. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-10-61B]
8.4. Bond.
8.5. Compensation.
8.6. Powers and duties of Manager.
8.1.1. The office of Municipal Manager is hereby created by the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
8.2.1. The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of all the members of
Council, and he shall serve at the will of Council.
8.3.1. The Manager shall be chosen principally on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual
experience in or his knowledge or accepted practices in respect to the
duties of his office as herein outlined.
8.4.1. Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Municipality of Bethel Park with a bonding company as surety, to be
approved by the Council, in the sum of $10,000, conditioned for the
faithful performance of his duties. The premium shall be paid by the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
8.5.1. The salary of the Municipal Manager shall be established by Council
from time to time.
8.6.1. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
municipality and he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the municipality.
His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
municipal business not expressly by statute imposed or conferred upon
other municipal officers.
8.6.2. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the
Municipal Manager shall include the following:
1. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments, except the Police Department.
2. He shall with approval of Council hire, and when necessary for the
good of the service shall suspend without pay, all employees under
8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.6
1:79
his supervision, and shall report at the next meeting thereafter of
Council any action taken by authority of the subsection, provided
that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the
Municipality Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in
accordance with such provisions.
3. He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as Council shall determine, a
suggested budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager or an
officer designated by him shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or officer, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he requests and may
suggest revisions when submitting the suggested budget to the
Council.
4. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Council.
5. He shall hold such other municipal offices or head one or more of
the municipal departments as the Council may from time to time
direct.
6. He shall attend all meetings of Council and its committees with the
right to take part in the discussion, and he shall receive notice of all
special meetings of Council or its committees.
7. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and
supply facts pertinent thereto.
8. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of municipal
affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the municipal
finance, and such other reports as the Council requests; and make
such recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
9. He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the municipality for the preceding year.
10. He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by the municipality are observed.
11. He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the municipality.
12. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law,
subject to the approval of the Solicitor, and he shall supervise the
performance and faithful execution of the same, except insofar as
such duties are expressly imposed upon some other municipal
officer by statute.
8.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 8.6
1:80
8.7. Powers and duties of Mayor.
8.8. Limitation on Council's powers.
8.9. Disability or absence of Manager. [Amended by Ord. 2-20-56]
8.10. Repealer.
13. He shall see that all money owed the municipality is promptly paid,
and that proper proceedings are taken for the security and
collection of all the municipal's claims.
14. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the municipality and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Code,
all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the municipality. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when
directed by Council, make a full written report thereof. He shall
comply with the orders, rules and regulations established by
Council, governing the requisition and purchasing of all municipal
supplies and equipment.
15. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the municipality
shall be referred to the office of the Manager. He or an officer
designated by him shall investigate, and the Manager shall dispose
of, such complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to
Council.
8.7.1. The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Municipal
Manager, subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his
nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
8.8.1. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council, its committees and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the
Municipal Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its committees,
or any of its members, shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any
sub-ordinates of the Manager.
8.9.1. If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the
Municipality, he shall designate one qualified member of his staff who
shall perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or disability.
The person so designated shall not perform these duties for a period
longer than two weeks without the approval of Council.
8.10.1. All ordinances or resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions,
insofar as they are inconsistent herewith, be and the same are hereby
repealed.
8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.10
1:81

ARTICLE II
Director of Public Works
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-28-68A]
8.11. Establishment; qualifications;
8.12. Duties.
8.13. Compensation.
8.14. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
8.11.1. Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park hereby creates a position
in the Municipality of Bethel Park to be known as Director of Public
Works.
8.11.2. The Director of Public Works shall be an individual who possesses
the qualifications of a professional registered engineer and a degree in
civil engineering, who shall serve at the will and direction of Municipal
Council and shall report administratively to the Municipal Manager.
8.12.1. The Director of Public Works shall perform general basic
engineering functions for the municipality and submit a monthly report
to the Council.
8.12.2. The Director of Public Works shall supervise and direct the operation
of the Municipal Road Department, and his duties shall extend to the
fixing of schedules of work crews and the scheduling of projects as
directed by the Council in conjunction with the Municipal Manager.
8.12.3. The Director of Public Works shall supervise the operation of the
sewage treatment facilities of the Municipality of Bethel Park; shall
attend to the scheduling of personnel at the sewage treatment plant;
handling maintenance and operational functions of the sewage
treatment plant; handling maintenance and operation functions of the
sewage treatment system.
8.12.4. The Director of Public Works shall attend all formal Councilmanic
meetings, all Public Works Committee meetings of Council, Planning
Commission meetings and any other meeting necessary as designated
by Municipal Council.
8.12.5. The Director of Public Works shall be in charge of and supervise the
issuance of building permits.
8.13.1. The salary of the Director of Public Works shall be as established by
Council from time to time.
8.14.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.14
1:83

ARTICLE III
Maintenance Superintendent
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-28-68A]
8.15. Establishment.
8.16. Duties.
8.17. Compensation.
8.18. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
8.15.1. There shall be created the position of Maintenance Superintendent.
8.16.1. The duties of the Maintenance Superintendent shall be to have
complete charge of the maintenance of the municipality building and he
shall be in charge of the operation of the various functions of the
building and report to the Municipality Manager.
8.17.1. The Maintenance Superintendent shall serve at the will of Council
and shall receive such compensation as shall be set by Council from
time to time.
8.18.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
8.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.18
1:85

ARTICLE IV
Building Code Official13
[Adopted 3-9-1959 by Ord. No. 3-9-59A]
8.19. Duties; inspections; fees.
8.20. Repeal of prior ordinance.
8.21. Powers and duties.
8.22. Compensation.
8.23. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
8.19.1. The Building Code Official of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall
perform as a part of his duties the inspection necessary for the issuance
of sanitation permits, building permits and all other permits required by
the Building Code and Zoning Code of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
All fees collected by the Building Code Official for the issuance of such
permits shall be remitted to the treasury of the Municipality of Bethel
Park no less often than twice monthly.
8.20.1. Ordinance No. 131-54, duly enacted on May 10, 1954, be and the
same is hereby repealed in its entirety.
8.21.1. The Building Code Official of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall
have the power and authority of a special enforcement officer with
respect to all municipal ordinances and shall be under the supervision
and control of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park and shall
perform such other duties as the Council and Municipal Manager may
direct.
8.22.1. The compensation of the Building Code Official shall be as
established by Council from time to time.
8.23.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
13.Editor's Note: The title "Building Inspector" was changed to "Building Code Official"
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 4-12-04A. (See Section 26.4.)
8.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.23
1:87

ARTICLE V
Construction Code Official14
[Adopted 4-8-1968 by Ord. No. 4-8-68C]
8.24. Establishment; qualifications.
8.25. Duties.
8.26. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
8.24.1. There is hereby created in the Municipality of Bethel Park the
position of Construction Code Official, subject to the following:
1. Qualifications.
a. The individual must be a high school graduate.
b. The individual must possess experience in construction work,
either in general construction field or building construction
field.
c. The individual must be at least 21 years of age.
8.25.1. The duties of the Construction Code Official shall be divided into two
categories, field duties and office duties, as follows:
1. Field duties.
a. The Construction Code Official shall be in charge of all
inspection personnel drawn from the public works employee
pool.
b. The Construction Code Official shall supervise all phases of
construction work performed by developers.
c. The Construction Code Official shall supervise all phases of
construction work performed by municipality contractors.
d. The Construction Code Official shall assist the Building Code
Official with field work wherever possible.
2. Office duties.
a. The Construction Code Official shall maintain inspection
records of time, materials and other items employed on the job.
b. The Construction Code Official shall take charge of all
inspection files, applications and permits.
c. The Construction Code Official shall prepare monthly
inspection reports.
14.Editor's Note: The title "Municipal Inspector" was changed to "Construction Code Official"
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 4-12-04A. (See Section 26.4.)
8.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.26
1:89
8.26.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
8.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 8.26
1:90
ARTICLE VI
Draftsman-Surveyor
[Adopted as Ord. No. 4-8-68C]
8.27. Establishment; qualifications.
8.28. Duties.
8.27.1. There is hereby created in the Municipality of Bethel Park the
position of Draftsman-Surveyor, subject to the following:
1. Qualifications.
a. Individual must be a high school graduate.
b. Individual must possess drafting experience related to civil
engineering with respect to topographic studies, installation of
sewers, paving of streets and land development.
c. Individual must possess survey experience, including ability to
operate transit, set up and translate field notes.
8.28.1. The duties of Draftsman-Surveyor shall be divided into two
categories, field duties and office duties, as follows:
1. Field duties.
a. Draftsman-Surveyor shall be responsible for the care and
condition of all field equipment.
b. Draftsman-Surveyor shall operate transit for formal survey
work required by municipality officials.
c. Draftsman-Surveyor, when required, shall serve as party chief
for miscellaneous survey work.
d. Draftsman-Surveyor shall assist the Public Works Director in
the training of inexperienced personnel.
e. Draftsman-Surveyor shall perform such other duties assigned
to him by department heads as fall within the capability of this
position.
2. Office duties.
a. Draftsman-Surveyor shall prepare drawings from instructions
furnished by Municipal Engineer or Director of Public Works.
b. Draftsman-Surveyor shall take charge of municipality's
engineering drawing files.
c. Draftsman-Surveyor shall assemble engineering data as
directed by department heads.
8.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.29
1:91
8.29. Conflicting ordinance repealed.
8.29.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
8.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 8.29
1:92
Chapter 9
PARKS, RECREATIONS AND LEISURE SERVICES
8.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8.29
1:93

ARTICLE I
Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services
[Adopted 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77B]
9.1. Creation; title.
9.2. Membership; terms.
9.3. Appointment.
9.4. Officers; bylaws; meetings.
9.5. (Reserved)15
9.6. Function. [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 3-11-85B]
9.1.1. The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park hereby creates a board
to be known as the "Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services Board of
the Municipality of Bethel Park," hereafter referred to as the "Board."
9.2.1. Membership on the Board shall be seven members with a maximum of
11 members, all of whom shall serve without pay, and shall be jointly
appointed by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park and the
School District of Bethel Park. Members of the Board shall serve for a
period of three years and may be reappointed at the expiration of their
respective terms. The first term of the seventh member shall expire
March 14, 1989, and shall be for a three-year term thereafter.
[Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 5-12-86A; 4-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 4-13-09A]
9.3.1. Of the seven members of the Board to be appointed, three shall be
appointed by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park, three shall
be appointed by the Board of Directors of the School District of Bethel
Park, and one member shall be approved by both bodies upon a
recommendation of the Board of Parks, Recreation and Leisure
Services. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments and shall be for the unexpired term. The members of the
Board shall not hold any other elected or appointed office with the
School District of the Municipality of Bethel Park or with the
Municipality of Bethel Park. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
5-12-86A]
9.4.1. The Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services Board shall elect from its
membership a Chairman, Secretary and such other officers as it may
deem necessary for the orderly conduct of its business. The Board may,
with the consent and approval of the School District and the
Municipality, adopt bylaws, rules and regulations covering its
procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. The
Board shall hold regular monthly meetings at such times and places as
it may designate.
9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 9.6
1:95
9.7. Agreements.
9.8. Repealer.
9.6.1. The function of the Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services Board
shall be:
1. To advise the School District and the Municipality concerning the
parks, recreational and leisure service needs of the community.
2. To recommend an annual parks budget for the review and approval
by the Municipal Council.
3. To recommend an annual recreation and leisure services program
and property maintenance budget to the Municipal Council and
School Board.
4. To mandate rules and regulations governing the operation of parks,
recreation and leisure services programs.
5. To recommend long- and short-range plans for the development of
parks, recreation and leisure services programs.
6. To interpret the importance and need of recreation and leisure
services for the general public and to perform all other functions as
authorized by resolution of the Municipal Council of Bethel Park
and the School District.
9.7.1. The Board of Directors of the School District of the Municipality of
Bethel Park and Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park may enter
into an agreement relating to the maintenance of outdoor recreation
facilities, the management and disbursement of funds and the sharing
of operating costs.
9.8.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.16
15.Editor's Note: Former Section 9.5, Attendance by members, as amended, was repealed
6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 6-10-02B.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former chapter on Parks and Recreation adopted
7-12-1965 by Ord. No. 7-12-65B.
9.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 9.8
1:96
Chapter 10
PLANNING COMMISSION
9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 9.8
1:97

ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
[Adopted 7-1-1950 by Ord. No. 7-1-50]
10.1. Establishment and composition.
10.2. Terms of office. [Amended 3-9-1970 by Ord. No. 3-9-70G]
10.3. Duties and powers.
10.4. Zoning Commission.
10.1.1. A Department of Municipality Planning is hereby created, which
Department shall be in charge of the Municipality Planning
Commission, consisting of five members to be appointed by the Council.
10.2.1. The term of each member of the Planning Commission shall be for
four years or until his successor is appointed and qualified.
10.2.2. The members of the existing Planning Commission established under
Ordinance No. 7-1-50, shall continue in office until the end of the term
for which they were appointed. Members appointed to the Planning
Commission since the effective date of Act 247 shall serve for a term of
four years, as provided for in Act 247, July 31, 1968.
10.2.3. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall
be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Should the Council of
the Municipality of Bethel Park determine to increase the number of
members on the existing Planning Commission, additional members
shall be appointed by the Council. However, members of the Planning
Commission shall not exceed nine. Should the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park determine to reduce the number of
members on the existing Planning Commission, such reduction shall be
effectuated by allowing the terms to expire and by making no new
appointments to fill the vacancies. However, the number of members of
the Planning Commission shall at no time be less than three members.
Any reduction or increase shall be by appointment.
10.2.4. All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of
the Municipality of Bethel Park.17
10.3.1. The duties and powers of said Municipality Planning Commission
shall be as expressed and set forth in the Statutes of Pennsylvania,
particularly in the Act of 1947, P.L. 519, No. 586, approved July 10,
1947, and in the amendments thereto and in all lawful ordinances and
resolutions of Council.
17.Editor's Note: Former Section 10.2.5, regarding attendance requirements of Commission
members, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-10-2002
by Ord. No. 6-10-02B.
10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 10.4
1:99
10.5. Compensation; expenses.
10.6. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
10.4.1. The said Municipality Planning Commission is hereby appointed and
designated as the Zoning Commission of the municipality of Bethel
Park.
10.5.1. The members of the said Planning Commission shall serve without
compensation, and any and all expenses incurred shall be subject to the
actions of the Municipality Council, as provided for under the statutes
of Pennsylvania.
10.6.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
10.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 10.6
1:100
Chapter 11
POLICE DEPARTMENT
10.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 10.6
1:101

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted by Ord 5-1-50]
11.1. Composition. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-28-56B; by Ord. No.
12-19-62G; by Ord. No. 10-9-72E; by Ord. No. 12-9-87A]
11.2. Salaries.
11.3. Repealer. [Added by Ord. No. 84-52]
11.1.1. The said Police Department of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall
consist of a number and composition as established by Council from
time to time.
11.2.1. The salaries of said police officers shall be as established by Council
from time to time.
11.3.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with this amended
ordinance is hereby repealed insofar as it conflicts with this ordinance.
11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.3
1:103

ARTICLE II
Salaries, Allowances and Personnel Policies
[Adopted by Ord No. 12-9-68D; amended by Ord. No. 7-14-69C; by
Ord. No. 12-8-69B; by Ord. No. 5-11-70B; by Ord. Nos. 12-14-70D
and 12-14-70E; by Ord. No. 7-12-72A; by Ord. No. 12-11-72B]18
11.4. Clothing allowance for deskmen. [Amended by Ord. No.
5-8-78]
11.5. Employment categories.
11.6. Certain employees not entitled to benefits.
11.7. Residency requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 3-14-88B; by
Ord. 9-12-88A; by Ord. 4-10-89B]
11.8. Mandatory retirement. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-9-79B; by
Ord. No. 9-19-83A]
11.4.1. An allowance shall be made for clothing provided to communications
desk personnel of the Municipality of Bethel Park in the amount of 50%
of the clothing allocation for uniformed policemen. Said allocation shall
be made annually.
11.4.2. All Communications Desk Personnel shall receive payment of a $125
allowance and the advancement of the 1984 Uniform Allowance, in the
amount provided by this ordinance. [Added by Ord. No. 10-10-83D]
11.5.1. The following shall be the categories of full-time, seasonal or parttime
employees:
1. Municipality police force personnel, including probationary
patrolmen, full-time.
2. Police desk personnel, full-time.
3. Record clerk-stenographer, full-time.
4. School police personnel, seasonal.
5. Special police personnel, seasonal.
11.6.1. Seasonal and part-time employees shall not be entitled to the
benefits of full-time employees.
11.7.1. Effective January 1, 1989, all police officers employed by the
Municipality of Bethel Park reside within a five air mile radius of its
Municipal Building/Police Station.
18.Editor's Note: Certain former sections were repealed by adoption of Code. Matters covered
by these former sections are included in the agreement between the Municipality and
Police Officers bargaining unit.
11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.8
1:105
11.8.1. An members of the Police Department of the Municipality of Bethel
Park covered by civil service shall retire from the Police Department on
the last day of the month in which they reach their 70th birthday.
11.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.8
1:106
ARTICLE III
School Patrol
[Adopted 1-12-1976 by Ord No. 1-12-76D]
11.9. Salaries. [Amended 1-10-1977 by Ord. No. 1-10-77B;
1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1-10-05A; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 12-08-08B]
11.10. Minimum time. [Amended 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 1-10-05A]
11.11. Uniform equipment to be furnished.
11.12. Sick leave.
11.13. Days allowed for bereavement.
11.14. Repealer.
11.9.1. Salary schedule.
Position 2009 2010 2011 2012
Regular patrol
(guards)
$12.63 $13.10 $13.59 $14.10
Sergeants $11.82 $12.26 $12.72 $13.20
Alternate $8.02 $8.32 $8.63 $8.95
11.10.1. There shall be a minimum of 1 1/4 hours per post for mornings and
afternoons.
11.11.1.Winter boots shall be shed as part of the uniform equipment of the
School Patrol.
11.11.2.Winter-type slacks and light-weight jackets and overcoats shall be
furnished where required.
11.12.1. As part-time employees, school guards will be allowed three days'
sick leave per year, accumulative to nine days. No more than three days
per year be placed in an unlimited escrow account. Escrow sick leave
benefits shall be associated with prolonged illness and be approved by
the Chief of Police.
11.13.1. An allowance of three days off in case of death in the immediate
family will be allowed.
11.14.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.
11.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.14
1:107

ARTICLE IV
Fee for Transfer of Prisoners
[Adopted by Ord No. 12-13-76C]
11.15. Constables authorized to transfer prisoners.
11.16. Appointment as special police.
11.17. Fee. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-18-89A]
11.18. When paid.
11.19. Repealer.
11.15.1. For the purpose of providing custodial transfer of persons charged
with crime from the Municipal Building in Bethel Park to a District
Magistrate's office or jail or penal institution located outside the
boundaries of the Municipality of Bethel Park, constables are hereby
authorized to perform said service and to receive the fee therefor in the
amount as specifically set forth hereinafter.
11.16.1. All duly elected constables and duly appointed deputy constables of
the Municipality of Bethel Park are hereby appointed special policemen
for the Municipality of Bethel Park for the purpose of performing the
services authorized by this ordinance and to receive proper fees for the
performance thereof.
11.17.1. A flat fee in the amount of $30 shall be paid by the Municipality of
Bethel Park for rendering custodial transfer of individuals from the
Municipal Building to a District Magistrate's office or jail located
outside the boundaries of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
11.18.1. Payment of fees herein authorized be made after the performance
of said service and upon the presentment of a voucher which shall
identify by name and address the person transferred; the place of origin
and place of destination; the date and time such service was rendered;
the name of the police official who ordered the transfer of the prisoner,
and subsequent approval of the Chief of Police and the signature of the
officer performing said service.
11.19.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
11.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.19
1:109

ARTICLE V
Management Personnel
[Adopted 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 6-13-83C]
Be it ordained and enacted by Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park,
in meeting assembled, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by and with
the authority of same as follows:
11.20. Salaries.
11.21. Benefits.
11.20.1. [Amended 2-13-1984 by Ord. No. 2-13-84D; 11-28-1984 by
Ord. No. 11-28-84F; 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. 11-27-85D;
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87B; 11-30-1987 by Ord. No.
11-30-87D; 11-30-1988 by Ord. No. 11-30-88E; 8-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 8-14-89A; 1-8-1990 by Ord. No. 1-8-90A; 3-11-1991 by Ord.
No. 3-11-91B; 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 4-13-92D; 5-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 5-10-93A; 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 4-11-94A; 3-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 3-13-95A; 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 3-11-96B; 3-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 3-10-97B; 8-11-1997 by Ord. No. 8-11-97A; 12-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 12-8-97B; 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 6-8-98A; 12-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 12-14-98A; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 11-13-00E;
11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 11-12-01C; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
12-9-02A]
1. Police Management Personnel.
Retroactive to January 1, 2000
Position 2000 Base Salary
Lieutenant of Police (2) $63,922
Effective to January 1, 2000
Position 2001 Base Salary
Lieutenant of Police (2) $66,478
Effective January 1, 2002
Position 2002 Base Salary
Lieutenant of Police (2) $68,870
Effective January 1, 2003
Position 2003 Base Salary
Lieutenant of Police (2) $68,870
11.21.1. The employees represented by the positions listed herein shall
continue to be provided with those economic benefits as enjoyed by the
Police Officers of the Municipality of Bethel Park (or by whatever name
known) as set forth in the prevailing collective bargaining agreement;
11.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.21
1:111
11.22. Repealer.
except for those provisions that may conflict with the management
duties and responsibilities of said employees.
11.21.2. All Lieutenants in the Police Department shall be provided with
coverage under the Blue Cross/Blue Shield High Option Dental and Eye
Care Program in such form as enjoyed by the management employees
in the municipality; such coverage to be contingent upon acceptance of
enrollment in the plan by the insuring agency. [Added 10-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 10-10-83C; amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-10-39C]
11.22.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
11.21 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.22
1:112
ARTICLE VI
Civil Service Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2-9-1519]
11.23. Definition of terms.
11.23.1. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and phrases, wherever used in these rules and regulations, shall be
construed to have the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission
in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination
for any position in the Police Department.
CERTIFIED LIST OF THREE — The submission to the appointing
authority pursuant to its request for three names taken from the
respective eligible lists developed by the Civil Service Commission.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of
the Municipality of Bethel Park, Pennsylvania.
CHIEF OF POLICE — A sworn officer heading the Police Department
who is appointed by Municipal Council.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSIONER — A member of the Civil Service Commission.
ELIGIBILITY LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list
or furlough list.
EXAMINATIONS — The series of tests given to applicants to determine
their qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
FULL-TIME POLICE OFFICER — A qualified police officer hired under
the provisions of these Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons laid off
from positions in the Police Department because of a reduction in the
number of officers.
IDENTIFICATION — Personal evidence; including a valid operator's
license, photo ID card or birth certificate of an individual.
MANUAL — The Bethel Park Police Policy and Procedures Manual.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION — Any examination, procedure, inquiry or
test designed to obtain information about medical history or a physical
or mental condition which might disqualify an applicant if it would
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. VI, Civil Service Rules and
Regulations, adopted 5-13-1985 by Ord. No. 5-13-85B; amended in its entirety 5-11-1998
by Ord. No. 5-11-98B, as amended.
11.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.23
1:113
prevent the applicant from performing, with or without a reasonable
accommodation, all of the essential functions of the position.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL — The appointing authority of the Municipality
of Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY/MUNICIPAL — The Municipality of Bethel Park.
MUNICIPAL POLICE OFFICERS EDUCATION AND TRAINING
COMMISSION (MPOETC) — Established in 1974 to set certification and
training standards for police officers employed by municipalities in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PHYSICIAN — Shall have the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991,
which relates to definitions.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — A department of the Municipality
administered by a Chief of Police and partly composed of police officers
appointed, promoted and disciplined pursuant to the Rules and
Regulations of the Bethel Park Civil Service Commission.
POLICE OFFICER — Any sworn full-time police officer serving in the
Bethel Park Police Department except as specifically noted.[Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list, but who has not yet completed the worktest
period.
PROMOTION: RANKING OFFICER — A qualified full-time police officer
in the Police Department appointed to a ranking position under these
civil service rules and regulations.
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL — An individual, in
collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a physician,
as may be required by law, who is licensed: as a physician assistant
pursuant to the Act of December 20, 1985 (P.L. 457, No. 112), known as
the "Medical Practice Act of 1985,"20 or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P.L.
1109, No. 261), known as the "Osteopathic Medical Practice Act";21 or
as a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act of May
22, 1951 (P.L. 317, No. 69), known as "The Professional Nursing Law."22
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank
where the employee fulfilled all of the requirements of these rules and
regulations for both the prior and current position or rank.
RE-EMPLOYMENT LIST — The list of police officers furloughed and
eligible for re-employment.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
20.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 422.1 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 271.1 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 211 et seq.
11.23 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.23
1:114
11.24. The Commission.
RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT — Maximum distance from the Bethel
Park Municipal Building within which a police officer shall have his
primary residence that is regularly occupied by the police officer.
RULES — The Rules and Regulations of the Bethel Park Police Civil
Service Commission.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police
officer from the Police Department.
11.24.1. Civil Service Commission.
1. Commissioners. The Commission shall consist of three
Commissioners who shall be qualified electors of the Municipality
and shall be appointed by the Municipal Council initially to serve
for the term of three years, and as terms thereafter expire may be
reappointed for terms of three years. The terms of the three
Commissioners shall be staggered so as not to expire in the same
year.
2. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled by the Municipal Council for the
unexpired term as soon as practical after such vacancy occurs.
3. Each member of the Commission created by this subsection, before
entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, shall take an
oath, or affirmation of office pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1141
(relating to form of oaths of office). The Civil Service
Commissioners shall receive no compensation.
11.24.2.Office incompatible with position of Commissioner. No
Commissioner shall, at the same time, hold an elective office under the
United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
political subdivision of the Commonwealth.
11.24.3. Organization of Commission — quorum.
1. The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as its Chairperson,
one as Vice Chairperson and one as its Secretary. The Commission
shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of January
of each even-numbered year, providing that the first Monday is not
a holiday, in which event, said meeting will be held on the second
Monday in January. Two members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum and no action of the Commission shall be valid
unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
2. For purposes of hiring and promoting police officers under these
rules, each step of the hiring or promotional process requiring
official action by the Commission shall be considered a separate
"matter or case" and each step of the hiring or promotional process
11.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.24
1:115
need not be voted upon or approved by the same composition of
Commissioners, as the case may be, provided that the quorum
requirement has been satisfied.
11.24.4. Duties of Chairperson. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence,
the Vice Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform all
duties required by law including these rules and regulations.
11.24.5. Duties of Vice Chairperson. The Vice Chairperson shall act in the
absence of the Chairperson in carrying out the duties of the
Chairperson and shall be a voting member.
11.24.6. Duties of the Secretary.
1. The Secretary, under the direction of the Commission, shall handle
all official correspondence of the Commission, including the
recording of votes cast by the Commissioners, send out all notices
required by law including these rules and regulations, keeping a
record of each examination or other official action of the
Commission, and perform all other duties required by law including
these rules and regulations. The Municipal Manager shall be
available to assist the Secretary when reasonably requested by the
Commission.
2. The Secretary shall, subject to supervisory action of the
Commission:
a. Keep records of the proceedings of the Commission and have
charge of, and be responsible for, the safekeeping of the books,
reports, papers and other property in the Municipal office;
b. File the minutes, or a true copy thereof, certified by the
Secretary with the Municipal Manager;
c. Notify the Commission when examinations are necessary, and
the dates when they may be held;
d. Direct the work of proctors or others subordinate to him and
take care to secure accuracy, uniformity and justice in all
proceedings and report the results of examinations to the
Commission;
e. Compile the eligibility list;
f. Provide a certification list to Council, as required;
g. Audit all bills and expenses before certifying them to the
Municipal Manager for payment;
h. Delegate routine tasks to, and supervise the work of, clerical
assistants furnished to the Commission; and
11.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.24
1:116
i. Generally carry on the correspondence and other designated
secretary work of the Commission.
11.24.7. Meetings. Except for the annual organization meeting, all meetings
shall be held either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two
members of the Commission. Each Commissioner shall be notified in
writing of each and every meeting at least 72 hours in advance. In all
cases regarding meetings, including scheduling, the board shall follow
the provisions provided for pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7, as amended
and commonly known as the "Sunshine Law." In addition, as mandated
by 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7, all the meetings of the Commission must be
properly advertised and posted. In the event an agenda item is specific
to an individual member of BPPD or is of a confidential legal matter, the
Commission may start the public meeting as prescribed below and then
convene an executive session, or schedule an executive session meeting
with the sole and limited purpose of discussing only specific personal
issue or legal matter. In the case of an executive session meeting the
Commission must announce the time and place of said executive
session at the next public meeting, and it must be recorded in the
meeting minutes. The order of business for all meetings shall be as
follows:
1. Roll call.
2. Public comments (agenda items).
3. Approval of previous meeting's minutes.
4. Announcement of any executive meetings/sessions.
5. Communications and reports.
6. Unfinished business.
7. Hearing of cases.
8. New business.
9. Public comments (general).
10. Adjourn.
11.24.8. Clerical assistance, supplies, solicitor, etc. The Municipality shall
furnish to the Commission, on its requisition, clerical assistance that
may be necessary for the work of the Commission. The Municipality
shall provide a suitable and convenient room for the use of the
Commission. The Commission shall order from the Municipality the
necessary stationery, postage, printing and supplies. The Municipality
shall also provide the services of a solicitor for the Commission to be
appointed by the Commission and paid by the Municipality. The
Municipality shall have the authority to place a reasonable limit on the
amount allowed each year for the services of the Commission solicitor.
The elected and appointed officials of the Municipality shall aid the
11.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.24
1:117
Commission in all proper ways in carrying out the provisions of this
subsection relating to civil service.
11.24.9. Appointment of examiners.
1. Unless the examination is conducted by the South Hills Area
Council of Governments (SHACOG), the Commission shall appoint
experienced written examination administrators and physical
examination administrators to conduct appropriate examinations
required by these rules and regulations. The Commission shall
reserve the right to accept or reject for cause, in whole or part, the
recommendations of the regularly appointed examining agency.
The oral examination shall be the responsibility of the Chief of
Police in accordance with Section 11.26.2 of these Police Civil
Service Rules and Regulations. [Amended 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
7-9-18]
2. The Municipality shall have the responsibility to appoint the
physical and psychological examiner, as outlined in Section
11.25.3(4) of these rules and regulations.
11.24.10. Amendment of rules and regulations. The Commission may
recommend amendment or revisions of these rules and regulations for
any reason by action of a majority of the Commission. Before any
changes to these rules and regulations become effective, those changes
must be approved by the Municipal Council. These rules and
regulations, and any amendments thereto, once approved, by the
Municipal Council, shall be made available to the public for distribution
or inspection, as amended.
11.24.11. Minutes and records. The Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings and records of examinations and other official actions. All
recommendations of applicants for appointment received by the
Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years, and
all records and all written causes of removal filed with the Commission,
except as otherwise provided in Section 11.27.3, shall be open to public
inspection and subject to reasonable regulation.
11.24.12. Investigations. The Commission shall have the power to make
investigations concerning all matters relating to the administration and
enforcement of these rules and regulations. The Chairperson of the
Commission is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in
connection with such investigations.
11.24.13. Subpoenas.
1. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson to require the attendance of witnesses
and the production of records and papers pertaining to any
investigation or inquiry. The fees of such witnesses for attendance
and travel shall be the same as for witnesses appearing in the
courts and shall be paid by the party requesting the subpoena.
11.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.24
1:118
11.25. Full-time police officer.
2. All officers in public service and employees of the Municipality of
Bethel Park shall attend and testify when required to do so by the
Commission.
3. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, for its subpoena, requiring the
attendance of such persons before the Commission or the court to
testify and to produce any records and papers as necessary, and in
default, shall be held in contempt of Court.
11.24.14. Annual report. The Secretary of the Commission will produce an
annual report containing a brief summary of the Commission's work,
and shall make a full accounting for any expenditure of public monies.
Once the Secretary's report is approved by the majority of the
Commission it will be submitted to Municipal Council on or before
January 31 of each year. Once the Commission's annual report is
accepted by Municipal Council, the report shall be available for public
review. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
11.25.1. Applications and qualifications.
1. Eligibility for examinations. In order to be eligible for participation
in any examination for any full-time position with the Municipality
of Bethel Park Police Department, every applicant must submit a
completed application form to the Commission or other offices or
agencies designated by the Commission, before the deadline stated
for that specific examination. The applicant must make an oath or
affirmation that the application has been completed truthfully, and
that the applicant is subject to the penalties of 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 4904
relating to unsworn falsification to authorities. The application for
SHACOG is only an application to participate in the physical agility
and written examinations. Only those qualified candidates for
employment with Bethel Park who pass both tests may file an
application with the Municipality.
2. Discrimination. The Municipality of Bethel Park is an equal
opportunity employer. It is the Municipal Council and the
Commission's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to
qualified persons without regard to race, religion, color, national
origin, gender, age, veteran's status, marital status, or non-jobrelated
physical or mental handicap or disability. The Municipal
Council and the Commission will provide equal opportunities in
employment.
3. Applications. Application forms shall be available to all interested
persons in the office of the Chief of Police or his/her designee and
from such other offices and officers that the Commission, from time
to time, may choose to designate.
11.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.25
1:119
4. Age and residency requirements. At the time of the application
deadline no applicant for a position in the Police Department shall
be less than 21 years of age. Applicants, if selected, must within six
months of the successful completion of the probationary period
have established and maintain a permanent residency within eight
air miles of the Bethel Park Municipal Building and supply annual
verification of compliance with residency requirements to the
Municipality. Police employees shall maintain permanent residency
under these rules for the duration of employment.
5. General qualifications. At the time of the application deadline every
applicant for a position in the Police Department shall possess the
following qualifications prior to application:
a. Possess a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or
university; or possess an associate's degree from an accredited
college or university and have three years of continuous fulltime
experience as a police officer; or possess an associate's
degree from an accredited college or university and be
honorably discharged from the Armed Services of the United
States of America; or possess an associate's degree from an
accredited college or university and be released from active
duty and assigned to reserve duty status.
b. Must have a minimum GPA of 3.0 upon graduation.
c. Be Act 120 certified under the Municipal Police Officers
Education and Training Act (Act 120), (MPOETC) 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 2161 et seq., or have successfully completed Act 120 training
or its equivalency and passed the final exam at the time of
appointment.
d. Be a United States citizen, if in the case of a naturalized citizen
for a period of not less than five years.
e. Be physically and mentally fit to perform the full duties of a
police officer.
f. Possess a valid Pennsylvania motor vehicle operator's license.
g. Have an unblemished documented driving record, (nonmoving
violation will not be considered) for the past 36 months. In
addition the candidate cannot have had his/her driver's license
(from any state or district) revoked for any reason in the past
seven years.
h. Must not have had an adjudicated protection from abuse (PFA)
order issued against him or her within the past five years.
[Added 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
6. Public notice — notification.
11.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.25
1:120
a. The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Bethel Park
Municipal Building, or other conspicuous locations, an
announcement of the full-time police officer testing and set
forth the time and place of every examination, together with
the information as to the type of position to be filled, the
requirements for that position, where applications may be
obtained for the examination, and the deadline for filing those
applications. For the position of full-time police officer at least
two weeks prior to each examination, publication of the notice
shall be placed in at least one newspaper of general circulation
in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
b. The Chief of Police, or other designated person, shall give, in
writing, to each applicant qualified for the next step in the
examination process, a notice which shall include the date,
time and place the applicant shall report for the next
examination in the process. In the case of physical,
psychological, and polygraph examinations, the Chief of Police
shall notify the police officer candidate who has been
conditionally offered a position in the Police Department by a
written notice of the date, time and place of the examination as
well as the name of the physical and psychological examiners.
c. Every such notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered at
least seven days prior to the date fixed for examination. Only
applicants receiving notices to report for any examination shall
be permitted to participate in such examination, and each
applicant shall present his or her notice and personal
identification to the examiner before he or she shall be
examined. Failure to report for an examination in accordance
with the instructions contained in the written notice shall
disqualify the applicant, except that in the case of physical or
psychological examinations, the physician and psychologist
designated in the notice may fix another date or time for such
examination; provided, however, that any such date or time
shall be written within the period of at least seven days of the
date and time established in the written notice.
7. Recording and filing applications.
a. Applicants who meet the minimum qualifications and who pass
the physical agility and written examinations will be notified
that they are now eligible to file an employment application
with the Municipality. Applications for positions of full-time
police officer shall be received at the office of the Chief of
Police, or other offices or agencies designated by the
Commission, only after a police officer position has been
properly advertised and before the deadline for receiving
applications which shall be set forth in the public
advertisement. Applications will be received by the municipal
official designated in the public advertisement or that official's
11.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.25
1:121
designee. That person shall record the receipt of all
applications and provide each applicant with notice of the time
and place for the next portion of the testing procedure. Any
application containing material errors or omissions may, at the
discretion of the Commission, be returned to the applicant for
correction prior to the deadline for filing applications after
which no new applications or amended applications will be
accepted.
b. Penalty for false statement. The statements made by the
applicant in the official application shall contain no
falsification, omissions or concealment of material fact. Should
any investigation disclose any material misstatement,
falsification or concealment with respect to an application:
[1] The application shall be invalid and the applicant shall be
disqualified from examination;
[2] If the applicant shall have been examined, the name of
such applicant shall be removed from the eligibility list; or
[3] If the applicant shall have been appointed, such material
misstatement, falsification or concealment shall constitute
grounds for dismissal from the Bethel Park Police
Department.
[4] No person who has made a material false application shall
be permitted in the future to be an applicant for any
position in the Bethel Park Police Department.
8. Rejection of applicant. The Commission shall refuse to examine, or,
if examined, shall refuse to certify as eligible after examination, any
applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for
examination prescribed in these rules and regulations for the
particular position for which the applicant has applied. In addition,
the Commission may refuse to examine, or if examined, shall refuse
to certify any applicant who is:
a. Found to have furnished incomplete, inaccurate, misleading or
false information on the official application or in response to
any portion of the hiring process;
b. Physically unfit for the performance of the duties of the
position of which the candidate seeks employment;
c. Illegally using a controlled substance, as defined in Section
102 of the Controlled Substance Act (Public Law 91-513, 12
U.S.C. § 802);
d. Guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous or
notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed
from public service for delinquency or misconduct of office;
11.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.25
1:122
e. Affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are
subversive to the forms of government set forth in the
constitution and laws of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
9. Hearing for disqualified applicant.
a. Any applicants or other persons who claim that they are
aggrieved by the actions of the Commission, in refusing to
examine or to certify them as eligible after examination, may
request a hearing before the Commission, within 10 days of
receiving written notice of what is perceived as the alleged
error. Within 10 days after such request, the Commission shall
designate a time and place for the hearing which shall be
conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., with or without counsel,
at which time the Commission shall take testimony and review
its refusal to provide examination or certification.
b. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings
on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in the nature
of a closed executive session. The Commission's disposition of
the matter shall constitute official action which shall occur at a
public meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to
open meetings). The decision of the Commission shall be final.
11.25.2. Examination and grading procedure.
1. General examination requirements.
a. The examination for full-time police officer shall consist of a
physical agility test, written examination, oral examination,
and background investigation which includes a polygraph
examination. The written examination and the oral
examination will be graded individually on a one-hundredpercent
scale. The written examination will represent 70% of
the final score. The oral examination will represent 30% of the
final score. The physical agility test and the background
investigation will be graded pass/fail.
b. The testing process will be as follows:
[1] Physical agility test: Those candidates passing the physical
agility test, as outlined in Section 11.25.2(2), will qualify to
take the written examination.
[2] Written examination: Those candidates passing the written
test as outlined in Section 11.25.2(3) will qualify for the
oral examination.
[3] Oral examination: Those candidates passing the oral
examination, as outlined in Section 11.25.2(4), will then be
11.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.25
1:123
placed on the eligibility list, after those qualifying for
veteran's preference points, as outlined in Section
11.25.2(5), have been awarded those preference points.
[4] Background investigation: Prior to being considered for
appointment on the "Certified List of Three," the applicant
will undergo a complete background investigation as
outlined in Section 11.25.2(6). Although a requirement,
only a sufficient number of top scoring candidates
necessary for consideration, as determined by the Civil
Service Commission, will need to have a background
investigation performed.
c. Thus, any individual appearing on the initial eligibility list is
subject to background investigation and no one will be
certified as eligible on the "Certified List of Three" until they
have successfully completed a background investigation and
received a written recommendation that the applicant is
appropriate for consideration in accordance with Section
11.25.2(6) of these rules and regulations.
2. Physical agility.
a. An applicant for the position of full-time police officer shall
meet the physical agility requirements, in accordance with the
criteria established by the Commission or other agencies
designated by the Commission. In all cases, candidates shall be
provided with the physical agility requirements at the time of
application.
b. Applicants who have successfully passed or failed the physical
agility test will be so notified at the completion of the physical
agility test or within 30 days, by the Commission.
3. Written examination. The written examination shall be graded on a
one-hundred-point scale, and an applicant must score 75% or
higher in order to continue in the application process. Applicants
scoring less than 75% shall be rejected. The written test shall be a
validated test administered by an experienced test administrator.
Within 30 days after the administration of the written examination,
all applicants shall be given written notice of their test results and
passing applicants shall be scheduled for an oral examination
appointment.
4. Oral examination. Every applicant who has satisfied all of the
written examination requirements provided in Section 11.25.2(3)
and the physical agility testing process provided in Section
11.25.2(2) shall be eligible for an oral examination. The oral
examination will be graded on a one-hundred-point scale with a
score of 75% or higher necessary for passing. The oral examination
shall involve questioning applicants on how they would handle
situations relevant to police work, their previous work experiences,
11.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.25
1:124
and questions or situations concerning ethics. Within 30 days after
the applicants' oral examination, they shall be informed of the
score in their oral examination and total overall score. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
5. Veterans' preference points. Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference
Act,23 any applicant for the position of police officer who qualifies
as a military veteran under this act shall receive an additional 10
points on top of his/her final score if that applicant qualifies under
Sections 11.25.2(1), (2), (3) and (4) of these rules and regulations.
Applicants claiming veteran's preference shall have submitted
satisfactory proof of service and honorable discharge therefrom
with their application form.
6. Background investigation.
a. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation which includes
a polygraph examination on the top scoring eligible applicants,
as determined by the Civil Service Commission, prior to
inclusion on the "Certified List of Three" of those eligible as set
forth in Section 11.25.3(3) of these rules and regulations.
b. The background investigation must be consistent for each
applicant and shall meet, at a minimum, all the specific
requirements of the MPOETC, as required by law. The
applicant may be interviewed directly when the information
collected requires clarification or further explanation. The
Chief of Police or Chief's designee may use his/her own
discretion in the expansion or contracting of these items and
time frames.
c. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall make a written
recommendation to the Commission on whether the applicant
is appropriate for consideration for appointment as a police
officer for the Municipality of Bethel Park.
d. The recommendation by the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee shall be based on the criteria set forth in Section
11.25.1(8) of these rules and regulations and on any other
relevant information developed during the background
investigation. This report to the Commission shall be in writing
and in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and
shall not include any physical history information on a
candidate. If the recommendation is to disqualify, then a
detailed, written explanation of the reasons for disqualification
shall be included. The Commission shall then make a final
determination on whether additional information is required or
23.Editor's Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
11.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.25
1:125
if the information collected and reported warrants acceptance
or rejection of the candidate.
e. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the
recommendation based on the background investigation, each
applicant shall be notified as to whether he/she has passed or
failed this portion of the examination process.
11.25.3. Certification of the list of eligibles and appointment.
1. Creation of eligibility list.
a. At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
Sections 11.25.2(2), (3) and (4), the physical agility test, the
written examination and the oral examination, the Commission
shall rank all passing candidates on the eligibility list. The
applicants having received the highest score shall be at the top
of the list, with all other candidates being listed in descending
order of their scores. Applicants, who qualify for veteran's
preference points, as outlined in Section 11.25.2(5), shall have
those 10 points added to their final score prior to being ranked
on the eligibility list.
b. In the case of tied scores, the tie will be broken by giving
preference to the applicant who received the highest score on
the written test. In the event the qualifying applicant received
identical scores, the order of listing shall be determined by the
earliest application received.
c. Any individual appearing on the eligibility list is subject to a
background investigation and no one will be certified in
accordance with Section 11.25.3(3) of these rules and
regulations until they have successfully completed a
background investigation and received a written
recommendation that the applicant is appropriate for
consideration in accordance with Section 11.25.2(6) of these
rules and regulations.
2. Duration of eligibility list. The original eligibility lists for full-time
police officers will be valid for a period of one year from the date
the Commission formally adopts the eligibility list. Prior to
expiration of the one-year period, the Municipal Council may
extend the validity of the eligibility list for up to an additional 12
months by a majority vote of the Municipal Council, at a duly
authorized Municipal Council meeting. In the absence of a lawful
extension by the Municipal Council, the list shall expire.
3. Appointment procedure.
a. Furloughed police officers, within three years, shall be given
first consideration for re-employment, prior to any other hiring
11.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.25
1:126
procedure and shall be reinstated in order of their seniority as
outlined in Section 11.27.5, of these rules and regulations.
[1] Except as provided above, every initial position of full-time
police officer, for employment in the Police Department,
shall be filled only in the following manner: The appointing
authority shall notify the Commission of any vacancy
which is to be filled and shall request certification of three
names from the eligibility list.
[2] If three names are not available, then the Commission
shall certify the name(s) remaining on the list.
[3] The appointing authority shall make an appointment from
one of the three names certified, or a lesser number
certified, with reference to the merits and fitness of the
candidates. However, for the initial appointment to the
position full-time police officer, when one of the three
applicants on the certified list is a veteran, that applicant
shall be selected. If two or more of the names on each of
the certified lists of three are veterans, the appointing
authority shall have the discretion to appoint the veteran it
deems most qualified.
b. The appointing authority may object to one or more of the
persons certified for the reasons set forth in Section 11.25.1(8)
of these rules and regulations. If the candidate to whom the
appointing authority objects or fails to timely exercise the
rights of appeal under 11.25.1(9), or if the Commission
declines to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall strike that
name from the eligibility list and certify the next highest name
for inclusion on the certified list of three candidates for each
name stricken off the "Certified List of Three."
4. Physical and psychological medical examinations.
a. After the Municipal Council selects a candidate from the
Certified List of Three for appointment to the vacant position,
that candidate shall receive a conditional offer of employment.
The offer of employment shall be conditioned upon the
conditional appointee undergoing a physical and psychological
medical examination and a determination that the conditional
appointee is capable of performing all the essential functions
of the position. Physical medical examinations shall be under
the direction of a physician or other qualified medical
professional. Psychological medical examinations shall be
under the direction of a psychiatrist or psychologist.
b. The physician or other qualified medical professional and the
psychiatrist or psychologist shall be appointed by Municipality
and shall render an opinion as to whether the conditional
appointee has physical or mental condition which calls into
11.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.25
1:127
question the person's ability to perform all of the essential
functions of the position for which the person was conditionally
appointed.
c. The physical and psychological exams will be conducted in
compliance with the MPOETC regulations. The completion of
the required MPOETC physical and psychological forms will be
provided by the Municipality. Drug testing shall be included as
one component of the requirements. In addition, the respective
examiners will be given a copy of the job description and the
"Essential Functions of the Job"24 for performing the duties of
police officer. The completed forms will be certified by the
examining physician(s) indicating that the candidate is
physically or psychologically fit, as the case may be, to perform
the duties of a police officer. The completed forms shall be
confidential and submitted to the appropriate Municipal
official for disposition.
d. If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified
medical professional, psychiatrist or psychologist calls into
question the conditional appointee's ability to perform all
essential functions of a position, a person designated by
Municipal Council shall meet with the conditional appointee
for the purpose of having one or more interactive discussions
on whether the conditional appointee can, with or without
reasonable accommodation, perform all the essential functions
of the position.
e. If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion, the Municipal
Council determines that the conditional appointee is not
qualified, the Municipal Council shall give written notice to the
conditional appointee and the Commission.
f. The rejected candidate may appeal this decision under Section
11.25.1(9) of these rules and regulations. If the candidate fails
to timely exercise the rights of appeal, or if the Commission
declines to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall strike the
name from the eligibility list and certify the next highest name
for inclusion on the "Certified List of Three."
5. Probationary period.
a. At or any time before the close of the probationary period of
one year commencing on the employment date, Council may
terminate the probationer's employment for any reason. The
probationer shall be notified in writing that he will not receive
a permanent appointment. Notice as required in this section
shall be deemed effective as of: a) the date of hand delivery of
the notice to the probationer or to an adult person at
24.Editor's Note: See Appendix I-A, which is included as an attachment to this chapter.
11.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.25
1:128
11.26. Promotions (ranking position).
probationer's place of residence; or b) the date of deposit of
notice in the United States mail. A copy of such notification
shall be supplied to the Secretary of the Commission.
Thereupon, the probationer's appointment shall cease;
otherwise, his retention shall be equivalent to a permanent
appointment.
b. If the police officer is not in compliance with the residence
requirement at the time he attains a permanent appointment,
he has six months from that date to come into compliance.
Failure to comply with the residence requirements shall result
in automatic termination which is not subject to appeal.
11.26.1. Application and qualification.
1. Eligibility for examinations.
a. No candidate will be considered who has a five-or-more-day
suspension in the past three years prior to the deadline for
submitting applications. [Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No.
7-13-15]
b. When no appeal of a suspension is pending, the three-year
period shall end on the date of public advertisement of the
examination.
c. At the time of the application, all applicants for the following
promotional (ranking positions) shall have had continuous
prior service as a full-time police officer, as noted, with the
Bethel Park Police Department. This service shall begin with
the employee's original employment date and end with the date
of public advertisement of the examination. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
[1] An applicant for the position of Sergeant shall, at a
minimum, have not less than five years of continuous prior
service with the Bethel Park Police Department.
[2] In addition to meeting the service requirements set forth
in Section 11.26.1(1)(c)[1], an applicant for the position of
Sergeant or any other promotional position must possess
an associate's degree or higher degree from an accredited
college or university.
2. Discrimination. The Municipality of Bethel Park is an equal
opportunity employer. It is the Municipal Council's and the
Commission's policy to grant equal employment opportunities to
qualified persons without regard to race, religion, color, national
origin, gender, age, veteran's status, marital status, or non-jobrelated
physical or mental handicap or disability.
11.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.26
1:129
3. Notification.
a. For promotions, at least two weeks prior to the close of the
application period, publication of the announcement outlining
the qualifications for the position, and requesting application
forms and/or letters of intent, to apply for the position, shall be
conspicuously posted in the Police Department. At the
discretion of the Civil Service Commission, the Commission
may receive documentation from the Municipality of those
eligible for a promotional exam and may notify them, in
writing, of the announcement and the deadline for filing
applications. It is important that all applicants that meet the
qualifications for promotion be notified by the Chief of Police or
other individuals designated by the Commission.
b. The Chief of Police, or other designated person, shall give, in
writing, to each applicant qualified for the next step in the
examination process, a notice which shall include the date,
time and place the applicant shall report for the next
examination in the process.
c. Every such notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered at
least 30 days prior to the date fixed for examination. Only
applicants receiving notices to report for any examination shall
be permitted to participate in such examination, and each
applicant shall present his or her notice to the examiner before
he or she shall be examined. Failure to report for an
examination in accordance with the instructions contained in
the written notice may disqualify the applicant. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
d. The Chairman of the Civil Service Commission will determine,
based on exceptional circumstances, whether or not an
individual is permitted to take a promotional examination on a
date other than that originally designated.
4. Rejection of applicant for promotion. The Commission may refuse
to examine, or, if examined, may refuse to certify as eligible after
examination, any applicant who is found to lack any of the
minimum qualifications for examination prescribed in these rules
and regulations for the particular position for which the applicant
has applied. In addition, the Commission may refuse to examine, or,
if examined, may refuse to certify any applicant who is:
a. Found to have furnished incomplete, inaccurate, misleading or
false information on the official application or in response to
any portion of the hiring process;
b. Physically unfit for the performance of the duties of the
position of which the candidate seeks employment;
11.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.26
1:130
c. Illegally using a controlled substance, as defined in Section
102 of the Controlled Substance Act (Public Law 91-513, 12
U.S.C. § 802);
d. Guilty of any crime involving moral turpitude, or of infamous or
notoriously disgraceful conduct, or who has been dismissed
from public service for delinquency or misconduct of office;
e. Affiliated with any group whose policies or activities are
subversive to the forms of government set forth in the
constitution and laws of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
5. Hearing for disqualified applicants.
a. Any applicants or other persons who claim that they are
aggrieved by the actions of the Commission, in refusing to
examine or to certify them as eligible after examination, may
request a hearing before the Commission, within 10 days of
receiving written notice of what is perceived as the
disqualifying item. Within 10 days after such request, the
Commission shall designate a time and place for the hearing
which shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth
in the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., with or
without counsel, at which time the Commission shall take
testimony and review its refusal to provide examination or
certification.
b. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings
on evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in the nature
of a closed executive session. The Commission's disposition of
the matter shall constitute official action which shall occur at a
public meeting held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to
open meetings). The decision of the Commission shall be final.
11.26.2. Examination and grading procedure.
1. General examination requirements. The examination for the
promotional position of Sergeant shall include a written
examination and an oral examination, which will be graded on a
one-hundred-point scale with the written examination representing
60% of the final score, the oral examination representing 40% of
the final score.
2. Written examination. The written examination for a promotional
position shall be graded on a one-hundred-point scale. An applicant
must score at least 75% to be eligible for the oral exam and
continue in the promotional process. Applicants who score less
than 75% shall be disqualified. Within 30 days after the
administration of the written examination, all applicants shall be
given written notice of their examination results.
11.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.26
1:131
3. Oral examination.
a. Every applicant for a promotional position, who has satisfied
all of the written examination requirements provided in
Section 11.26.2(2) above, shall be given an oral examination.
An applicant must score at least 75% to qualify and continue in
the application process. Any applicant who scores less than
75% will be disqualified. The oral examination shall involve
questioning applicants on police-oriented issues, including
how they would handle situations relevant to police work.
Within 30 days after the administration of the oral they shall be
informed of the score in their oral examination and total overall
score.
b. Except for the position of Chief of Police or Lieutenant or other
command level positions of Bethel Park, the oral examination
of any applicant for a promotional position, including the
position of Sergeant, shall be conducted by a panel of three
active police chiefs from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
or similar Pennsylvania state or federal law enforcement
qualified individuals selected and approved by the
Commission. One of the three positions on the oral
examination panel shall be reserved for the Chief of Police of
the Municipality of Bethel Park. Notice of the appointment of
the oral examination panel shall be made a matter of record in
the minutes of the Commission. A member of the Commission
may be present for the oral examination. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
c. The Chief of Police is authorized to schedule oral exams with
candidates who passed the physical agility and written tests
and meet the age and general qualification eligibility
requirements upon receipt of an administratively complete
application. The oral exam will be conducted by the Chief of
Police and two other sworn police professionals with a rank
higher than officer, not employed by the Municipality of Bethel
Park, and selected by the Chief of Police. The Commissioners
may observe the oral interview process, if available, at their
own discretion and receive the scores upon completion of the
interviews. The Chief of Police and two other sworn police
professionals shall provide the Commissioners the scores of
the oral exam. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 7-9-18]
11.26.3. Certification of the list of eligibles and appointment.
1. Creation of eligibility list.
a. At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
Sections 11.26.2(1), (2) and (3), the Commission shall rank all
passing applicants on a list with the applicant receiving the
11.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.26
1:132
highest score at the top of the list and the applicant receiving
the lowest passing score at the bottom of the list.
b. In the case of tied scores, the tie will be broken by giving
preference to the applicant who received the highest score on
the written test. In the event the qualifying applicant received
identical scores, the order of listing shall be determined by the
earliest application received.
2. Duration of eligibility list. Municipal Council shall notify the
Commission of a vacancy in the police force to be filled by
promotion and shall request the certification of an eligibility list.
The Commission shall certify for each vacancy the names of three
persons on the eligibility list who have received the highest
average in the last preceding promotional examination held within
a period of one year preceding the date of the request for the
eligibility list.
3. Appointment procedure.
a. The ranking promotional positions, except the Chief of Police
or Lieutenant, shall be filled only in the following manner:
[1] The appointing authority of the Municipality shall notify
the Commission of any vacancy which is to be filled and
shall request the certification of three names from the
eligibility list;
[2] If three names are not available, then the Commission
shall certify the name(s) remaining on the list;
[3] The Municipal Council shall make an appointment from
one of the three names certified with sole reference to the
merits and fitness of the candidates.
b. The Municipal Council may object to one or more of the
persons certified for the reasons set forth in Section 11.25.1(8)
of these rules and regulations. If the candidate to whom the
Municipal Council objects fails to timely exercise the rights of
appeal under Section 11.25.1(9), or if the Commission declines
to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall strike the name of
that candidate from the eligibility list and certify the next
highest name for inclusion on the list of three candidates for
each name stricken off.
4. Probationary period.
a. Every successful applicant for a promotional position within
the Police Department shall serve a twelve-month probationary
period. The probationary period will begin on the first day of
the promotion to the respective ranking position.
11.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.26
1:133
b. A full-time police officer promoted to a ranking position, during
probation, may be returned to the position from which they
were promoted, for cause for the reasons set forth in Section
11.25.1(8) of these rules and regulations.
c. The Chief of Police shall submit to Municipal Counsel, the
Municipal Manager and the Commission quarterly
correspondence indicating satisfactory performance review of
the recently promoted Sergeant during the probationary
period.
d. In addition, a probationary promoted police officer may be
returned to his/her previous position, if the probationary police
officer does not meet the requirement expectations of the
position and documentation is accurately noted.
e. The Chief of Police shall submit a final probationary report, not
less than 10 days or more than 15 calendar days before the
next regular meeting of the Municipal Council immediately
preceding the end of the probationary period. Each report shall
be submitted in writing to Municipal Council. Within five
calendar days after receiving a probationary report from the
Chief of Police, if the conduct of the probationer has not been
satisfactory to the Municipal Council, the probationer shall be
notified in writing by the Municipal Council that the
appointment will not be permanent and the promoted
probationary police officer will be returned to the previous
position held, for the Municipality.
f. Any probationer who is notified in writing by the Municipal
Council, prior to completion of the twelve-month probation
period, that his/her appointment will not be made permanent
has no rights of appeal under these rules and regulations.
g. The Chief of Police shall notify the Commission, in writing, of
its decision to retain or remove the probationer of such
decision within five calendar days and in no event beyond the
last day of the probationary period.
h. At the end of the twelve-month probationary period, if the
probationer is not notified in accordance with this section, a
promoted ranking police officer shall receive permanent status
in his/her respective promotional position.
11.26.4. Chief of Police/Lieutenant.
1. Appointment of Chief of Police/Lieutenant/Command positions. In
the case of a vacancy in the Office of Chief of Police or Lieutenant
or other command positions, the Municipal Council has sole
discretion in selecting the individual to fill the position of Chief of
Police or Lieutenant or other command positions. The appointed
Police Chief or Lieutenant or other command position will be an "at
11.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.26
1:134
11.27. Suspensions, removals and reduction in rank; furloughs.
will" Police Chief or Lieutenant or other command position and may
be terminated at any time with or without cause. In the case of
Lieutenant, if the person appointed was promoted from the Bethel
Park Police Department, that person shall be returned to his/her
previous rank within the Police Department unless the person is
terminated pursuant to Section 11.27, Subsection 11.27.1.
[Amended 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 7-13-15]
11.27.1. Grounds for disciplinary action.
1. No person appointed to a position in the Police Department,
pursuant to these rules and regulations, shall be suspended
without pay, reduced in rank or terminated except for the following
reasons:
a. Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service;
b. Neglect or violation of any official duty;
c. Conviction of any law of this commonwealth which provides
that such violation constitutes a misdemeanor or felony; for
purposes of this provision, conviction shall also include nolle
contendre, accelerated rehabilitative disposition or probation
without verdict;
d. Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, disobedience of orders or
conduct unbecoming an officer;
e. Intoxication while on duty;
f. Engaging or participating in conducting of any political or
election campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using
Municipal property otherwise than to exercise the person's
own right of suffrage;
g. Violation of rules, regulations or procedures of the Bethel Park
Policy and Procedure Manual;
h. No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political
reasons; or
i. Any documented behavior or action that is inconsistent with
the high personal and professional standards associated with
being a member of the Bethel Park Police Department, and a
law enforcement officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
regardless of being on-duty time or during off-duty time.
11.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.27
1:135
2. A statement of any charges made against any officer so employed
shall be furnished to the officer within five days after the same are
filed with the Commission.
11.27.2. Notice of suspension, removal or reduction in rank.
1. Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in
rank, the specific charges warranting such actions shall be stated
in writing by the Chief of Police. The charges shall be stated clearly
and in sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand the
charges and to allow the officer an opportunity to respond to those
charges. The charges shall specify the subsection of Section
11.27.1 which provides the basis for the disciplinary action as well
as an explanation of the factual circumstances upon which the
appointing authority relied in finding a violation of Section 11.27.1.
2. Within five days after the decision to impose the disciplinary action,
a written statement of the charges shall be delivered to the officer
either by personal service or by certified registered mail. In
addition, the charges shall notify the officer of the right to appeal
under Section 11.27.3 of these rules and regulations. A copy of the
statement of charges shall also be served upon the members of the
Civil Service Commission within the same allotted time.
11.27.3. Hearings on suspension, removals and reductions in rank. Any
police officer, who has been suspended, reduced in rank, or terminated,
may appeal the decision by requesting a hearing with the Civil Service
Commission. In the event an officer aggrieved by such a decision is
entitled by a collective bargaining agreement to pursue a grievance on
the matter, the officer must elect to pursue the matter either under the
processes in place under the collective bargaining agreement or under
these rules and regulations. Once an election of remedies is made, the
alternate procedure is waived. When chosen, the civil service hearing
process is as follows:
1. The hearing request must be received in writing by the Chairman
of the Commission at 5100 W. Library Avenue, Bethel Park, PA
15102. The officer may make written answers to any charges filed
not later than the date fixed for the hearing. Failure of the officer to
provide written answers to any of the charges shall not be deemed
an admission by the officer. The Commission shall schedule a
hearing within 10 days from the officer's written request for a
hearing unless continued by the Commission for cause at the
request of the Municipal Council or the officer. Notwithstanding
this provision, the failure of the Commission to hold a hearing
within 10 days from the filing of the charges in writing shall not
result in the dismissal of the charges filed.
2. At any hearing, the officer against whom the charges have been
made may be present and represented by counsel, may call
witnesses and present testimony and documentation in defense.
11.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.27
1:136
The Municipality may also be represented by counsel, call
witnesses and present evidence as is necessary to support the
charges. A stenographic record of all testimony shall be taken
at every hearing and preserved by the Commission. In the event
the charges are dismissed, the record shall be sealed and not be
available for public inspection.
3. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review
shall be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been
presented to support the statutory reason for the disciplinary
action. If the Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been
introduced to support the charge, the Commission shall not modify
the penalty imposed by the Chief of Police unless it finds that the
penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the
board's discretion. In considering the appropriateness of the
discipline, the Commission shall not substitute its judgment for that
of the Chief of Police. The Commission may request posthearing
briefs, and shall issue a written decision containing specific
findings of fact and conclusions of law within 60 days of receipt of
the hearing transcript.
4. In the event that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then
the officer shall be reinstated with full pay for the period of the
suspension, removal or reduction in rank. No charges related to the
suspension, removal or reduction in rank shall be officially
recorded in the officer's official personnel records, nor may any of
these charges be held against the officer for future or promotional
opportunities.
11.27.4. Hearing procedure.
1. All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice
Chairperson. The Commission shall have the power to issue
subpoenas as set forth in Section 11.24.13 of these rules and
regulations.
2. Unless Municipal Council or the person sought to be suspended,
reduced in rank or terminated, requests that the proceedings
before the Commission be open to the public, the proceedings
before the Commission pursuant to this section shall be held in the
nature of a closed executive session that shall not be open to the
public. Any such request shall be presented to the Commission
before the civil service hearing commences. The deliberations of
the Commission, including interim rulings on evidentiary or
procedural issues, may be held in private and shall not be subject to
a request for being open to the public, the Municipal Council or to
the person sought to be suspended, removed or reduced in rank.
The Commission's disposition of the disciplinary action shall
constitute official action which shall occur at a public meeting held
pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings).
11.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.27
1:137
3. All parties concerned shall have an immediate right of appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, and the case shall be
determined as the court deems proper. The appeal with the Court
of Common Pleas shall be taken within 30 days from the date of
entry by the Commission of its final order and shall be by petition.
Upon the appeal being taken and docketed, the Court of Common
Pleas shall fix a day for the hearing and shall proceed to hear the
appeal on the original record and additional proof of testimony as
the parties concerned may desire to offer evidence.
4. The Chief of Police may suspend a police officer in the Police
Department for a period not to exceed 30 days. The Chief of Police
may recommend to Municipal Council suspensions of police officers
for periods in excess of 30 days and may also recommend reduction
in rank or removal.
11.27.5. Furloughs. If for reasons of economy or other reasons it shall be
deemed necessary by the Municipality to reduce the number of paid
officers, the following procedure shall be followed:
1. The Municipality shall first furlough the person or persons,
including probationers, last appointed to the respective force. Such
removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order
commencing with the person last appointed until such reduction
shall have been accomplished. Any such furlough shall expire in
three years.
2. In the event that the Municipal Council decides to increase the size
of the Police Department officer personnel, the furloughed police
officers shall be reinstated in order of their seniority in the Police
Department. Employees so notified of reinstatement must accept
reinstatement within 30 days of receipt of such notice, otherwise
such employee shall be deemed to have waived any right to
reinstatement.
3. These reductions in force provisions are not applicable to the Chief
of Police.
11.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 11.27
1:138
Chapter 12
SALARIES, ALLOWANCES AND PERSONNEL POLICIES
11.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 11.27
1:139

ARTICLE I
Salaries, etc.
[Adopted 7-12-1972 by Ord. No. 7-12-72B25]
12.1. Salaries of elected officers.
12.2. Salaries of nonelected officers and employees.
12.1.1. The salaries of the elective officers of the Municipality of Bethel Park
shall be fixed as follows: [Amended 2-12-1973 by Ord. No.
2-12-73C; 1-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1-11-87A; 1-11-1988 by Ord. No.
1-11-88A; 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 3-14-94A]
1. Mayor: $4,200 per year, payable at the rate of $350 per month.
2. Councilmen: $3,000 per year, payable at the rate of $250 per
month, per Councilman.
12.2.1. The salaries of management, supervisory and other confidential
employees shall be fixed as follows: [Last amended 12-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 12-10-18B]
Management, Supervisory and Confidential Personnel
(Effective January 1, 2019)
Position 2019 Base Salary
Manager $123,188
Assistant Manager $107,345
Finance Director $73,029
Director of Engineering $91,000
Municipal Planner $61,665
Environmental Engineer $83,844
Commercial Building Code Official $63,860
Residential Building Code Official $56,650
Code Enforcement Officer $48,683
Engineering Assistant $61,198
Plant Superintendent $78,468
Assistant Plant Superintendent $65,998
Recreation Director $60,217
Assistant Recreation Director (Community
Center)
$46,631
Executive Assistant $57,200
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. No. 10-10-60B, adopted 10-10-1960, and
subsequent amendments to said ordinance.
12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.2
1:141
Management, Supervisory and Confidential Personnel
(Effective January 1, 2019)
Position 2019 Base Salary
Public Works Director $73,519
Public Works Supervisor $65,000
Engineering Inspector (1) $55,742
Engineering Inspector (2) $56,650
Public Access Facility Director $47,286
Accounting Supervisor $61,444
Administrative Assistant $51,555
CCTV Technician $53,288
Chief of Police $124,402
Police Lieutenants $115,365
12.2.2. In addition, a one-time bonus shall be paid to the Code Enforcement
Officer in the amount of $1,000. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
12-12-16]
12.2.3. In addition, a one-time bonus of $1,000 is provided to both Public
Works Department Supervisors. [Amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No.
12-9-13A]
12.2.4. Bargaining Unit Personnel (Effective January 1, 1993).
The following are the job groups and wage rates of the employees
covered by the agreement between the Municipality of Bethel Park and
Teamsters Local No. 205, effective January 1, 1993, through December
31, 1996, and the basic hourly wage rate of compensation such
employees shall be paid in the respective job groups during the period
indicated. It is understood that these rates are minimums only and that
the Employer retains the right to hire a new employee at any rate as
long as it is equal to or exceeds the minimum and does not exceed the
maximum wage rate under the contract.
Job Groups
1/1/93
Hourly
Rates
1/1/94
Hourly
Rates
1/1/95
Hourly
Rates
1/1/96
Hourly
Rates
Grade 1 13.45 13.95 14.45 14.95
Grade 2 13.30 13.80 14.30 14.80
Grade 3 13.20 13.70 14.20 14.70
Grade 4 13.00 13.50 14.00 14.50
Grade 5 12.80 13.30 13.80 14.30
Bookkeeper 11.34 11.84 12.34 12.84
12.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.2
1:142
Job Groups
1/1/93
Hourly
Rates
1/1/94
Hourly
Rates
1/1/95
Hourly
Rates
1/1/96
Hourly
Rates
Secretary 10.30 10.80 11.30 11.80
Clerk 9.25 9.75 10.25 10.75
*A. Coddington 9.92 10.42 10.92 11.42
Police radio desk 10.80 11.30 11.80 12.30
*Designates red circle rate.
12.2.5. New Hires.
The following rates shall be effective for all employees who have not
achieved the "Full Rate" and for employees hired after the effective
date of the agreement.
Clerks
$6.00 Initial rate
$6.25 After completion of 6 months
$6.50 After completion of 12 months
$6.75 After completion of 18 months
$7.00 After completion of 24 months
Full Clerk rate after completion of 27 months
Maintenance
$8.00 Initial rate
$8.25 After completion of 6 months
$8.50 After completion of 12 months
$8.75 After completion of 18 months
$9.00 After completion of 24 months
Full Clerk rate after completion of 27 months
Police Communications Desk
$7.50 Initial rate
$7.75 After completion of 6 months
$8.00 After completion of 12 months
$8.25 After completion of 18 months
Full Clerk rate after completion of 24 months
The above-noted new hires rates apply only to employees occupying
Clerk positions, Grade 4 or 5 positions or Police Communications Desk
positions. In the event a newly hired employee successfully bids into
a higher rated job, the employee shall immediately receive the full
contract rate for that position.
12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.2
1:143
12.3. Regulations governing benefits.
Employees receiving a new hire rate who are temporarily transferred
to a higher rated job shall receive the full rate for the higher rate
job providing the temporary transfer is consistent with the temporary
transfer provisions of the agreement.
Those employees entitled to longevity pay under the ordinances of the
employer shall receive such longevity pay in addition to the hourly
wage rates listed herein above in one lump sum payment in the first
pay in December of each calendar year covered by the agreement.
A shift differential will be paid to any employee regularly assigned to a
steady evening shift or night shift:
1. 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. shift - $0.35 per hour.
2. 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shift - $0.50 per hour.
12.2.6. Planning Commission Consultant: $3,300 per year, payable at the
rate of $825 per quarter,.
12.3.1. No emergency leave or annual vacation shall be granted any fulltime
employee unless such employee shall have completed at least 12
months' employment for the Municipality of Bethel Park.
12.3.2. Seasonal and part-time employees shall not be entitled to the
benefits of full-time employees.
12.3.3. All benefits provided in this ordinance shall apply to full-time
personnel, except that no remuneration for overtime shall be paid to be
following: [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C; 1-12-1976
by Ord. No. 1-12-76B; 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 1-9-1978
by Ord. No. 1-9-78D]
1. Manager.
2. Assistant Manager.
3. Finance Officer.
4. Director of Public Works.
5. Chief of Police.
6. Road Supervisor.
7. Environmental Supervisor.
8. Sanitation Supervisor.
9. Parks Supervisor.
10. Building Inspector.
12.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.3
1:144
12.4. Work Schedules.
12.5. Work hours and overtime provisions.
11. Code Enforcement Officer.
12. Engineer.
13. Draftsman.
14. Draftsman-Rodman Apprentice.
15. Sewage Supervisor
16. Community Development Director.
17. Special Coordinator.
12.3.4. Time lost by any employee by reason of leave without pay or time
otherwise not worked will not be counted in computing earned sick
leave or annual leave.
12.4.1.Work in excess of established schedules shall be permitted only
when necessary to meet operating requirements. Such overtime must
be authorized in advance by a designated officer.
12.4.2. The Municipal Manager shall be responsible for hours in excess of
operating schedules and shall advise the Municipal Council of such
expenditures made for overtime.
12.4.3. Designated supervisory personnel, under the supervision of the
Municipal Manager, shall determine whether or not excess work is
necessary and shall advise the Municipal Manager of such overtime.
12.5.1. The normal workweek for all employees is five consecutive eighthour
days, Monday through Friday, where such schedule is possible and
has been the past practice for such employees. A regular workday shall
consists of eight consecutive hours of work, exclusive of a one-half-hour
lunch period. A split shift shall not be permitted at any time.
12.5.2. Time and one-half will be paid for all hours worked in excess of eight
hours in any workday or 40 hours in any workweek. Time and one-half
will be paid for all work on the employee's sixth or seventh consecutive
workday within the same schedule workweek. There will be no
pyramiding of overtime payment under this provision.
12.5.3. The workweek shall start Saturday at 12:00 midnight and shall end
the following Saturday at 12:00 midnight.
12.5.4. A regular schedule of working house with a daily starting time shall
not be changed unless at least 48 hours' notice of such change is given
to the employee or employees involved.
12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.5
1:145
12.6. Longevity Pay.
12.5.5. Any employee who is called back to work after completing his
regular day's work shall be guaranteed three hours of call-out time at
time-and-one-half pay, except confidential employees.
12.5.6. Any employee who is assigned to work in a higher classification shall
receive the rate of pay for such higher classification for the hours he so
works, except confidential employees. However, if an employee is
assigned to work in a lower classification, he shall nevertheless be paid
his regular rate of pay.
12.5.7. No employee shall be justified or warranted without valid reason to
refuse to work overtime on any day when the necessity for doing such
overtime work arises because the job must be finished that day or
because of any emergency that reasonably necessitates the doing of
such overtime work. Any employee shall be given a one-half-hour paid
lunch period for every four hours worked after eight hours in any
workday. When a need for overtime arises, such overtime will first be
assigned to those men who are regularly assigned to perform those
functions for which overtime work is required. If men who normally
perform such functions or activities are unavailable for the overtime
work, it will be assigned on a municipality-wide seniority basis to those
who qualified to perform the necessary overtime work. [Amended
2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C]
12.5.8. Time-and-one-half pay shall be calculated on overtime hours on the
following basis:
1. Hourly employees at the rate in effect, plus 1/2.
2. Salaried employees at the rate of the yearly pay divided by 2,080
hours (52 weeks x 40), which will determine the regular hourly
rate, and 1/2 of this rate in addition will be considered time and
one-half.
12.6.1. The following increases shall apply to the longevity pay for all fulltime,
management, supervisory and other confidential employees:
[Amended 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 11-13-00D]
Years of Service
Longevity as a Percentage of Base
Salary
5-9 2.5%
10-14 3.5%
15-19 4.5%
20+ 5.0%
12.6.2. The employees entitled to longevity pay under the terms of this
ordinance shall continue to receive such longevity pay in one lump sum
payment the first pay of December each year.
12.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.7
1:146
12.7. Holidays.
12.7.1. All full-time employees shall be granted 12 legal holidays with full
pay for the year 1977. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C;
3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C]
12.7.2. Holidays observed for the year 1977 shall be as follows: [Amended
2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C; 3-14-1977 by Ord. No.
3-14-77C]
1. New Year's Day.
2. Washington's Birthday.
3. Good Friday.
4. Memorial Day.
5. Independence Day.
6. Labor Day.
7. Thanksgiving Day.
8. Day after Thanksgiving Day.
9. Veterans Day.
10. Christmas Day.
11. Personal Day.
12. Employee's birthday.
12.7.3. Any employee who is required to work on any of the above
enumerated holidays shall be paid double (two times) his regular pay
plus holiday pay. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C]
12.7.4. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be
observed as a holiday. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding
Friday shall be observed as a holiday.
12.7.5. The employee's birthday shall be observed on the birthday, with the
above ruling for holidays to apply if it falls on either Saturday or
Sunday.
12.7.6. All full-time personnel shall be entitled to the above legal holidays
except when it is necessary in order to meet operating requirements
and maintain service that certain such personnel be required to work.
12.7.7. No pay shall be granted in lieu of holidays.
12.7.8. Personal days will be scheduled by management upon at least two
weeks' notice of a request for a personal day by an employee. Where
possible, management will honor the request of the employee, provided
12.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.7
1:147
12.8. Vacations.
that not more than one employee in any department shall be off on
the same day. Where one or more employees have requested the same
day as a personal day, conflicts in preference will be resolved in order
of seniority. The municipality will reserve the right to approve or
disapprove the taking of personal days in light of efficient operation of
the municipality. [Added 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C]
12.7.9. To be eligible for holiday pay, the employee must have worked the
last scheduled workday prior to the holiday and the next scheduled
workday after the holiday within the employee's scheduled workweek,
unless the employee is absent because of a death in the family,
occupational injury, jury duty or other reasonable cause acceptable to
management.
12.8.1. All full-time employees shall be entitled to receive the following
vacations with pay: [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C;
3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 1-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1-9-78D;
11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80D]
Non-Bargaining-Unit Personnel
Years of Service of Number Weeks
After 1 2
After 5 3
After 10 4
After 15 5
After 20 6
12.8.2. A week's vacation shall consist of five working days, 40 hours' pay, at
the employee's straight-time hourly rate.
12.8.3. Employees shall select their vacation periods in December in the
order of their seniority during the approved vacation period posted by
the Municipality of Bethel Park. Employees shall be required to take
time off for their vacation. In the event extenuating circumstances
justify the municipality's requesting that an employee return to work
during his vacation period, approval must be received from the
employee. Such employee who so returns to work from his vacation
shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half his regular hourly rate of
pay for such vacation that he so works. Such employee shall be given
another vacation period as the municipality's schedule permits, or the
employee may elect to take his vacation pay in lieu of additional days
off.
12.8.4. Employees shall take vacations in minimum units of one week but
shall be encouraged to take their total vacation in consecutive weeks.
12.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.8
1:148
12.9. Sick leave.
12.8.5. If a holiday occurs during an employee's vacation period, such
employee shall get an additional day off with pay at a time mutually
agreeable to the municipality and the employee.
12.8.6. Layoffs or absence due to illness not exceeding 90 days shall not
limit or abridge the employee's right to full vacation with pay.
12.8.7. It is recognized that vacations are based on past service. Hence,
when an employee has completed a year of service in accordance with
his anniversary date of hire, he shall be deemed to have earned his
vacation and pay, even though he does not take vacation nor receive
vacation pay at that time. Further, if his employment is terminated prior
to a subsequent anniversary date of hire, he shall also receive vacation
pay prorated in accordance with the number of months he worked since
the last anniversary date of his employment to the date of termination.
However, if an employee quits his job without notice or is discharged for
just cause, he shall forfeit his termination vacation pay.
12.8.8. No employee shall be permitted to waive vacation for the purpose of
receiving double pay.
12.9.1. Sick leave with full pay shall be granted at the rate of 12 working
days per year or one working day for each calendar month of full-time
service or major fraction thereof.
12.9.2. Sick leave days may be accumulated up to 100 days by each
employee. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C]
12.9.3. Illness or injury requiring time off will be charged against the normal
accumulation of sick days. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No.
2-11-74C]
12.9.4. Nonoccupational major illness or injury. [Amended 2-11-1974 by
Ord. No. 2-11-74C; 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 11-25-1980
by Ord. No. 11-25-80D]
1. Nonoccupational major illness or injury requiring time off will be
covered by sickness and accident benefits equal to 66 2/3% of the
basic weekly wage not to exceed $300 per week for 26 weeks. Said
benefits shall be paid only after an employee has used up all
accumulated sick leave days and accrued vacation.
2. Nonoccupational major illness or injury that results in total
disability will be covered by sickness and accident benefits equal to
60% of the basic monthly wage not to exceed $2,500 per month;
provided, however, that more than 180 days have expired since the
accident or illness. All benefits shall be integrated in accordance
with the prevailing insurance contract.
12.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.9
1:149
12.10. Bereavement pay for deaths in family. [Amended 3-14-1977
by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80D]
12.11. Hospitalization and medical benefits.
3. The provisions of the insurance contract in effect at the time of the
major nonoccupational illness or injury shall prevail in determining
eligibility, disability, payment amounts, elimination periods and any
other factor governing the receipt of benefits under this
subsection.
12.9.5. All employees must report off sick at least one hour prior to their
starting time. Employees using earned sick leave shall be considered to
be using sick leave against the accumulative leave. [Amended
2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C]
12.9.6. All full-time employees shall be required to file competent written
evidence (doctor's certificate) after three days' leave that his absence
was for an authorized reason. If said employee is incapacitated for the
period of absence or major part thereof, he shall be required to provide
evidence (doctor's certificate) that he is again physically able to
perform his duties. Claiming sick leave or emergency leave benefits
except as permitted may be cause for disciplinary action, including
suspension, demotion or dismissal.
12.9.7. At retirement, death or termination of employment of an employee
due to permanent reduction of force or elimination of a department
function, the employee may request that he be reimbursed for each of
his unused accumulated sick leave days at the rate of 60% of the
employee's straight-time daily pay for each of his unused sick leave
days for employees with 24 or less years of service. [Amended
3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 4-10-78F;
11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80D]
12.9.8. On an annual basis, computer from December 1 through November
30 each year, the employer will pay to each employee 50% of the gross
daily wages in effect for each employee on November 30 of such year
for each accumulated sick leave day in excess of 100 days. Such
payment shall be made, whenever practicable, in the first pay of
December thereafter. [Added 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80D]
12.10.1. In cases of death in the immediate family, up to three working days,
i.e., days for which the employee was scheduled for work, with pay, if
necessary, will be granted to regular employees at straight-time rate.
"Immediate family" is defined as husband, wife, children, parents,
brother, sister, grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law, father-in-law,
brother-in-law and sister-in-law.
12.10.2. In the event of death of an employee's aunt, uncle, niece or nephew,
an employee will be granted one day off if necessary, with pay, for his/
her absence if such is the employee's regular scheduled workday.
12.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.11
1:150
12.11.1. The Municipality agrees to provide and pay for hospitalization and
medical insurance coverage for all full-time employees, while in the
employ of the Municipality, and their dependents. Said program shall be
the Comprehensive Blue/Cross Shield/Major Medical Program
(MedSave) or substantially equivalent program) or, at the employee's
sole option, one of the Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO)
options offered by the Municipality to employees in the bargaining unit,
excluding employees receiving buy out compensation under Section
12.11.5 of the Code. Said program shall also cover children up to 25
years of age while attending college, and mentally retarded children,
regardless of age. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C;
5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 5-10-93A]
12.11.2. Employees on approved sick and accident leave shall be covered by
the hospital and medical program for a period of one year. However, if
any employee is on leave of absence due to an injury received on the
job, he shall be covered by said hospitalization and medical program for
a period of two years.
12.11.3. Dental and eye-care program. The Municipality shall provide for
dental and eye benefits through the Blue Cross/Blue Shield High Option
Dental and Eye-Care Program for each employee and his family. Such
coverage is contingent upon acceptance of enrollment in the plan by the
insurer. [Added 3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; amended
11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80D; 2-7-1983 by Ord. No.
2-7-83A; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 4-10-89D]
12.11.4. The employer agrees to carry an employee on his group medical
plan from age 62 to 65 upon early retirement. The full cost of such
coverage shall be borne by the employee and shall be subject to
immediate cancellation if full payment is not received within 30 days of
the receipt of the invoice from the Municipality. The employee further
agrees to file and secure Medicare coverage when available and report
the receipt of the same to the Municipality. The employer agrees to
assist the employee in obtaining a Medicare supplement, if available
and desired, which shall be in the form of a private plan and carried at
the employee's expense. [Added 11-25-1980 by Ord. No.
11-25-80D]
12.11.5. Duplicate hospitalization/medical benefits. Any employee who has
duplicate hospitalization coverage under Section 12.11.1 above, upon
furnishing proof of duplicate coverage satisfactory to the Municipality,
shall receive the payment set forth below at the end of the calendar
year in lieu of the Municipality providing such coverage, (or a prorated
portion thereof for nonpayment of such benefits for less than a year) as
an incentive for the employee to cooperate in disclosure of duplication
and in consideration of the nonpayment of the full cost of each such
coverage to the carrier. [Added 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 5-10-93A]
12.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.11
1:151
12.12. Life insurance. [Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 2-11-74C;
3-14-1977 by Ord. No. 3-14-77C; 11-25-1980 by Ord. No.
11-125-80D; 2-7-1983 by Ord. No. 2-7-83A; 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87A]
12.13. Pension and retirement system.
12.14. Social security.
Coverage
12 months of
nonpayment in
calendar year
(Pro Rata Example)
4 months of
nonpayment in
calendar year
1. Individual $600 $200
2. Husband & Wife $1,500 $500
3. Parent & Child $1,500 $1,500
4. Parent &
Children
$1,500 $500
5. Family $1,800 $600
12.12.1. Life insurance. Life Insurance or death benefits shall be provided
and paid for by the Municipality as follows: [Amended 5-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 5-10-93A]
1. Life insurance during employment: $40,000.
2. Accidental death and dismemberment coverage during
employment: $80,000.
3. Upon retirement due to disability prior to age 65: life insurance in
the amount of $8,500 until age 65.
4. Upon retirement at age 65: a death benefit coverage in the amount
of $5,000.
5. Upon retirement at age 62: a death benefit coverage in the amount
of $3,500.
12.12.2. Said Life Insurance or death benefit shall be paid to the named
beneficiary(ies) of the employee or retiree upon presentation of a
certified copy of a death certificate.
12.13.1. Pursuant to the Municipality Pension and Retirement Plan
(Ordinance No. 2-8-65B) for all employees other than police personnel,
full-time employees, as defined in the plan, shall become members of
the retirement fund and shall pay or contribute towards the pension
and retirement fund an amount equal to 2% of their monthly salary and
wages. These amounts shall be in addition to social security payments
made by the employee.
12.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.14
1:152
12.15. Jury duty and reserve training adjustments.
12.16. Leaves of absence.
12.17. Leaves of absence for armed forces services.
12.18. Leaves of absence without pay.
12.19. Resignations.
12.14.1. The Municipality shall participate in the social security system.
12.15.1. Any employee who has been called to jury duty or called to serve for
two weeks in the active service of the various branches of the United
States Armed Forces shall be compensated in the amount which will be
necessary to equal the difference between the employee's regular pay
and the compensation received for jury duties or armed forces pay.
12.15.2. When an employee receives notice of such services, he shall notify
his supervisor immediately.
12.16.1. Where the good of the service is involved, a leave of absence
granted to any employee to attend a recognized official meeting shall be
considered as time on duty, except that no such leave shall be granted
unless a written request has been made to the Municipal Manager.
12.17.1. Any employee called into the active service of any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States shall be granted leave of absence for
the period of such service without loss of status provided that the
employee applies for reinstatement within 90 days after honorable
discharge. The application for reinstatement shall be addressed to the
Municipal Manager.
12.18.1. Any employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a
period not to exceed 60 days in any one calendar year for sickness,
disability or other good and sufficient reasons which are considered in
the best interests of the municipality. Leave without pay shall require
advance approval of the Municipal Manager; provided, however, that
the Municipal Manager shall not grant such leave for a period of more
than 10 consecutive days without the consent of Council.
12.19.1. Any employee wishing to leave the service of the Municipality in
good standing shall file with the Municipal Manager, at least 14 days
before leaving, a written resignation stating the effective date of
resignation and the reasons for leaving. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this section may be considered cause for denying such
employee future employment and for denying him such benefits as have
been made available. Unauthorized absence from work for a period of
three working days may be considered as a resignation without
benefits.
12.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.20
1:153
12.20. Insurance contracts; rules and regulations.
12.21. Residency requirements. [Amended 3-14-1988 by Ord. No.
3-14-88A; 9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 9-12-88; 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
6-12-17A26]
12.22. Retirement. [Amended 4-7-1974 by Ord. No. 4-8-74D]
12.23. Repealer.
12.20.1. The Municipal Manager shall have power to negotiate any or all
contracts for insurance and to prescribe, amend and enforce rules and
regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this ordinance, and
shall be governed thereby. Before any such rules and regulations are in
force, or before any contracts for insurance are made final, they shall
first be approved by Council. When such rules and regulations have
been so approved, they shall not be annulled, amended or added to
without the approval of Council.
12.21.1. Effective this date, anyone who is employed by the Municipality of
Bethel Park, with the exception of police officers, shall reside in the
Municipality or shall move into the Municipality within 12 months of
their date of employment and shall remain a resident of the
Municipality of Bethel Park so long as they are employed by the
Municipality.
1. However, the following employees are exempt:
a. Those employees who were not residents of the Municipality as
of March 8, 1971.
b. Any employee for whom Council waives the residency
requirement based on its determination that such waiver is in
the best interest of the Municipality of Bethel Park and its
residents in order to attract or retain highly qualified
personnel.
2. This section shall not authorize waiver of residency requirements
for Bethel Park Police Department employees covered by civil
service, or for employees represented for purposes of collective
bargaining by Teamsters Local 205, or for any employee who is
required to reside in the Municipality of Bethel Park pursuant to
the Home Rule Charter of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
12.22.1. All municipal employees, except members of the Police
Department, shall retire on the last day of the month in which they
reach their 65th birthday.
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it shall be effective retroactively to January 1,
2017, in 30 days from adoption.
12.20 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.23
1:154
12.23.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
12.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 12.23
1:155
Chapter 13
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
12.23 BETHEL PARK CODE 12.23
1:156
ARTICLE I
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 5-8-1727]
13.1. Establishment of Commission.
13.2. Jurisdiction of Commission.
13.3. Responsibilities.
13.1.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park constitutes and establishes a
municipal shade tree commission to be known as the "Municipality of
Bethel Park Shade Tree Commission," hereinafter referred to as "the
Commission."
13.2.1. The jurisdiction of the Commission shall be within the boundaries of
the Municipality. Within those boundaries, the Commission may, as part
of the Shade Tree Plan, recommend to Council appropriate boundaries
for various Shade Tree Districts.
13.3.1. The Commission will have advisory capacity over all public trees on
public property or in the public right-of-way.
13.3.2. The Commission shall study the problems and determine the needs
of the Municipality in connection with a tree planting, maintenance,
and removal program. It will also assess the need for regulations
pertaining to tree preservation, tree protection, and tree replacement
specifications and guidelines for new construction and renovation
projects.
13.3.3. The Commission shall have the authority to formulate a Shade Tree
Master Plan within the Shade Tree Districts. The Shade Tree Master
Plan shall include an inventory of existing public trees and shall provide
recommendations on the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, and removal or disposition of trees in parks, along streets
and on other public sites and shall specify the species of tree most
suitable to be planted in these areas. Upon completion of the plan, the
Commission will prepare and maintain a list containing the
recommended and preferred type and kind of trees to be planted within
public areas of the Shade Tree Districts.
13.3.4. The Commission shall create and maintain an inventory of all
existing public trees within the designated Shade Tree Districts. This
inventory should include information on the locations, species, size,
condition, and evaluation of existing public trees.
27.Editor’s Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Shade Tree Commission, adopted
5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 5-8-17.
13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 13.3
1:157
13.4. Membership in Commission.
13.3.5. The Commission may, at the request of the Municipal Council, assist
with the solicitation of grants and contributions. All funds obtained
shall be expended at the sole discretion of the Council.
13.3.6. The Commission may, at the request of the Municipal Council,
provide advice regarding land development plans or major capital
renovation projects (such as roadway construction or repair or pipe
installation or replacement, etc.) to determine the impact of such plans
on public trees. The Commission may then make recommendations to
the Municipality on the steps needed to mitigate any impacts. All
materials will be reviewed in a timely fashion to coordinate with the
Planning and Zoning Commission or Council meeting schedule.
13.3.7. The Commission shall, when requested by the Council, consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work. The
Commission shall study the problem and then recommend an
appropriate course of action in connection with the Shade Tree Master
Plan.
13.3.8. The Commission may, upon authorization by the Municipal Council,
retain the services of qualified professionals.
13.3.9. The Commission shall assist the Council, as well as municipal
employees and citizens, in the dissemination of news and information
regarding the selection, planting, and maintenance of trees within the
Shade Tree Districts. The Commission shall likewise make periodic
recommendations as to relevant legislation or funding programs
concerning issues relevant to the Commission.
13.3.10. The Commission shall work to develop a network of volunteers
within the Shade Tree Districts. The Commission shall also work in
conjunction with civic and public interest groups devoted to tree care,
tree preservation, and other environmental issues relevant to the scope
of work of the Commission.
13.3.11. The Commission may, upon authorization by the Municipal Council,
retain the services of a certified arborist to conduct a survey of existing
public trees to determine if any hazard to life or property exists or if
that tree is vulnerable to any prevalent injurious disease, insect, or
fungus.
13.4.1. The Commission shall consist of five voting members who will serve
without compensation. The voting members will be appointed by the
Council. The Council will endeavor to appoint members who have
experience and/or expertise in environmental and "shade tree" issues
and practices.
13.4.2. Council may appoint up to three additional alternate members who
have particular experience or expertise that is beneficial to the
13.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 13.4
1:158
13.5. Term of members.
Commission, including but not limited to arborists, landscape
architects, experts at utility pruning practices/issues, or experts in the
management of a shade tree program. [Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 10-8-18B]
13.4.3. All members of the Commission shall be residents or owners of
businesses that are located within the Municipality of Bethel Park.
13.5.1. The term of each voting member of the Commission will be five
years. To ensure continuity from year to year, the terms of initial
members will be staggered. Staggered terms will be created initially by
having the Municipality appoint one member for three years, another
two members for four years, and the last two members for five years.
On expiration of each term of that member, the Municipality will either
reappoint the member or appoint a successor, who will serve a full fiveyear
term.
13.5.2. Any vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the Council, and
the appointee will serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
13.5.3. There are no term limits, and voting members with expiring terms
may be reappointed to consecutive terms at the discretion of the
Council.
13.5.4. A member may remain on the Commission after expiration of his or
her term until a replacement has been duly appointed by the Council.
13.5.5. The terms of alternate members shall be three years. Any alternate
may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Commission but
shall not be entitled to vote as a member of the Commission unless
designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to Section 13.5.6 of
this article. If an alternate is designated to sit on the Commission by
reason of absence or disqualification of a member of the Commission,
as set forth in Section 13.5.6, the alternate as a voting member shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the
Commission to the same and full extent as provided for the Commission
members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a voting
member during proceedings. [Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord. No.
10-8-18B]
13.5.6. If a full complement of voting members is not available because of
absence or disqualification of a member, the Chairman of the
Commission shall designate alternate members of the Commission, if
available, as voting members to obtain a full complement of voting
members. There shall not be more than five members voting on any
specific item or matter. Any alternate member of the Commission shall
continue to serve on the Commission in all proceedings involving the
item or matter for which the alternate was initially appointed until the
Commission has made a final determination of the item or matter.
13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 13.5
1:159
13.6. Officers.
13.7. Meetings.
13.8. Reports.
Designation of an alternate shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to seniority among alternates. [Added 10-8-2018
by Ord. No. 10-8-18B]
13.5.7. The terms of the initial alternates will be staggered. The term of
office for alternate members shall be so fixed so that one alternate
member of the possible three alternate members shall expire each year.
[Added 10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 10-8-18B]
13.6.1. The Commission shall meet in January of each year and elect one
member to serve as Chairperson of the Commission. The Chairperson
shall have the authority to call and conduct meetings of the
Commission, receive all correspondence and other materials on behalf
of the Commission, and perform such duties as may be delegated to him
or her by the other Commission members.
13.6.2. The Secretary of the Commission shall also be elected by the
Commission at the January meeting. The Secretary shall keep the
minutes of the meetings and a permanent record of all business
conducted by the Commission. A written record shall be kept of all
meetings and made available to the Council for its reference.
13.7.1. The Commission will meet on a quarterly basis, or as needed, and
will publicize all meeting times and dates. The Chairperson of the
Commission shall have the right to cancel/postpone meetings or
schedule additional meetings, as necessary, to conduct the affairs of the
Commission.
13.7.2. All voting and alternate members of the Commission are expected to
regularly attend Commission meetings. [Amended 10-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 10-8-18B]
13.8.1. The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Municipality on an
annual basis a report of its activities and all Commission expenses and
transactions.
13.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 13.8
1:160
Chapter 14
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 13.8
1:161

ARTICLE I
Unmanned Aircraft
[Adopted 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 9-11-17]
14.1. Definitions.
14.1.1. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance invented, used, or designed to navigate
or fly in the air.
AIRPORT — The Allegheny County Airport.
AIRPORT AUTHORITY — The Allegheny County Airport Authority,
which is the operator of the airport.
ENFORCEMENT ACTION — Any action taken under this article for
alleged violations of the same.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
INCOMPATIBLE LAND USE — Use of land within the Municipality
limits that poses an undue hazard to manned aircraft departing or
arriving at the airport, and to persons or property on the ground.
MANNED AIRCRAFT — Any aircraft operated by the input of a person
who is onboard the aircraft.
OPERATE — To takeoff or land an unmanned aircraft or otherwise
manipulate the flight controls of an unmanned aircraft.
PERSON — An individual person or a company, or other duly organized
and authorized entity, but not including the Municipality, the State of
Pennsylvania, the United States, or an individual person acting in an
official capacity thereof.
RESTRICTED LAND — The land within the boundaries reflected on
the map appended to this article designated "restricted land" or which
has been later designated as "restricted land" via notice issued by the
Municipality or the Authority.28
SAFETY CRITICAL LAND — The land within the boundaries reflected
on the map appended to this article designated "safety critical land" or
which has been later designated as "safety critical land" via notice and
official action by the Municipality or the Authority.29
SMALL NONCOMMERCIAL UA — An unmanned aircraft which:
1. Is capable of sustained flight in the atmosphere;
28.Editor's Note: Said map and any additional designations are on file in the municipal
offices.
29.Editor's Note: Said map and any additional designations are on file in the municipal
offices.
14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 14.1
1:163
14.2. Operation within municipal limits restricted.
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT ("UA") — An aircraft operated without the
possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
Is flown within visual line of sight of the person operating the
aircraft;
2.
3. Is flown for hobby or recreational use; and
4. Weighs 55 pounds or less.
14.2.1. No person may operate a small noncommercial UA from a groundbased
location within municipal limits and that is situated within safety
critical land.
14.2.2. No person may operate a small noncommercial UA from a groundbased
location within the Municipality that is situated within restricted
land but is not situated within safety critical land unless:
1. The Airport Authority is provided with notice of the proposed
operation and the Airport Authority approves of such operation; or
2. The small noncommercial UA is being operated during a day and/or
time when operation is allowed as indicated by a notice issued by
the Municipality or the Authority.
14.2.3. No person may operate an unmanned aircraft within the
geographical limits of the Municipality in violation of:
1. An agreement between that person and the Municipality, the
Airport Authority, or the FAA; or
2. Any term, condition, directive, or applicable regulation imposed by
the FAA, including, but not limited to, 14 CFR Part 111, Subpart E;
14 CFR Part 107; or the terms of any waiver or special
authorization issued by the FAA.
14.2.4. No person may operate an unmanned aircraft that weighs in excess
of 55 pounds, including everything that is onboard or otherwise
attached to the unmanned aircraft, unless the unmanned aircraft is
marked and registered in accordance with 14 CFR Part 47 or 48.
14.2.5. Use over private property.
1. Except as provided in Subsections 2 and 3, an individual may not
operate an unmanned aircraft above private property between zero
feet and 400 feet in altitude from the ground.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection 1, an individual may operate an
unmanned aircraft between zero feet and 400 feet in altitude above
private property if they:
a. Are the owner of that private property; or
14.1 BETHEL PARK CODE 14.2
1:164
b. Have the express permission of the owner of that private
property.
3. Notwithstanding Subsection 1, an employee or contractor of the
Municipality may operate an unmanned aircraft without the
express permission of the owner of private property if either of the
following conditions are met:
a. The operation is in connection with the resolution of an
emergency situation as determined by the Municipal Manager,
the Chief of Police or their designees; or
b. The operation is by law enforcement personnel executing a
valid warrant.
14.2.6. Use on public property.
1. A person may not operate an unmanned aircraft on public property
unless the person has a permit issued by the Municipality for that
use. However, no permit shall be required for operation of an
unmanned aircraft within the following public parks maintained by
the Municipality:
Birch Tree Park
Brookeside Park
Elm Tree Park
Miners Memorial Park
Oak Tree Park
Peter J. Page Park
Shamrock Park
Simmons Park
2. The Municipality may, by resolution, add or remove other public
land or parks where operation of unmanned aircraft is permitted.
14.2.7. General prohibitions. An individual may not operate an unmanned
aircraft:
1. Which has a weapon attached to any portion of the unmanned
aircraft;
2. To harass or annoy another;
3. For the purpose of surveillance, when the target of surveillance
would have an expectation of privacy;
14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 14.2
1:165
14.3. Enforcement and penalties for violation.
14.4. Local police and regulatory powers.
4. In a reckless or careless manner that causes a real or reasonably
perceived threat to persons or property or actually causes damage
to persons or property;
5. Above 400 feet in altitude from the ground; or
6. Within 25 feet of a utility.
14.3.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park police shall have the authority to
enforce this article by issuance of citations.
14.3.2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
14.3.3. Each violation hereunder shall constitute a separate offense, subject
to the penalties provided in the preceding subsections.
14.3.4. After conferring with the Airport Authority, the Municipality of
Bethel Park police or the Airport Authority may:
1. Refer the matter to the FAA for investigation and enforcement
action under applicable laws and regulations;
2. Refer the matter to the United States Attorney's Office or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation for investigation and enforcement
under applicable laws and regulations; and/or
3. Refer the matter to the Allegheny County District Attorney for
prosecution under applicable state laws.
14.4.1. This Chapter 14 is intended to be a lawful exercise of the
Municipality's police and regulatory powers available to it under
applicable state and federal law. Nothing in this Chapter 14 is intended
to, nor does it actually, impede or conflict with any federal law, FAAissued
restrictions or powers of the FAA to bring any action to enforce
any applicable federal law or regulation or issue penalties or take any
other action that the FAA is authorized to take under federal law and
applicable regulations.
14.4.2. In the event that the FAA initiates an enforcement action against any
person who is also in violation of this Chapter 14, the Municipality shall
suspend any pending enforcement action for a period of not less than
60 days upon written request from the FAA. After the expiration of the
suspension of enforcement proceedings, the Municipality may proceed
with any appropriate actions, including issuance of penalties authorized
by this section. Such penalties shall be in addition to any action taken
by the FAA.
14.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 14.4
1:166
14.4.3. To the extent that any portion of this Chapter 14 is found to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions
shall remain in full force and effect.
14.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 14.4
1:167
Chapter 25
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
14.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 14.4
1:168
ARTICLE I
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-13-89A]
25.1. License Required.
25.2. Application.
25.3. Gambling devices not authorized.
25.1.1. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall, at any time, have in
his or its possession without having first procured and paid for a license
therefore, for each and every device as hereinafter provided, with the
Municipality of Bethel Park:
1. Any mechanical or, electrical or electronic device, machine or
apparatus whatsoever for the playing of games and amusements,
among which are those mechanical devices commonly known as
"pinball machines," or "video games," on which baseball, football,
bowling, shuffleboard and other games which are played through
the insertion therein of a coin, paper currency, metal disk or other
token; any mechanical device, machine or apparatus which, upon
insertion of a coin, paper currency, metal disk or other token,
provides, for the purpose of amusement and diversion, a ride,
among which devices are those known as "hobby horses," "rocket
ships" and other such like devices including every device having a
grasping or gripping, or a claw arrangement whereby the operator
of the device retrieves prizes or objects.
2. Any mechanical device, machine or apparatus whatsoever whereon
or whereby music is played through the insertion of a coin, paper
currency, metal disk or other token.
3. Game of chance which shall be any mechanical or electrical device,
machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of poker,
blackjack, keno, or other playing card or playing card simulation
game, or other casino-type games of chance, including, but not
limited to dice, roulette, slot machines, bingo or the like, through
the insertion of a coin, paper currency, metal disk, slug or any other
tokens whatsoever.
25.2.1. Any person or persons or firm or corporation desiring to procure a
license as provided above in this ordinance shall apply in writing to the
Manager of the Municipality. The form of the application shall be as
prescribed by the Manager.
25.3.1. Nothing in this ordinance shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism
which has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or is in
any way contrary to law.
25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 25.4
1:169
25.4. Fee for pinball machines, video games, rides and such.
25.5. Fee for musical devices.
25.6. Fee for games of chance.
25.7. Multiple devices in one cabinet or enclosure.
25.8. Issuance and display of licenses.
25.4.1. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this ordinance for
any mechanical device, machine or apparatus as defined in section
"License Required" of this ordinance until an annual fee therefore shall
have been paid for the use of the Municipality in the sum of $200, which
amount paid as aforesaid shall be a license fee until December 31 of the
year in which said license fee is paid; provided, however, that should
any such mechanical device, machine or apparatus be installed after
September 1 of any year and application for license therefore be made
after said date, then and in that event the license fee for such machine
or device until December 31 of that particular year shall be the sum of
$100.
25.5.1. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this ordinance for
any mechanical device, machine or apparatus, as defined in Section
"License Required" of this ordinance, until an annual fee therefore shall
have been paid for the use of the Municipality in the sum of $100, which
amount paid as aforesaid shall be a license fee until December 31 of the
year in which said license is paid.
25.6.1. No license shall be issued under the provision of this ordinance for
any mechanical or electrical game of chance as defined in Section
"Licensed Required" of this ordinance until an annual fee therefore
shall have been paid for the use of the Municipality in the sum of $300
which amount paid as aforesaid shall be a license fee until December 31
of the year in which the license is paid. Provided, however, that should
any such mechanical device, machine or apparatus for the playing of
games of chance be installed after September 1 of any year, and
applications for license therefore be made after said date, then and in
that event the license fee for such device, machine or apparatus until
December 31 of that particular year shall be the sum of $150.
25.7.1. When two or more devices regulated by this ordinance capable of
being independently operated are contained in a single cabinet or
enclosure, each device or machine within the cabinet or enclosure must
be separately licensed.
25.8.1. Upon payment of the license fee as provided by this ordinance, the
Manager of the Municipality shall issue a sticker which shall state the
type of devices and the numbers of devices that have been licensed.
Such sticker shall be prominently displayed in a location approved by
the Municipality.
25.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 25.9
1:170
25.9. Violations and penalties.
25.10. Authority.
25.11. License fees to continue in force without annual
reenactment.
25.12. Enforcement.
25.9.1. Any person or persons, firm or corporation having a device, as
defined herein, located on property under his or her control, which is
not in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed $300 for each
and every offense.
25.9.2. Each and every day that such device which is not in compliance with
the terms of this ordinance remains on the property or premises shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense hereunder, and shall be
subject to a separate and distinct penalty therefore. Any person who
defaces or allows to be defaced a sticker as described in this ordinance
shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined a sum not to
exceed $100.
25.9.3. Notwithstanding an applicant having paid a property license fee, it
shall be a violation punishable pursuant to this section for a property
owner, lessee or person having control of property to have a licensed
device on premises under his or her control without having a sticker
prominently displayed. It shall also be a violation to deface or allow to
be defaced such sticker.
25.10.1. This ordinance has been passed under the authority vested in the
Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park by Act. No. 511 of the 1965
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, effective
January 1, 1966, and its amendments, the terms and provisions of which
are hereby accepted and adopted in accordance with the provisions
thereof.
25.11.1. The license fees imposed herein shall continue in force on a
calendar-year basis following December 31, 1989, without annual
reenactment until such time as the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park shall change the license fees, or by appropriate ordinance, repeal
of such license fees.
25.12.1. The Manager of the Municipality of Bethel Park may prescribe the
form of an application, transfer application and license stickers, and my
establish such reasonable regulations as are necessary to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance or any other municipal ordinance with may
be affected by the use or operation of devices licensed under this
ordinance.
25.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 25.12
1:171
Chapter 26
BUILDING
25.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 25.12
1:172
ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 4-12-04A30]
26.1. Opting into enforcement.
The Municipality of Bethel Park hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
26.2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
26.3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Municipality of
Bethel Park shall be undertaken by the Building Code Official and the
Construction Code Official with the exception of the plumbing and electrical
codes. The International Plumbing Code and Plumbing Chapters 25 through
32 of the International Residential Code shall continue to be permitted
and inspected by the Plumbing Division of the Allegheny County Health
Department, and said International Electrical Code inspections shall be
performed by any state-certified third-party electrical inspection agency.
26.4. Offices and positions.
Articles IV and V of Chapter 8 (Offices and Positions) shall be amended to
"Building Code Official" and "Construction Code Official," respectively, in
accordance with Chapters 401 and 403 of said Act 45 of 1999.
26.5. Additions to standards.
26.5.1. As-built survey requirements. The Building Official may require that
a survey be made on the ground by a licensed surveyor of the building
or structure authorized by a building permit at any time during
construction as a condition to continue work. In the event that the
holder of a building permit is directed to secure and produce such
survey, and neglects or refuses to do so, such building permit shall be
revoked.
26.5.2. Certificate of compliance. All inspections for buildings containing
more than four stories in height or more than 20,000 square feet of
combined gross floor area shall be performed by a registered architect
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Building Code, adopted 7-9-1990
by Ord. No. 7-9-90B.
26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.5
1:173
or licensed engineer who shall certify on a form provided for that
purpose, that the building or addition is in accordance with all the
provisions of this code.
26.5.3. Site bond. A bond in the amount of $200 shall be deposited with each
building permit for a single-family dwelling to guarantee site
completion or repairs to any municipal facility damaged as a result of
construction activities.
26.5.4. Carbon monoxide detectors required. Carbon monoxide detectors
shall be installed properly and maintained to function as they were
intended by the manufacturer. All new dwelling units shall have at least
one carbon monoxide detector located near each sleeping area.
26.5.5. Footing requirements. The minimum dimensions of footings shall be
twice as wide and as deep in thickness as the wall it is supporting
above. All vertical sections in stepped footings shall be continuous with
the horizontal sections and shall be at least the same depth and
thickness as the horizontal sections. There shall be included in the
concrete footings two reinforcing steel bars of at least 1/2 inch in
diameter and running continuously throughout the footer sections both
horizontally and vertically. Where required reinforcing bars lap over
one another, the lap will be at least 30 bar diameters in length.
Reinforcing bars will be located two inches from the bottom of the
section and two inches from the side of the section. Footing shall extend
through garage door openings. Footings shall rest on undisturbed
virgin soil with an assumed bearing value of 2,000 pounds per square
foot. The Building Official may prescribe requirements greater than
those stated herein when unusual conditions exist.
26.5.6.Radon control methods. Appendix F of the International Residential
Code shall be adopted in its entirety.
26.5.7. Prohibition of portable or moveable devices used for cooking or food
preparation; general. The use of portable or moveable gas grills,
hibachis or other devices used for the cooking or heating of food which
use or are fueled by propane, butane or liquid natural gas or
combustible solids or combustible liquids is prohibited in the following
locations:
1. Within any building occupied or intended to be occupied by more
than two dwelling units.
2. On any balcony, roof or upon any patio or area located closer than
25 feet to any building listed above.
26.5.8. Floodplains. The Building Official shall require additional
information to be provided on the plans for any construction or
alteration located in a floodplain area in accordance with the
requirements in the Bethel Park Floodplain Management Ordinance.31
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Floodplain Management.
26.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.5
1:174
26.6. Insertions.
All requirements for construction in floodplains need to be met prior to
issuing a building permit. [Added 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14]
26.6.1. International Building Code:
1612.3 Municipality of Bethel Park
1612.3 October 4, 1995
3410.2 April 12, 2004
26.6.2. International Residential Code:
R101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
P301.2 Table on page 24 (IRC)
Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
Subject to Damage From
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
(mph)
Seismic
Design
CategoryWeathering
Frost
Line
Depth Termite Decay
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice Shield
Underlayment
Required
Flood
Hazards
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp
25 lb/
ft2
90 A Severe 36" Moderate
To heavy
Slight
to
Moderate
5-7 Yes 10-4-95 1000 50
P203.6.1 12, 36
P31-03.1 12, 12
26.6.3. International Existing Building Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
120.1.2 April 12, 2004
26.6.4. International Code Council Electrical Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
404.2 April 12, 2004
26.6.5. International Urban Wildland Interface Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
26.6.6. International Fuel Gas Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
106.5.2 In accordance with 26.11 of Municipal Ordinance 7-12-93A
106.5.3 50, 50
26.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.6
1:175
26.7. Remedies.
In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any provision
of this ordinance, the proper office of the Municipality, in addition to other
remedies, may institute in the name of the Municipality any appropriate
action on proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent
such unlawful work and to restrain or abate such violation.
26.8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates this ordinance
shall pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs. Each day that such
condition continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Further,
any person, partnership, firm or corporation who shall fail or neglect to
comply with written notice given by the Municipality shall be subject to an
108.4 See Section 26.8
108.5 300, 1,000
26.6.7. International Mechanical Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
106.5.2 Municipality of Bethel Park Municipal Ordinance 7-12-93A
106.5.3 50, 50
108.4 See Section 26.8
108.5 300, 1,000
26.6.8. International Energy Conservation Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
26.6.9. International Fire Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
109.3 See Section 26.8
111.4 300, 1,000
26.6.10. International Plumbing Code:
101.1 Municipality of Bethel Park
106.6.2 Municipality of Bethel Park, Municipal Ordinance 7-12-93A
106.6.3 50, 50
108.4 See Section 26.8
108.5 300, 1,000
305.6.1 12, 36
904.1 12
26.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.8
1:176
additional fine not to exceed $1,000, and each day such condition continues
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
26.9. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
26.10. Repealer.
Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance be, and the same is, hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
26.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.10
1:177

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)32
32.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Building Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, adopted
6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 6-11-84B, as amended, was repealed 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
4-12-04A. For current provisions, see Art. I, Uniform Construction Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.10
1:179

ARTICLE III
Building Permit Fees
[Adopted 1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 1-8-73C]
26.11. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 5-12-75A;
3-11-1991 by Ord. No. 3-11-91E; 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 12-11-95A;
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 5-12-03B; 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 4-12-04B;
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
26.11.1. Fees shall be charged for the issuance of permits for the
construction of buildings, residences or other structures within the
Municipality of Bethel Park wherein permits are required pursuant to
any ordinance, regulation or other official action of the Municipality:
1. The building permit fee shall be based upon the estimated market
value of the proposed structure, including the lot therein in cases of
new construction; and when the proposal involves reconstruction,
alterations or additions to an existing structure, the permit fee
shall be based on an increase in market value of the existing
structure which shall result from such reconstruction, alteration or
addition, as determined by the Municipality's Building Code
Official, and each applicant shall be bound by said determination.
2. After the estimated market value of the proposed structure is
determined, and lot where applicable in accordance with the
preceding subsection, the building fee shall be set in accordance
with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined by
Municipal Council.
a. When construction of a project for which a building permit is
required has begun and the required permit has not been
secured, the building permit fee shall be adjusted in
accordance with the language that follows:
[1] The fees required shall be, in addition to the fee as
determined and stated for the permit, two times that
stated therein when construction has begun without the
required building permit having been issued. In no case
shall such additional fees required by this subparagraph
be less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
b. The aforesaid building permit fee shall be paid to the Municipal
Office upon the filing of the application for a building permit by
any contractor or developer submitting an application for the
construction of a structure within the confines of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
3. Tapping fees.
a. No new physical tap-in or use involving increased flow into the
sanitary sewer system of the Municipality shall be permitted
26.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.11
1:181
26.12. Repealer.
until a tapping fee of $2,500 for each equivalent dwelling unit
or fraction of each equivalent dwelling unit shall have been
paid to the Municipality.
[1] Each single-family dwelling, or dwelling unit in a duplex,
or townhouse shall constitute a single equivalent dwelling
unit.
[2] The equivalent dwelling unit flow for units other than
single-family dwellings or duplexes or townhouses shall be
based on generally accepted standards in the industry
when approved by the Municipal Engineer, or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
b. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the
interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance:
[1] TAPPING FEE — A fee that is consistent and in compliance
with the Act, and is charged by the Municipality to supply
services to the property owner or owner(s) connection.
[2] EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — A flow into the sanitary
sewer system of 350 gallons per day.
[3] PROPERTY OWNER OR OWNER(S) — Includes, but is not
limited to, the following: any natural person, estate, trust,
partnership, association, public and quasi-public
corporation, private corporation, and profit or not-forprofit
corporation and/or institutions, schools, churches,
hospitals, clubs and societies.
4. When a reinspection is required because the applicant requested
an inspection but failed to be prepared for the inspection, a
reinspection fee shall be charged. A minimum charge of one hour
shall apply to any reinspection. The fee shall be set in accordance
with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined by
Municipal Council.
5. A fee shall be charged for any demolition permit. The fee shall be
set in accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as
determined by Municipal Council.
26.12.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.33
33.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Floodplain Districts, adopted 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81B,
as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 9-8-2014 by Ord. No.
9-8-14. For current provisions, see Ch. 72, Floodplain Management.
26.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.12
1:182
ARTICLE IV
Registration of Foreclosed Property
[Adopted 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2-12-1834]
26.13. Registration of foreclosed property.
26.13.1. Purpose and intent.
1. It is the purpose and intent of the Municipal Council to establish a
process to address the deterioration, crime and decline in value of
Municipality of Bethel Park neighborhoods caused by foreclosed
property located within the Municipality of Bethel Park, and to
identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these properties
located within the Municipality of Bethel Park. It is the Municipal
Council's further intent to establish a registration requirement as a
mechanism to protect neighborhoods from the negative impact and
conditions that occur as a result of vacancy, absentee ownership
and lack of adequate maintenance and security and to provide a
method to expeditiously identify contact persons for each property
responsible for this protection.
2. It is not the intent of this article to determine the rights and
liabilities of persons under agreements to which the Municipality of
Bethel Park is not a party. This article shall not be construed to
alter the terms of any lease or other agreement between a landlord
and a tenant or others relating to property that is the subject of this
article, provided that no provision of any lease or other agreement
shall be construed to excuse compliance with this article.
Additionally, a violation of this article shall not in and of itself
create a negligence per se standard or otherwise expand existing
liability in tort for either a landlord or a tenant.
26.13.2. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure
that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to
the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, the
Municipality of Bethel Park's Zoning Code, the Municipality of Bethel
Park's Property Rehabilitation and Maintenance Code, Neighborhood
Improvement Ordinance, Solid Waste Ordinance, Residential and
Commercial Recycling Ordinance, and the State and Municipality of
Bethel Park Building and Fire Codes.
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, Registration of Foreclosed
Property, adopted 10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 10-9-17A.
26.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.13
1:183
DEFAULT — The mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of
the debt referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, Building
Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector or
Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Municipality of
Bethel Park to enforce the applicable code(s).
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee, or other
lienholder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption
to obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as
security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. This
definition shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default,
a deed in lieu of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee or lienholder,
certificate of title and all other processes, activities and actions, by
whatever name, associated with the described process. The process is
not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lienholder,
or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a
nonrelated bona fide purchaser in an arm's-length transaction to satisfy
the debt or lien.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including, but not limited to, trustees;
mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any
agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest;
or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under
the mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who,
individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or
beneficial title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land,
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in the Municipality of Bethel Park limits. Developed lots are
considered improved land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY —
Any real property located in the Municipality of Bethel Park,
whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage
in default, that is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the
mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of a foreclosure action
by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgment has been entered, or
has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was
transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the
foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.
1.
The designation of a property as "registrable" shall remain in place
until such time as the property is sold to a nonrelated bona fide
2.
26.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.13
1:184
SEMIANNUAL REGISTRATION — Six months from the date of the first
action that requires registration, as determined by the Municipality of
Bethel Park, or its designee, and every subsequent six months. The date
of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first
action that required registration.
VACANT — Any parcel of land in the Municipality of Bethel Park that
is not legally occupied. Vacant property does not mean property that
is temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation,
personal matters or business, or is not intended by the owner to be left
vacant, so long as the period does not exceed 30 days.
purchaser in an arm's-length transaction or the foreclosure action
has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been
cured.
26.13.3. Applicability. These sections shall be considered cumulative and
not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but
rather be an additional remedy available to the Municipality of Bethel
Park above and beyond any other state or Municipality of Bethel Park
provisions for same.
26.13.4. Establishment of a registry. Pursuant to the provisions of Section
26.13, the Municipality of Bethel Park, or its designee, shall establish a
registry cataloging each registrable property within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, containing the information required by this article.
26.13.5. Real property registration.
1. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on registrable property
located within the Municipality of Bethel Park shall perform an
inspection of the property to determine vacancy or occupancy,
upon foreclosure. The Mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the
inspection, register the property with the Code Enforcement
Department, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed,
and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A
separate registration is required for each property, whether it is
found to be vacant or occupied.
2. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and email
address for the mortgagee/trustee, and the mortgage servicer,
and the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the
local property management company responsible for the security
and maintenance of the property who has the authority to make
decisions concerning the abatement of nuisance conditions at the
property, as well as any expenditure in connection therewith.
3. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this article have 30 calendar days from the effective date to
register the property with the Code Enforcement Department, or
its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate
26.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.13
1:185
whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration
is required for each property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
4. Any previous unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the
new mortgagee or trustee and are due and payable with their initial
registration; except if it is determined that the transferee is exempt
from paying fees, then the previous mortgagee will not be released
from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees and fines,
regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time when registration
was required, including but not limited to unregistered periods
during the foreclosure process. The provisions of this section are
cumulative with and in addition to other available remedies.
5. If the servicing rights for a mortgage on a registrable property are
sold or transferred, the registration must be updated to include all
the new servicer information within 10 days of the servicing
transfer.
6. Any previous unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the
new registrable property owner and are due and payable with their
initial registration; except if it is determined that the transferee is
exempt from paying fees, then the previous mortgagee will not be
released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees
and fines, regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time when
registration was required, including but not limited to unregistered
periods during the foreclosure process. The provisions of this
section are cumulative with and in addition to other available
remedies.
7. As long as the property is registrable, it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change
in the property's occupancy status, the mortgagee shall, within 10
days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the
property registration.
8. A nonrefundable semiannual registration fee of $300 shall
accompany each registration pursuant to this section.
9. If a lis pendens, deed in lieu of foreclosure, or other public notice of
foreclosure is filed on a property and the property was not
registered and the registration fee paid at least 30 days prior to the
filing date, a late fee shall be charged. The late fee shall be the
equivalent to 10% of the registration fee and shall be charged for
every thirty-day period, or portion thereof, the property is not
registered and shall be due and payable with the registration. This
section shall apply to the initial registration and thirty-day
delinquent registration renewals. Registrations delinquent greater
than 30 days are also subject to additional fines as described
herein.
10. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee,
trustee, servicer, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not
26.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.13
1:186
allowed without the consent of the Municipality of Bethel Park and/
or its authorized designee.
11. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the
semiannual registration requirement and the inspection, security
and maintenance standards of this section as long as they are
registrable.
12. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied,
or legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure,
the filing of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final
judgment and/or certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does
not exempt any mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage from all
the requirements of this article as long as the property remains
registrable.
13. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
14. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the
registration information within 10 days of the action requiring the
update to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this
article is a violation of the article and shall be subject to
enforcement and any resulting monetary penalties and/or property
liens.
15. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and
determination that any property is in violation of this article, the
Municipality of Bethel Park may take the necessary action to
ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property for the
cost of the work performed to benefit the property and bring it into
compliance.
16. Mortgagees, as defined by Section 26.13.2, shall maintain real
property subject to this article in accordance with the applicable
code(s) of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
26.13.6. Severability. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article.
26.13.7. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are and the same are hereby repealed.
26.13.8. Codification. It is the intention of the Municipal Council that the
provisions of this article shall become and be made a part of the
Municipality of Bethel Park Code of Ordinances; and that the sections of
this ordinance may be renumbered or relettered to accomplish such
intention, and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section,"
26.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.13
1:187
"article," or such other appropriate word or phrase in order to
accomplish such intentions.
26.13.9. Violations and penalties. Mortgagees who shall fail to comply with
the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a summary offense, and,
upon conviction thereof before the District Judge in the Municipality of
Bethel Park, shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense.
26.13.10. When effective. This article shall take affect according to local and
state requirements.
26.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 26.13
1:188
Chapter 27
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
26.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 26.13
1:189

ARTICLE I
Dangerous Buildings and Structures
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-8-60B]
27.1. Definition.
27.1.1. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following
defects shall be deemed "dangerous building":
1. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base.
2. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or
50% of damage or deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or
outside walls or covering.
3. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
4. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general
health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
5. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or
are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
6. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare
of human beings who live or may life therein.
7. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of communication.
8. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure members of the public or property.
9. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of this municipality.
10. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of this municipality or any provision of the Fire Prevention
Code or other ordinances of this municipality.
27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 27.2
1:191
27.2. Standards for repair, vacation or demolition.
27.3. Buildings as public nuisances.
27.4. Duties of Building Inspector.
27.2.1. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the
Building Inspector and Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park in
ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
1. If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this ordinance, it shall be
ordered repaired.
2. If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
3. If any case where a dangerous building is 50% damaged or decayed
or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be
demolished; and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this ordinance,
it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a
fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this
ordinance or any ordinance of the municipality or statute of the
State of Pennsylvania, it shall be demolished.
27.3.1. All dangerous buildings within the terms of 27.1 of this ordinance
are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired,
vacated or demolished as herein before and hereinafter provided.
27.4.1. The Building Inspector shall:
1. Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining
whether any conditions exist which render such places a dangerous
building within the terms of 27.1 of this ordinance.
2. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is
or may be existing in violation of this ordinance.
3. Inspect any building, wall, or structure reported (as hereinafter
provided for) by the Fire or Police Departments of this municipality
as probably existing in violation of the terms of this ordinance.
4. Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent
and all other persons having an interest in said building, as shown
by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County,
of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in 27.1 of this ordinance, that:
27.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 27.4
1:192
27.5. Duties of Council.
a. The owner must vacate or repair or demolish said building in
accordance with the terms of the notice and this ordinance.
b. The occupant or lessee must vacate said building, or may have
it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in
possession.
c. The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County may, at his own risk, repair, vacate
or demolish said building or have such work or act done;
provided, that any person notified under this subsection to
repair vacate or demolish any building shall be given such
reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary
to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice
provided for herein.
5. Report to the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park any
noncompliance with the notice provided for in 27.4 hereof.
6. Appear at all hearings conducted by Council and testify as to the
condition of dangerous buildings.
7. Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This
building has been found to be a dangerous building until it is
repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice
which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or
agent of this building and all other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County. It is unlawful to remove this notice until
such notice is complied with."
27.5.1. Duties of Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park. Council shall:
1. Upon receipt of a report of the Building Inspector as provided for in
27.4 hereof, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee,
lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said
building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of
Allegheny County to appear before it on the date specified in the
notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a
dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished
in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the
Building Inspector's notice provided for herein.
2. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the Building Inspector
or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person
having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of
the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County shall offer relative to
the dangerous building.
27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 27.5
1:193
27.6. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-10-70D]
3. Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant
to above as to whether or not the building in question is a
dangerous building within the terms of 27.1 hereof.
4. Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to 27.4
commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all
other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the
land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny County to
repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous
building within the terms of this ordinance, and provided that any
person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of
either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any person
not the owner of said dangerous building, but having an interest in
said building, as shown by the land records of the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County, may demolish said dangerous building
at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land
upon which said dangerous building stands by the municipality, as
provided in 27.4 hereof.
5. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the
order provided for in 27.4 hereof, within 10 days, Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park shall cause such building or structure
to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant
under the standards herein before provided for in this ordinance
and shall, with the assistance of the Municipal Solicitor, cause the
costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against
the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien or cause
such costs to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner,
provided that in cases where such procedure is desirable and any
delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of the people of this municipality, Council
shall notify the Municipal Solicitor to take legal action to force the
owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building.
6. Report to the Municipal Solicitor the names of all persons not
complying with the order provided for in 27.5 hereof.
27.6.1. The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with
any notice order to repair, vacate or demolish said building, given by
any person authorized by this ordinance to give such notice or order,
shall be guilty of a summary offense, and, upon conviction thereof
before the Mayor or Justice of the Peace in the Municipality of Bethel
Park, shall be fined not exceeding $100 for each offense, and a further
sum of $25 for each and every day such failure to comply continues
beyond the date fixed for compliance.
27.6.2. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair said building in accordance with
any notice given, ask provided for in this ordinance, shall be guilty of a
27.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 27.6
1:194
27.7. Duties of the Municipal Solicitor.
27.8. Emergency cases.
27.9. Where owner absent from Borough.
27.10. Administrative liability.
summary offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
exceeding $100 for each offense and a further sum of $25 for each and
every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance.
27.6.3. Any person removing the notice provided for in 27.4 hereof shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof before the
Mayor or a Justice of the Peace, shall be fined not exceeding $100 for
each offense.
27.7.1. The Municipal Solicitor shall:
1. Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices
provided for herein in 27.4, and the order provided for in 27.5.
2. Bring suit to collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs
incurred by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park in
repairing, or causing to be vacated or demolished, dangerous
buildings.
3. Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms
and provisions of this ordinance.
27.8.1. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger
to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building, as
defined herein, is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the
Building Inspector shall report such facts to the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park; and Council shall cause the immediate
repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of
such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous
building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in 27.5
hereof.
27.9.1. In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant,
lessee or mortgagee is absent from the municipality, all notices or
orders provided for herein shall be sent by registered mail to the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in
said building as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of
Allegheny County, to the last known address of each; and a copy of such
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building
to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
27.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 27.10
1:195
27.11. Severability.
27.10.1. No officer, agent or employee of the Municipality of Bethel Park
shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue
to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this ordinance. Any suit brought against
any officer, agent or employee of the Municipality of Bethel Park as a
result of any act required or permitted in this discharge of his duties
under this ordinance shall be defended by the Municipal Solicitor until
the final determination of the proceedings therein.
27.11.1. It is the intention of the Municipal Council that each separate
provision of this ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the Municipal
Council that if any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, all
other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
27.10 BETHEL PARK CODE 27.11
1:196
Chapter 28
DEFUNCT BUSINESS
27.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 27.11
1:197

ARTICLE I
Defunct Business Sales
[Adopted by Ord. No. 7-13-87A]
28.1. Adoption.
28.2. Forms.
28.3. Fees.
28.4. Bond.
28.5. Amendments.
28.6. Rules and regulations.
28.1.1. That the language and provisions of a certain document, three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Municipality of Bethel
Park, being an Act of the General Assembly of the Common-wealth of
Pennsylvania titled "An Act regulating and licensing all sales at retail
when such sales are advertised as "Closing-Out Sale", "Fire, Smoke or
Water Damage Sale" or "Defunct Business Sale with exceptions;
requiring filing of inventory and bond; and providing for appeals and
penalties. 53 P.S. 4471-1 et seq., 1963 July 31, P.L. 410, No. 217" are
hereby adopted as if fully set out in this ordinance.
28.2.1. Application forms for licenses shall be made available at the office of
the Building Inspector, 5100 West Library Avenue, Bethel Park,
Pennsylvania.
28.3.1. Applicants for licenses shall pay a fee of $50 upon the granting of a
license hereunder and a fee of $100 upon the renewal of any license
granted hereunder pursuant to the provisions of 53 P.S. 4471-1 et seq.
28.4.1. Applicants, before the granting of a license hereunder shall be
required to post a bond pursuant to the provisions of 53 P.S. 4471-1 et
seq., the amount of which shall be determined as follows:
1. Five percent of the first $100,000 of the retail value of all the
goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at such sale;
2. Two percent of the next $400,000; and
3. One percent of the balance.
28.5.1. The licensing fee and bond amounts set forth herein shall
automatically reflect any subsequent amendments to the fee and
bonding amounts as set forth in 53 P.S. 4471-1 et seq.
28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 28.6
1:199
28.7. Repealer.
28.6.1. The Municipal Manager may from time to time prescribe such rules
and regulations as he may deem necessary or expedient for the efficient
administration of this ordinance.
28.7.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
28.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 28.7
1:200
Chapter 29
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
28.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 28.7
1:201

ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-14-71C]
29.1. Repealer.
29.2. Drunkenness.
29.3. Vagrancy.
29.4. Disturbing the peace.
29.5. Offensive conduct.
29.6. Weapons.
29.1.1. Ordinances Nos. 4-1-50, 79-5-62 and 6-13-66E be and the same are
hereby repealed in their entirety.
29.2.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, while intoxicated, to
be upon any street, lane, alley, public highway or other public place, or
upon a public corridor in a shopping mall or complex within the limits of
the Municipality of Bethel Park, to the annoyance of any of the peaceful
inhabitants thereof.
29.3.1. It shall be unlawful for vagrants or any persons with no fixed place of
residence to go about from place to place within the limits of said
Municipality of Bethel Park, or to trespass on private or public property,
to the annoyance of any of the peaceful inhabitants thereof.
29.4.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully make any
loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or disturbance; to fight or publicly
threaten or challenge any other person or persons to fight; to throw
stones, rocks or other missiles; to cause an assemblage of persons upon
or near any street, lane, alley, park, highway or common corridor or
area in a shopping mall or complex, or to cause any disturbance or
breach of the peace to take place on public or private property to the
annoyance of any of the peaceful inhabitants thereof.
29.5.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to disturb, tend to
disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous,
offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person shall knowingly
permit such conduct to take place on public or private property.
29.6.1. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a properly constituted
peace officer, to display or make use of any knives, fire guns or firearms
or any other weapon on the streets, lanes, alleys, highways or common
corridor or area of a shopping mall or complex within the limits of the
Municipality of Bethel Park in a threatening manner or for the purpose
of intimidating or frightening any of the inhabitants of said municipality.
29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 29.7
1:203
29.7. Loitering.
29.8. Injury to plants and trees.
29.9. Mingling or carousing in parked vehicles.
29.10. Begging or soliciting alms.
29.11. Violations and penalties.
29.12. Disposition of fines and penalties.
29.13. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
29.7.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter or assemble
with others upon or along public streets, lanes, highways, sidewalks or
public places, or the common corridors or areas in a shopping mall or
complex within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel Park in such a
manner as to interfere with, impede or annoy the public.
29.8.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully or
maliciously deface, destroy or injure any tree, shrub, bush or vine on or
along any street, lane, alley, highway or common corridor or area in a
shopping mall or complex within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
29.9.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to mingle or carouse in
a parked automobile upon or near any street, lane, alley, park, highway
or common parking area of a shopping mall or complex within the limits
of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
29.10.1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to beg or solicit alms
upon or along the public streets, lanes, highways, sidewalks or public
places or the common corridors or areas in a shopping mall or complex
within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
29.11.1. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance, upon conviction thereof before a Justice of the Peace, shall
be sentenced to pay the costs of prosecution and a fine of not less than
$10, and not exceeding $100, and in default of the payment of the fine
and costs, persons so convicted shall be sentenced and committed to
the Allegheny County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
29.12.1. All fines and penalties imposed and collected under the provisions
of this ordinance shall be paid into the Municipal Treasury for the use of
said Borough within 30 days after the same are collected, and shall be
credited to the Municipality's General Fund.
29.13.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
29.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 29.13
1:204
Chapter 30
DOGS, CATS AND OTHER PETS
29.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 29.13
1:205

ARTICLE I
Dogs, Cats and Other Pets
[Adopted 5-8-1972 by Ord. No. 5-8-72B]
30.1. Registration of animals required; dogs exempt. [Amended
5-13-1974 by Ord. No. 5-13-74C; 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 7-11-77A;
7-20-1987 by Ord. No. 7-20-87A; 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 8-12-91B;
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
30.2. Issuance of tag; display on pet. [Amended 7-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 7-20-87A; 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
30.1.1. Licensing for cats.
1. Applicability. Within seven days of assuming ownership,
possession, care, custody or control of a cat or the date such cat
reaches the age of six months, it shall be the duty of the owner or
custodian of any cats now kept permanently caged and more than
six months old, which shall be kept and shall remain in the
Municipality of Bethel Park for a period exceeding 72 hours, to
apply for and to procure from the Municipal Secretary or to have in
his or her possession a currently valid license for every such cat
owned or kept.
2. License requirements and procedures. If made for a period of one
year, a municipal license application shall be accompanied by a
license fee payable to the Municipality of Bethel Park in the amount
of $2. If the application is for three years, it shall be accompanied
by a license fee payable to the Municipality of Bethel Park in the
amount of $5. Each application shall be accompanied by a
certificate signed by a duly licensed veterinarian in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which certificate shall certify that
the cat for which a license has been applied was vaccinated against
rabies and distemper, said vaccinations shall not expire or
terminate during the coming licensing period, and that the cat is
otherwise in good physical condition and free of communicable
diseases.
30.1.2. Licensing of dogs; municipal licenses not required. From the
effective date of this ordinance hence, owners or custodians of dogs
shall not be required to apply for and obtain municipal licenses for such
individual dogs, but each such owner or custodian of one or more dogs
shall still be required to obtain from the Treasurer's Office of Allegheny
County, a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania dog license required by the
Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. §§ 459-201 through 459-205.
30.2.1. Upon application having been duly made as required by the
Treasurer's Office of Allegheny County and upon issuance of a dog
identification tag, each owner or custodian shall cause to be displayed
on and affixed to the collar or harness of each dog owned, a
30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 30.2
1:207
30.3. Seizure of untagged animals. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 1-12-98B]
30.4. Special personnel authorized.
30.5. Kennel license required.
Pennsylvania dog license tag duly issued by the Treasurer's Office of
Allegheny County. Failure of such owner or custodian of a dog to affix
and display the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania dog tag on the collar
or harness of such dog or dogs shall submit the owner or custodian of
such dog or dogs to the penalties hereafter provided.
30.2.2. Upon application having been duly made in accordance with Section
30.1.1, Subsection 2, of this ordinance, accompanied by the proper
certificate and fee, the Municipal Secretary shall issue to the applicant
a metal tag, together with a written license for each cat to be licensed.
It shall be the duty of the owner or custodian of each cat to affix said
metal tag upon a collar or harness worn by the cat, and failure to do so
will subject the owner or custodian of said pet to the penalties hereafter
provided.
30.3.1. The duly constituted agents and police officers of the municipality
shall have the right and duty to examine the collar or harness of all pets,
including dogs, to determine if the owner or custodian of such pet, if
such pet is a dog, has complied with this ordinance and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or, if such pet is a cat, has complied
with the provisions of this ordinance. Any pet, including a dog, within
the Municipality of Bethel Park which, after the effective date of this
ordinance, shall be found not to be wearing or displaying a
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania metal dog tag, if such pet is a dog, or a
Municipality of Bethel Park metal pet tag, if such pet is a cat, shall be
seized by such agent or police officer and placed under restraint in the
custody of such person or persons as the Municipal Council may, in its
discretion, designate from time to time.
30.4.1. The Municipal Council may, from time to time, retain or hire a
special officer or officers and provide the same with the necessary
equipment for the purpose of seizing, restraining and confining any pet
found within the limits of the municipality and contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance, and the Municipal Council may enter into a
contract or contracts for the compensation of such special officer or
officers, providing for a proper compensation to the same upon either a
time basis or a unit basis, as said Council may decide.
30.5.1. Any person, firm, association or corporation which customarily has
in its custody four or more pets (except for cats where the number shall
be six or more) over the age of six months is hereby declared to be a
person, firm, association or corporation engaged in the business or
occupation of running a kennel and all such persons, firms, associations
30.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 30.5
1:208
30.6. Replacement of tags lost or stolen. [Amended 1-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
30.7. Impoundment procedure; notice to owner. [Amended
2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 2-11-85H; 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 10-10-05]
or corporations so engaged shall be required on or before the first
day of June of this year and on or before the 15th day of January
of each succeeding year hereafter to procure a kennel license. The
application for a kennel license shall be made in writing, shall set
forth the actual owner or owners of the kennel, the location of which
shall be on a tract of land five or more acres in area (under one
ownership), and shall contain a certificate of the fact that all pets over
the age of six months kept at said kennel have been vaccinated against
rabies and said vaccination will not expire or terminate during the
coming licensing period; and shall have attached to it the certificate of
a duly authorized veterinarian in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
that all pets over the age of six months kept at said kennel have, at a
certain date, been vaccinated against rabies and said vaccination will
not expire or terminate during the coming licensing period. The kennel
license fee shall be $25 per annum and the amount, payable to the
Municipality of Bethel Park, shall accompany each application for a
kennel license. All pets owned by or confined to any such kennel shall
not be permitted off the limits of the kennel property without being held
in leash and accompanied by a proper attendant Each pet shall have
affixed to its collar or harness the metal license tag provided in cases of
pets not confined to a kennel.
30.6.1. In the event that any pet license issued by the Municipality of Bethel
Park has been lost or stolen, the owner or custodian of such cat shall
obtain from the proper officer of the municipality a replacement tag for
a fee of $0.50, upon affidavit of the owner certifying such loss or theft.
30.6.2. In the event that a dog tag issued by the Treasurer's Office of
Allegheny County pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law is lost or
stolen, then the owner or custodian of said dog shall obtain a
replacement tag from the Allegheny County Treasurer's office as
required by 3 P.S. § 459-203 by producing the license certificate for the
lost tag and paying the appropriate fee.
30.7.1. All pets more than six months of age found running at large, whether
registered or unregistered, shall be seized by a municipal police officer
or other duly authorized animal control officer for such purpose on
sight. When such pet has been seized and impounded, the owner or
custodian of such pet, if known, shall be given immediate notice to
claim such within five days of notice. All domestic animals, i.e., dogs
and cats, will be scanned to determine ownership of said animal. If the
owner of such animal is unknown, said animal may be destroyed or sold
within a period of five days. Prior to being destroyed, all animals seized
by a municipal police officer or authorized animal control officer will be
30.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 30.7
1:209
30.8. Redemption. [Amended 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 10-10-05]
30.9. Animals running at large prohibited. [Amended 8-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 8-13-90C]
30.10. "Running at large" defined. [Amended 10-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 10-10-05]
30.11. Impoundment of animals running at large; redemption
procedure. [Amended 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 10-10-05]
offered to a no-kill shelter for adoption. Any municipal police officer
may kill any dog which is deemed, after due consideration by said police
officer given the fact situation as said police officer believes exists at
the time, to constitute a threat to public health and welfare.
30.8.1. The owner or custodian of any pet seized and impounded under the
provisions of this ordinance may, before the expiration of the five-day
period noted above, redeem such pet by paying all costs for feeding,
care, boarding and fines imposed against such owner or custodian for
violation of this ordinance. Information on securing a valid dog or cat
license will be provided to owners of unlicensed animals.
30.9.1. On and after the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person or persons who are the owners or custodians of any pet
to permit any pet owned by him, her or them or under his, her or their
supervision and control to run at large either in the day or at nighttime,
either upon the public streets and highways (including state and County
highways) of the Municipality of Bethel Park or upon the property of
persons other than the owner of such pets.
30.9.2. For the purpose of this provision, the terms "supervision and
control" shall, in addition to their common definitions, mean that the
owners, custodian or any member of his family or the servant or owner
of a pet shall supervise and control such pet in a manner so as to
prevent such pet from defecating on any public property. Such person
supervising or in control of the pet shall promptly remove any deposits
and dispose of such in a lawful manner.
30.10.1. For the purpose of this ordinance, the phrase "running at large"
shall be defined as running about loose on the street, or upon property
of persons other than the owners of such pets, unleashed, whether
accompanied or unaccompanied by the owner or custodian or by any
member of his family or by any servant or agent of the owner of such
pets.
30.11.1. In the event that a pet licensed pursuant to the terms of this
ordinance is found running at large within the Municipality of Bethel
Park, said pet may be seized on sight, either in the daytime or nighttime
by any municipal police officer or other duly authorized animal control
officer and impounded. In such event, the owner or custodian of said
30.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 30.11
1:210
30.12. Acquisition of personnel and material required for
impoundment authorized.
30.13. Disposition of unclaimed animals. [Amended 10-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 10-10-05]
30.14. Animals prohibited where food is sold. [Amended 7-20-1987
by Ord. No. 7-20-87A]
30.15. Penalties for owners of unlicensed animals or animals found
running at large. [Amended 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 2-11-85H]
30.16. Penalties for owners of premises where food is sold where an
animal is found. [Amended 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 2-11-85H]
pets, if known, shall be notified of such impoundment and shall be
given a period of five days to redeem said pet upon payment of all
costs assessed against the owner, including the cost of boarding the pet
during the period of the impoundment and on payment of the penalty
hereafter set forth for the violation of this ordinance.
30.12.1. The Council for the Municipality of Bethel Park may from time to
time provide for such places, means or methods and equipment as it
shall deem necessary for the purpose of keeping in custody any pet
seized under the provisions of this ordinance or, in its discretion, the
Council may provide such places, means or methods under the control
and management of any individual authorized for such purposes.
30.13.1. In the event that the owner or custodian of any pet seized and held
under the terms of this ordinance shall not redeem such pet within five
days, the municipal authorities, by their proper officer, shall have
authority to destroy or to offer said animal to a no-kill shelter. No pets
seized and impounded shall be sold for the profit of any individual.
30.14.1. It shall be unlawful from and after the effective date of this
ordinance for any pets, licensed or unlicensed, on leash or running
loose, to be permitted in that part of premises which is used as a store
for the sale of food for human consumption. This section is not to be
construed to pertain to animals used by the handicapped.
30.15.1. In the event that any person shall fail to obtain a license as
hereinabove provided or shall violate the provisions of Sections 30.9,
30.10, 30.11 and 30.21 of this ordinance, he shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, pay a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$100. Where any person has been convicted of the violation of Section
30.9 twice in a twelve-month period, for the third and subsequent
offenses the municipal police officer may issue a citation pursuant to
the Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-903, and upon conviction of a misdemeanor of
the third degree such person shall pay a fine of not more than $2,500.
30.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 30.16
1:211
30.17. Penalties for owners of animals found where food is sold.
[Amended 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 2-11-85H; 7-20-1987 by Ord. No.
7-20-87A]
30.18. Specific repealer.
30.19. General repealer.
30.20. Treatment of animals that bite persons. [Added 6-12-1972 by
Ord. No. 6-12-72B]
30.21. Species of pets not permitted. [Added 2-11-1985 by Ord. No.
2-11-85H]
30.16.1. The owner or person in control of any premises used for the
preparation or sale of food for human consumption in which any pet is
willfully permitted shall, upon conviction in summary proceeding, pay a
fine of not less than $25, nor more than $50. This section is not to be
construed to pertain to animals used by the handicapped.
30.17.1. The owner or custodian of any pet which is found on any premises
used for the preparation or sale of food for human consumption shall,
upon conviction in summary proceeding, pay a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $50. This section is not to be construed to pertain to
animals used by the handicapped.
30.18.1. This ordinance specifically repeals Ordinance No. 3-9-64A.
30.19.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
30.20.1. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or other animal
that bites any person, regardless of the circumstances or whether the
animal is vaccinated for rabies protection or not, not to confine said
animal, either within an enclosure at home, a veterinary hospital or
restrained by leash composed of a chain or other indestructible
material, for a period of not less than 10 days following the evening of
the day of the bite. Initially and at the end of the ten-day period it is
strongly recommended that the animal be examined by a veterinarian.
After quarantine date, the animal must be seen by the Animal Control
Officer to verify its health.
30.21.1. After the effective date of this ordinance it shall be unlawful to
keep, harbor or possess live members of the equine, bovine, ovine,
porcine, caprine species or gallinaceous fowl within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, except on a farm, which farm shall be a single tract of land
consisting of not fewer than five acres under one ownership.
30.16 BETHEL PARK CODE 30.22
1:212
30.22. When effective. [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
This ordinance shall be effective immediately.
30.23. Severability. [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
section, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall, for any reason, be held to
be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance,
but they shall stand notwithstanding such other invalid section, clause,
phrase or sentence.
30.24. General repealer. [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance is and the same shall be hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
30.25. Specific repealer. [Added 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98B]
This ordinance specifically repeals former Sections 30.1, 30.2, 30.3 and
30.6 insofar as those sections required owners or custodians of dogs to
apply for and obtain a municipal license for such dogs. This ordinance also
specifically repeals any reference in Chapter 30, Article I, to the licensing of
any pets other than cats. This ordinance only requires owners or custodians
of cats in the municipality to apply for and obtain a municipal license from
the Secretary. Owners and custodians of dogs are required to apply for and
obtain a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania dog tag from the Treasurer's Office
of Allegheny County.
30.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS 30.25
1:213
Chapter 31
DRIVEWAYS, BASEMENTS AND DRAINS
30.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 30.25
1:214
ARTICLE I
Driveways, Basements and Drains
[Adopted 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 3-9-98A35]
31.1. Permit required. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
11-12-12B]
31.2. Plans required.
31.3. Termination.
31.1.1. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall engage in
activities associated with the construction or paving (hard surface) of
driveways, the waterproofing of basements, the construction or
alteration of interior or exterior french drains/seepage drains, sump
pumps or similar subsurface drains utilized to convey uncontaminated
water, including, but not limited to, subsurface drains, shall secure a
permit for such activities from the Code Official before beginning work.
The cost of said permit shall be set in accordance with a schedule of
fees, charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal Council.
31.2.1. When required by the Code Official, plans shall be drawn to scale
and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the
work proposed and shall show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of all building codes and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations. Plans shall include a plot plan, prepared by a licensed
engineer or registered surveyor, drawn to scale, showing the location of
all easements, drainage facilities, adjacent grades, property lines and
the proposed driveway, drainage system and/or sump pump location,
including the point of termination. Where the proposed drainage
system will be connected to an existing drainage/downspout system,
the point of termination for the existing system shall be verified prior to
introducing any additional flow.
31.2.2. A copy of approved plans, when required by the Code Official, shall
be kept on the site of the building or work at the time of inspection.
31.3.1. All downspouts, roof drains, private storm sewer facilities and their
appurtenances shall be installed according to the municipality's
building codes and all relevant laws, ordinances, rule and regulations.
31.3.2. Sump pumps and/or drains utilized to convey uncontaminated water
which flows on a frequent basis shall discharge into one of the
following:
1. Storm sewer.
2. Storm sewer facility, such as a catch basin or storm manhole.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article I, Driveways, Basements and
Drains, adopted 9-8-1975 by Ord. No. 9-8-75D, as amended.
31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 31.3
1:215
31.4. Manner of performance of work.
31.5. Responsibility for compliance.
31.6. Violations and penalties.
31.7. Repealer.
3. Running streams or watercourses.
4. Sump (dry) which has been approved by the Code Official.
31.3.3. If none of the above facilities are available and a sump (dry) is
determined by the Code Official to be impractical, the Code Official will
specify the method of discharge. When the sump pump is to be
discharged into a municipal-owned facility, the work performed and the
connections made shall be as directed by agents of the municipality,
which agents shall supervise and inspect the work.
31.4.1. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall engage in
activities regulated by this ordinance shall perform such activities in
such a way as to prevent the illegal entry of storm, ground, drain,
surface or seepage water or any other uncontaminated water into the
sanitary sewer system resulting from the arrangement, construction,
modification or relocation of facilities involving the collection,
conduction, transfer, containment or discharge of storm, ground, drain,
surface or seepage water or any other uncontaminated water. All work
shall be completed in a professional manner and comply with all
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and typical
construction practices.
31.5.1. When activities regulated by this ordinance have been performed by
a paid contractor or artisan, the responsibility for compliance with the
terms of this ordinance shall rest with said paid contractor or artisan
for a period of one year from the completion of said activities, after
which time the responsibility shall rest with the homeowner or his heirs
and assigns. When the homeowner has performed activities regulated
by this ordinance, the responsibility for compliance with the terms of
this ordinance shall rest with the homeowner or his heirs and assigns.
31.6.1. Any contractor or artisan who engages in the activities set forth in
Section 31.1.1 of this ordinance and who violates any or all of the
sections of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment in
the County jail for not more than 10 days, provided that each day the
violation continues after proper notice shall be a separate offense.
31.7.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
31.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 31.7
1:216
Chapter 32
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
31.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 31.7
1:217

ARTICLE I
Drug Paraphernalia
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-10-80B]
32.1. Definitions; determination of objects as drug paraphernalia.
32.1.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
32.1.2.DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of 35 P.S. 780-101 to 780-144,
the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act. It includes
but is not limited to:
1. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
2. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
3. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
4. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
5. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana.
8. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 32.1
1:219
9. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
12. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
b. Water pipes.
c. Carburetion tubes and devices.
d. Smoking and carburetion masks.
e. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
g. Chamber pipes.
h. Carburetor pipes.
i. Electric pipes.
j. Chillums.
k. Bongs.
l. Ice pipes or chillers.
32.1.3. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
32.1 BETHEL PARK CODE 32.1
1:220
32.2. Enumeration of unlawful acts.
32.1.4. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of
35 P.S. 780-101 to 780-144.
32.1.5. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
32.1.6. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
32.1.7. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows
or should reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of 35 P.S. 780-101 to 780-144. The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 35 P.S. 780-101
to 780-144, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for
use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
32.1.8. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
32.1.9. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
1. National and local advertising concerning its use.
2. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
3. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
4. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise.
5. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
6. Expert testimony concerning its use.
32.2.1. Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of 35 P.S. 780-101 to 780-144.
32.2.2. Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with
intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 32.2
1:221
32.3. Forfeiture of paraphernalia.
32.4. Severability.
32.5. Repealer.
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of 35 P.S. 780-101 to 780-144.
32.2.3. Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part,
is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
32.3.1. All drug paraphernalia as defined by 32.1 of this ordinance shall be
subject to forfeiture to the municipality, and no property right shall
exist in them.
32.4.1. If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this ordinance are severable.
32.5.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
32.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 32.5
1:222
Chapter 33
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
32.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 32.5
1:223

ARTICLE I
Environmental Protection
[Adopted 7-14-1975 by Ord. No. 7-14-75B]
33.1. Litter and debris. [Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No.
12-14-81H; 10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 10-14-96C]
33.1.1. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall deposit, leave or
cause to be left or accumulated on any street, land, highway, alley,
vacant lot, stream, creek or any other public or private property within
the Municipality of Bethel Park, any garbage, rubbish, waste materials,
old building materials, litter and debris of any kind, junked, scrapped,
dilapidated or outworn construction equipment or machinery including
parts of same and fuel or lubrication equipment and other apparatus
associated with their use, flammable articles or stored junk vehicles
which shall be those without a current inspection sticker and are either
rusted, wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative
or in an abandoned condition, including parts of the same, all of which
are hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
environment of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
33.1.2. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall allow to
accumulate and/or remain on his own property the material and objects
listed above, whether or not such material and objects were
accumulated or deposited with the consent or knowledge of such a
person, partnership, firm or corporation.
33.1.3. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in 33.1.1 above,
damaged or wrecked vehicles with or without current inspection
stickers may be stored on the premises of property being used as an
auto repair facility, provided all of the following criteria set forth below
are met:
1. The vehicles are stored behind the front face of the building where
legal parking areas exist in the side or rear yards and that no more
than 10 vehicles are stored at one time.
2. The period of storage, notwithstanding any work order, for any one
vehicle does not exceed one month from the date of first storage,
provided further a break in storage of less than one week shall not
begin a new storage period.
3. The owner or occupier of the property can show by work order or
other proper documentation that each vehicle is scheduled for
repair within the time period set forth in two above.
4. The owner or occupier of the property has a current Certificate of
Use, Occupancy and Compliance, pursuant to the requirements of
Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 33.1
1:225
33.2. Obnoxious vegetation.
33.3. Stagnant water and siltation.
33.4. Infestations.
5. The vehicles do not harbor rodents, mosquitoes or other vermin
and do not present a hazard to public health or safety.
33.1.4. Storage of Junk Vehicles Exception: Junk vehicles as defined in
33.1.1 above may be stored in manufacturing and light industrial
districts (MLI) provided all of the following criteria set forth below are
met:
1. No vehicles shall be stored within 50 feet of residential zoned
property.
2. No vehicles shall be stored in required parking spaces as set forth
in Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance.
3. No vehicles shall be stacked on top of each other.
4. That the storage of said vehicles do not constitute a junkyard as per
Chapter 44 of Bethel Park Municipal Code.
5. The vehicles do not harbor rodents, mosquitoes or other vermin
and do not present a hazard to public health or safety.
6. The MLI property abuts a street that does not serve as an ingress
and egress to a residential zoned area.
33.2.1. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall permit the
following growths and vegetation which are hereby declared to be a
detriment to the environment of Bethel Park Municipality:
1. Grass in excess of eight inches. [Amended 11-8-1982 by Ord.
No. 11-8-82F]
2. Poison ivy, poison oak and other toxic vegetation.
3. Weeds and other obnoxious vegetation.
4. Dead, dying or diseased trees or parts thereof whose existence
poses a hazard to persons or property in their vicinity.
5. Trees, shrubs or other vegetation whose limbs or parts thereof
project into a public right-of-way, thereby interfering with the
normal use of said right-of-way.
33.3.1. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall permit the
accumulation of stagnant water nor allow siltation to be deposited on
any public or private property.
33.1 BETHEL PARK CODE 33.4
1:226
33.5. Obstruction of watercourses.
33.6. Notice to remove violations; failure to comply.
33.7. Violations and penalties.
33.4.1. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall permit property
under his ownership or control to become a harborage or infestation of
insects, rodents or vermin.
33.5.1. No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall do any act or
engage in any activity which shall restrict or impede the flow of any
stream, creek or other watercourse which has its source beyond the
limits of property under the ownership or control of such person,
partnership, firm or corporation. The building of walls or the dumping
of fill in such a manner as to restrict or impede the flow of any stream,
creek or other watercourse described herein are prohibited. The
building of bridges or other appurtenances that span streams, creeks or
other watercourses described herein shall be in accordance with a
permit regulating the design and location of same which has been
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, and further, no trees, shrubs or
other vegetation or parts of same shall be planted or allowed to exist in
such a manner as to restrict or impede the flow of such streams, creeks
or other watercourses described herein.
33.6.1. The Municipal Manager or his delegate is hereby authorized and
directed to give notice by personal service or by United States mail to
the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises where
violations of 33.1 through 33.5 exist, directing and requiring such
owner or occupant to remove or eliminate such violation within five
days after issuance of such notice. If any person, partnership, firm or
corporation shall neglect, fail, or refuse to comply with such notice
within the period stated therein, such person, partnership, firm or
corporation shall be subject to the penalties provided elsewhere in this
ordinance and, in addition, the municipal authorities may remove such
deposits, accumulations, harborages or infestations in violation of this
ordinance; and the costs thereof, together with any additional payment
authorized by law, may be collected by the municipality from such
person, partnership, firm or corporation in the manner provided by law.
33.7.1. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates 33.1
through 33.5 of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment of such fines and costs, to undergo
imprisonment in the County jail for not more than 10 days, provided
that each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice
to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense,
and provided further that any person, firm or corporation who shall
ignore or fail to comply with notice given pursuant to 33.6 of this
33.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 33.7
1:227
33.8. Certain rights-of-way to be considered private property.
[Added 11-8-1982 by Ord. No. 11-8-82F]
33.9. Smoking ban. [Added 11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 11-2-92A]
33.10. Repealer.
33.11. Severability.
33.12. Oil and gas wells. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99C]
ordinance shall be subject to an additional fine of $300, and each day's
continuance of the violation therein shall constitute a separate offense.
33.8.1. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term "private property" shall
include that portion of any public right-of-way to the property line
which is not improved with a cartway for public travel and which area
may contain or be improved in part by sidewalks, grass strips, street
trees or drainage ditches.
33.9.1. No person shall smoke within Bethel Park's Municipal Building.
33.10.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
33.11.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be
affected or impaired thereby. [Added 12-12-1983 by Ord. No.
12-12-83B]
33.12.1. All procedures and rules for the drilling, alteration, operation and
plugging of oil and gas wells shall be maintained in accordance with Act
of 1984, P.L. 1140, No. 223, and the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection; Chapter 78, Oil
and Gas Wells, whose agents are charged with the administration and
enforcement of said Act. In addition to the restriction stated above, the
following conditions set forth below must be met:
1. For all wells within 15 feet of a cartway, protective barriers must be
installed adjacent to the well to prevent damage from stray
vehicles. All barricades must be approved by the Code Official and
installed so as not to interfere with access to the wellhead for
maintenance and emergency purposes.
2. Landscaping is permitted to aesthetically enhance the appearance
of the wellhead; however, it must not interfere with access to the
wellhead for maintenance and emergency purposes.
33.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 33.12
1:228
Chapter 34
FEES
33.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 33.12
1:229

ARTICLE I
Municipal Lien and Property Tax Verification Letters
[Adopted 1-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1-13-86B]36
34.1. Definitions.
34.2. Enactment.
34.3. Document of Certification application.
34.1.1.PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, institution, agency, authority, partnership or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
34.1.2. MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER —
A written letter from the municipality concerning municipal liens and
property taxes.
34.1.3.DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — An official statement from the
Municipality stating that there are no illegal storm or surface water
connections into the sanitary sewer connections on the property to be
sold which violate Section 9 and 10 of Ordinance No. 11-13-56E.
34.1.4.TEMPORARY DOCUMENT OF CERTIFICATION — A temporary
statement of certification from the Municipality issued pursuant to the
terms of Section 34.4 of this ordinance.
34.1.5. ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The
discharge of basement seepage or ground water or the connection of
downspouts, roof drainage or surface or areaway drainage into the
sanitary sewer system.
34.2.1. After the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
person to sell property within the Municipality on which a building or
improvement exists without first delivering to the purchaser a
document of certification or a temporary document of certification from
the Municipality.
34.3.1. Any person selling property located within the Municipality
(hereinafter "applicant") shall make application on a form furnished by
the Municipality at least 21 days before the date of sale. The applicant
shall then have a plumber who is registered and licensed by the
Allegheny County Health Department perform a dye test on the
property to be sold. Such plumber shall complete the appropriate
portions on the form and certify that the property has been dye tested
and certify the results of such test. In the event that there are no illegal
storm or surface water connections, the Municipal Manager or his
designate shall issue a document of certification upon payment of a fee
36.Editor's Note: Former Article I, adopted 11-25-1980 by Ord. No. 11-25-80G, was repealed
1-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1-13-86B.
34.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.3
1:231
34.4. Temporary Document of Certification.
34.5. Municipal Lien and Tax Certification Letters.
of $25. When an illegal storm or surface water connection is discovered
by means of the above mentioned dye testing, no document of
certification will be issued until the illegal connections are removed
and certification of such removal by a registered licensed plumber is
received.
34.4.1. Applicant proves that dye testing cannot be performed because of
weather conditions. When such is the case, the applicant shall provide
the Municipality with security in the amount of $200 to guarantee that
the dye test will be performed. The applicant will cause to have
performed the dye test within 14 days of written notification from the
Municipality, which will be given at such time as weather conditions
make the day test possible. In addition, the applicant shall provide a
signed, written acknowledgment from the purchaser agreeing to
correct, at purchaser's sole expense, any violations that may be
discovered as a result of subsequent dye tests. Nothing in this
subsection shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring applicant to
reimburse purchase for any costs incurred provided, however, primary
liability shall run with the land and no such agreement shall affect the
Municipality's enforcement powers or excuse the current owner from
performance.
34.4.2. When an illegal storm or surface water connection is discovered and
the necessary remedial activities to correct such connection would
require a length of time such as to create a practical hardship for the
applicant, applicant may apply to the Municipal Manager for a
temporary document of certification, which may only be issued when
the applicant provides the Municipality with all of the following:
1. A bona fide, executed contract between the applicant and
registered licensed plumber to complete the necessary remedial
work with the Municipality listed therein as a third party
beneficiary;
2. Cash security in the amount of said contract is posted with the
Municipality; and
3. An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all cost
overruns related to the remedial work together with a license to
enter upon the property to complete work in case of default of
contractor as above. The Municipal Manager shall determine by
regulation when such temporary document of certification shall
expire. At which time the security shall be forfeited and the
Municipality may use the security to have the necessary remedial
work completed.
34.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.5
1:232
34.6. Regulations.
34.7. Adjustment of fees.
34.8. Conflict with general police powers.
34.5.1. A request for a municipal lien or tax certification letter must be
accompanied by a valid document of certification and the following fees
which shall be delivered at least seven days before such letters are to
be provided:37
Municipal Lien Letter $10
One Year Property Tax Verification Letter $4
Two Year Property Tax Verification Letter $7
Three Year Property Tax Verification Letter $10
Combined Municipal Lien and One Year Property Tax
Verification Letter
$14
Combined Municipal Lien and Two Year Property Tax
Verification Letter
$17
Combined Municipal Lien and Three Year Property Tax
Verification Letter
$20
34.5.2. Where requested by a property owner of his agent and subject to
time availability as determined solely by the Municipal Manager, the
Municipality may issue a municipal lien and tax certification letter on
two days' notice upon the payment of an expedition fee of $10 in
addition to the fees set forth above.
34.6.1. The Municipal Manager is hereby empowered to make reasonable
rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this
ordinance as he deems necessary which shall include but not be limited
to:
1. Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees.
2. Establishing the form of (i) application, (ii) purchaser
acknowledgments and (iii) plumber certifications;
3. Limiting the times of year in which a temporary document of
certification is available for reasons of weather.
34.6.2. All rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be in
writing.
34.7.1. Council may change from time to time the fees set forth in this
ordinance by resolution of Council.
37.Editor's Note: Fees indicated in the Code book were changed by Resolution No. 11-26-86A.
34.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.8
1:233
34.9. Penalties.
34.10. Severability.
34.11. Repealer.
34.12. Effective date.
34.8.1. Nothing in this ordinance shall limit in any fashion whatsoever the
Municipality's right to enforce its ordinances (by way of example and
not limitation Ordinance 11-13-56E) or the laws of the commonwealth.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be a defense to any citation issued by
any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any other
law or ordinance.
34.9.1. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
terms or provisions of this ordinance or of any regulation or
requirement pursuant thereto and authorized thereby shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of $300
and in default of payment thereof to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
34.10.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be
affected or impaired thereby.
34.11.1. Except as set forth in Section 34.8 hereof, any ordinance or part of
an ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance be and
the same is hereby repealed to the extent of said conflict. Ordinance
11-25-80G is expressly repealed hereby.
34.12.1. The effective date of this ordinance shall be April 30, 1986.
34.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.12
1:234
ARTICLE II
Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board
[Adopted 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 9-13-82A]
34.13. Fee for appeal. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 12-11-95A;
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.13.1. The fee for an appeal to the Building and Fire Codes Appeals Board
shall be set in accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses
as determined by Municipal Council.
34.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.13
1:235

ARTICLE III
Fire Code Inspections
[Adopted 10-11-1982 by Ord. No. 10-11-82D]
34.14. Inspection fees. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
12-11-95A; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.14.1. Initial inspection or investigation of a complaint: fee shall be set in
accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined
by Municipal Council.
34.14.2. If a follow up is required, a fee shall be charged per man hour for
each return visit. The fee shall be set in accordance with a schedule of
fees, charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal Council.
34.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.14
1:237

ARTICLE IV
Corrective Action Fee
[Adopted 7-16-19 84 by Ord. No. 7-16-84D]
34.15. Definitions.
34.16. Fees.
34.17. Penalty.
34.18. Court proceedings.
34.19. Severability.
34.15.1. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the
provisions of this ordinance:
1. CORRECTIVE ACTION FEE — A fee to be used exclusively for the
reconstruction, repair, replacement or rehabilitation of the public
sewer system within the Municipality in order to reduce or
eliminate excessive inflow and infiltration.
2. EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — A flow into the sanitary sewer
system of 350 gallons per day. Each single-family dwelling, or
dwelling unit in a duplex or townhouse building shall constitute an
equivalent dwelling unit. The equivalent dwelling unit flow for units
other than single-family dwellings and dwelling units in duplexes
and townhouses shall be based on generally accepted standards in
the industry when approved by the Municipal Engineer, or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
3. PERSON — An individual partnership, firm, association,
corporation, or other legal entity.
34.16.1. After the effective date of this ordinance, no new tap-in or use
involving increased flow into the sanitary sewer system of the
Municipality shall be permitted until a corrective action fee of $500 for
each equivalent dwelling unit or fraction of each equivalent dwelling
unit shall have been paid to the Municipality. The fees required herein
shall be in addition to the sewer tap-in fee now, or in the future,
required for such tap-in. [Amended 3-19-1990 by Ord. No.
3-19-90A]
34.17.1. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be fined
not more than $300 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
34.18.1. The Council may, in its sole discretion, and in the name of the
Municipality, institute proceedings in courts of equity to restrain the
continued violation of this ordinance.
34.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.19
1:239
34.20. Repealer.
34.19.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be
affected or impaired thereby.
34.20.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be, and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
34.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.20
1:240
ARTICLE V
Emergency Medical Services Fees
[Adopted 11-26-1986 by Ord. No. 11-26-86C38]
34.21. Definitions.
34.22. Subscriber fees.
34.21.1. The following terms, when used in this ordinance, shall, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise, mean or indicate as follows:
34.21.2. APPROVED EMERGENCY FACILITY — Either St. Clair Memorial
Hospital or Jefferson Medical Center; provided, however, that the
Emergency Medical Services Director or his/her designate may, from
time to time, designate a medical facility other than those named herein
when, in his/her professional opinion, the above-named facilities are
unable to handle the particular medical emergency.
34.21.3.ANNUAL PERIOD — The current calendar year which the
subscription fee as paid; that being January 1 to December 31 inclusive.
34.21.4. RESIDENT — A resident of the Municipality of Bethel Park,
Pennsylvania.
34.21.5. SUBSCRIBER — Any resident who has paid the prescribed fee and
authorized his/her party billing in accordance with Sections 34.22 and
34.23 of this ordinance.
34.21.6. INSURANCE CARRIER — Blue Cross/Blue Shield, major medical or
any other medical insurance provider or underwriter, by whatever
name known, that provides reimbursement or direct payment for
medical related costs incurred by a particular person or agency.
34.21.7. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park, Allegheny
County, Pennsylvania.
34.22.1. All residents are eligible to become system subscribers subject to
conditions hereinafter expressed:
1. Subscription.
a. That any resident, upon payment of $60 and authorization for
third-party billing, as described hereafter, shall be provided
with unlimited emergency care and transport to an approved
emergency facility without direct charge for him or any other
person transported from his permanent residence address,
provided that the prescribed fee and authorization is paid and
given in advance of the transport or medical treatment.
[Amended 11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 11-30-92C;
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded Ord. Nos. 11-25-80F, 11-24-81F, 12-14-81J,
12-1-82D, 11-28-83C, 11-28-84G, 11-25-85E and their amendments.
34.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.22
1:241
34.23. Nonsubscriber fees.
34.24. Transport and associated fees. [Amended 11-30-1987 by Ord.
No. 11-30-87E; 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 11-12-91C; 11-30-1992 by
Ord. No. 11-30-92C; 11-29-1993 by Ord. No. 11-29-93C; 10-3-1994
by Ord. No. 10-3-94A; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No. 11-30-94C;
11-29-1995 by Ord. No. 11-29-95A; 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
11-24-97A; 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98B; 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
11-22-99A; 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 6-12-00A; 11-12-2001 by Ord. No.
11-12-01B; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 5-13-19]
11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 11-13-06D]
2. Third party billing, system subscriber.
a. That, upon authorization of the subscriber, the Municipality
shall bill said subscriber's insurance carrier or Medicare for
emergency medical care or transport on each occasion as
rendered by the Tri-Community South Emergency Medical
Service in the amounts described hereafter.
b. That the Municipality shall accept said payment from such
insurance carrier or Medicare as full and final settlement for
the transport fee on behalf of the subscriber, regardless of the
amount paid or not paid by the insurance carrier or Medicare.
3. Effective period of subscription.
a. Subscriptions described in Subsection 1 above shall be valid
for the annual period for which the subscription fee was paid.
Subscriptions paid after the beginning of the annual period
shall be valid beginning on the first day that full payment is
received in the Municipal Office until the end of the annual
period for which the subscription fee was paid. When
extenuating circumstances exist, the Municipal Manager may,
with the approval of the Council, extend the deadline for
receipt of subscription fees by residents for coverage during
the annual period.
34.23.1. Any person who is not a system subscriber as described heretofore
shall be responsible for full direct payment of all fees assessed by Tri-
Community South Emergency Medical System for emergency care
rendered or emergency transport.
34.24.1. The following fees shall be in effect for medical care rendered or
emergency transports made by the Tri-Community South Emergency
Medical Service:
1. Emergency basic life support transport.
34.22 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.24
1:242
34.25. (Reserved)39
34.26. Repealer.
a. Any person transported to an approved medical facility via a
basic life support unit shall be subject to a charge of $900 per
transport in addition to any applicable medical care fees
described hereafter.
2. Emergency advanced life support I transport.
a. Any person transported to an approved medical facility via an
advanced life support I (ALS-I) unit shall be subject to a charge
of $1,113 per transport in addition to any applicable medical
care fees described hereafter.
3. Emergency advanced life support II transport.
a. Any person transported to an approved medical facility via an
advanced life support II (ALS-II) unit shall be subject to a
charge of $1,406 per transport in addition to any applicable
medical care fees described hereafter.
4. Treatment at a scene with no transport.
a. Advanced life support. Any person administered advanced life
support at a scene and it is deemed not necessary to transport
or the person refuses transport shall be subject to a charge of
$250.
b. Basic life support. Any person administered basic life support
at a scene and it is deemed not necessary to transport or the
person refuses transport shall be subject to a charge of $200.
34.26.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
39.Editor's Note: Former Section 34.25, First aid treatment, as amended, was repealed
12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 12-02-02.
34.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.26
1:243

ARTICLE VI
Emergency and Nonemergency Transport Fees
[Adopted 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 8-12-85F]
34.27. Initiation of service.
34.28. User fees. [Amended 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. 11-12-91C;
11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 11-30-92C; 11-29-1993 by Ord. No.
11-29-93C; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No. 11-30-94C; 11-29-1995 by Ord.
No. 11-29-95A; 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 11-24-97A; 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 11-9-98B; 11-22-1999 by Ord. No. 11-22-99A; 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 6-12-00A; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 11-13-00B; 11-12-2001
by Ord. No. 11-12-01B; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 11-14-05D;
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 5-13-19]
34.29. Third-party billing; subscriber. [Amended 11-12-1991 by
Ord. No. 11-12-91C; 11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 11-30-92C; 11-29-1993
by Ord. No. 11-29-93C; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No. 11-30-94C;
11-29-1995 by Ord. No. 11-29-95A; 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
11-24-97A; 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98B; 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
11-22-99A; 6-12-2000 by Ord. No. 6-12-00A; 11-13-2000 by Ord. No.
11-13-00B; 11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 11-12-01B; 11-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 5-13-19]
34.27.1. The proper officials of the Municipality of Bethel Park are hereby
authorized to institute and operate a nonemergency transport service
in conjunction with the Tri-Community South Emergency Medical
System and to expend such funds as are deemed necessary for its
initiation and continued operation.
34.28.1. The following fees shall be assessed to all users of the
nonemergency transport system:
1. Nonemergency basic life support destination (each way): $900.
2. Nonemergency mileage fee for each loaded mile greater than zero:
$12.89 per mile.
3. Nonemergency advanced life support destination (each way):
$1,113.
34.29.1. Any subscriber to the Tri-Community South Emergency Medical
System, as defined in Ordinance No. 11-25-80F and its amendments,
shall be eligible for the third-party billing arrangement as follows.
1. The following fees shall be assessed to all users of the emergency
and nonemergency transport system:
34.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.29
1:245
34.30. Effective date.
34.31. Severability.
a. Upon the authorization of the subscriber, the Municipality shall
bill said subscriber's insurance carrier or Medicare in the
amount of $900 for each and every emergency and
nonemergency basic life support (BLS) transport as provided
in Section 34-28 above.
b. Upon the authorization of the subscriber, the Municipality shall
bill said subscriber's insurance carrier or Medicare in the
amount of $1,113 for each and every emergency and
nonemergency Advanced Life Support (ALS) transport as
provided in Section 34-28 above.
c. The subscriber is responsible for 50% of their co-pays and
deductibles. All lift assists, including those for subscribers, are
charged a fee of $200. The Municipality shall accept said
payment from such insurance carrier or medicare as full and
final settlement for the transport fee on behalf of the
subscriber, regardless of the amount paid.
34.30.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall not take effect unless and
until such time as the other participants in the Tri-Community South
Emergency Medical System, i.e., the Townships of Upper St. Clair and
South Park, adopt or enact such provisions by official municipal action.
34.31.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable; and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional, the remaining portion of this ordinance or Ordinance
No. 11-25-80F and its amendments, shall not be affected or impaired
hereby.
34.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.31
1:246
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Fees
[Adopted 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 9-14-92A]
34.32. Administrative fee for returned checks. [Amended
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.33. Public hearing fee. [Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
11-12-95A; amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.34. Research fee. [Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 11-12-95A;
amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.35. Written certificate of zoning. [Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
11-12-95A; amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.35A. Establishment of the schedule of fees, charges and
expenses. [Added 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.32.1. An administrative fee is hereby imposed for any payment of taxes,
fees, or other charges levied by the Municipality which is returned by
the Municipality's collection agent or depository for nonsufficient
funds, account closed, invalid signature or any other reason. The
Finance Officer, at his discretion, may waive this fee where the bank is
found to be in error for returning the check. The fees shall be set in
accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined
by Municipal Council.
34.33.1. Any application requiring a special public hearing shall be charged
a fee to cover the costs of said hearing. This fee shall be in addition to
any other applicable application fee. The fees shall be set in accordance
with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined by
Municipal Council.
34.34.1. A fee shall be charged for researching a request for special
information. Requests requiring less than 15 minutes of research time
are exempt from this fee. This fee is in addition to any cost associated
with reproduction costs of materials. The fees shall be set in
accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined
by Municipal Council.
34.35.1. A fee shall be charged for any requested written certificate of
zoning. The fee shall be set in accordance with a schedule of fees,
charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal Council.
34.35A.1. The Municipal Council shall determine by resolution a schedule of
fees, charges and expenses for permits, applications, amendments and
other matters pertaining to the Municipal Code identified or designated
activities under the jurisdiction of the Municipality. Said schedule of
fees shall be available in the offices of the Manager.
34.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.35A
1:247
34.35B. Establishment of the recreational facilities and services
fee. [Added 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
34.36. Procedures and fees for use of Bethel Park Community
Center. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99A]
34.35A.2. Municipal Council shall be empowered to reevaluate the fee
schedule from time to time to make necessary alterations to it. Such
alterations shall not be considered an amendment to the Official Code
of the Municipality of Bethel Park and may be adopted at any public
meeting by resolution.
34.35B.1. The Municipal Council may charge a recreational service fee for
the use of municipal recreational fields, facilities, and services to
groups and organizations which may be utilizing the recreational fields,
facilities and services of the Recreational Department. The Municipal
Council shall determine by resolution the recreational service fee. Said
schedule of fees shall be available in the offices of the Manager.
Municipal Council shall be empowered to reevaluate the fee schedule
from time to time to make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations
shall not be considered an amendment to the Official Code of the
Municipality of Bethel Park and may be adopted at any public meeting
by resolution.
34.36.1. Application procedure. A completed application, on the approved
facility request form, including municipal approval and deposit fee paid,
must be completed at least four weeks in advance of the date
requested.
1. A completed application form does not constitute approval for use
of the Community Center.
2. A completed application form must have all authorized municipal
signatures, applicant signatures and any required fees paid at the
time the approved reservation form is provided to the applicant, so
as to constitute approval of use of the Community Center.
3. A completed, approved and signed application shall be evidence of
the applicant's acceptance of responsibility for damages done
during the approved period of use.
34.36.2. Priority for use of Center. Priority for use of the Community Center
will be given in the following order: [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 11-14-05B; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
1. Municipal and community functions, such as Council Meetings,
community events or activities; Recreation Department activities
and programs; Municipal Board or Commission meetings or
programs.
2. Nonprofit Bethel Park community groups or organizations that
provide activities or programs exclusively to Bethel Park residents.
34.35A BETHEL PARK CODE 34.36
1:248
3. Nonprofit community groups or organizations with an office for
operations within the Municipality of Bethel Park that provide
activities or programs not exclusively to Bethel Park residents.
4. Residents of Bethel Park.
5. Nonresident owner of a business located in the Municipality of
Bethel Park.
6. Non-Bethel-Park resident, business, or organization not located in
Bethel Park.
The Municipal Council shall determine by resolution a schedule
of fees, charges and expenses for the rates for use of the Center.
It shall all establish any discounts or surcharges based upon the
priority for use of the Center. Said schedule of fees shall be
available in the offices of the Manager. Municipal Council shall be
empowered to reevaluate the fee schedule from time to time to
make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations may be adopted
at any public meeting by resolution.
34.36.3. Certificates of insurance. All nonprofit groups or organizations not
affiliated with the Municipality of Bethel Park must provide a certificate
of liability insurance.
1. The minimum insurance shall be $100,000 per person with an
aggregate of $300,000.
2. Property damage shall not be less than $25,000 per incident.
3. The certificate of insurance shall be issued by an insurance carrier
or underwriter that is approved by the Pennsylvania Commissioner
of Insurance.
4. The certificate of insurance shall name the Municipality of Bethel
Park as an additional insured.
34.36.4. Responsibility of applicant. It shall be the responsibility of the
approved applicant to abide by the following rules and regulations:
1. Use of the Community Center for an approved event shall be
restricted to the areas identified on the approved application.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for the supervision of all
individuals that are provided access to the area(s) specified on the
permit.
3. The municipality shall reserve the right to require police
supervision at the expense of the applicant.
4. Alcoholic beverages are only permitted in the Community Center
with prior approval on an approved alcohol waiver form with
proper signatures affixed.
34.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.36
1:249
5. Smoking is not permitted in the Community Center and shall be
restricted to specific areas posted on the premises.
6. The facility shall be given a general cleanup as a requirement of
rental. All other normal cleanup will be included in and shall be
considered as a part of the rental fees and charges. [Amended
6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 6-11-01B]
7. Any damages to the facility will be the responsibility of the
individual so identified on the approved rental permit.
8. At no time shall any individual not yet 12 years of age be permitted
in the Community Center without a parent or custodian 18 years of
age or older accompanying such individual.
34.36.5. Setting fees and charges. The Municipal Council shall determine a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses for the rates for use of Areas A,
B, and C of the multipurpose room of the Community Center. Said
schedule of fees shall be available in the offices of the Manager.
Municipal Council shall be empowered to reevaluate the fee schedule
from time to time to make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations
may be adopted at any public meeting by resolution. [Amended
6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 6-11-01B; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
11-14-05B; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 12-08-08A; 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 11-8-10B; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
1. The room rental may be done (but not limited to) in the following
manner:
a. Areas A, B, and C of the multipurpose room.
b. Area B only of the multipurpose room.
c. Area A or C only of the multipurpose room.
d. Overtime surcharge. An additional charge, which may be made
on a per-hour basis for any part of an hour, shall be required for
use of any area after the established scheduled close of the
Community Center.
2. Gymnasium and walking track: setting fees and charges.
a. The Municipal Council shall determine a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and membership rates for use of the
gymnasium and the walking track located within the
Community Center. Said schedule of fees shall be available in
the offices of the Manager. Municipal Council shall be
empowered to reevaluate the fee schedule from time to time to
make necessary alterations to it. Such alterations may be
adopted at any public meeting by resolution.
b. The fee may be charged (but not limited to) in the following
categories:
34.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.36
1:250
[1] Annual memberships are for 12 months from the date of
purchase. Guest passes are for one calendar day.
[2] Daily memberships are for one calendar day.
[3] Membership categories:
[a] Youth: ages 13 through 17.
[b] Adult: ages 18 through 59.
[c] Senior: age 60 and older.
[d] Family: all members of the immediate family
permanently residing within the same residence.
[4] The membership may be classified by a resident and
nonresident rate.
[5] Memberships, both family and individual memberships,
may also include guest passes.
34.36.6. Maximum one-day permit. The maximum permitted use of the
center shall be set at nine hours' maximum use for any calendar day.
34.36.7. Procedure for payment of deposit and fees. It shall be the
responsibility of the approved applicant to make the following deposit
payments, rental payment and forfeiture of fees if application is
canceled: [Amended 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 6-11-01B; 11-14-2005
by Ord. No. 11-14-05B]
1. An initial minimum payment of 25% of total fees shall be required
at time of approved reservation.
2. Balance of payment shall be due at least 30 days prior to the date of
the activity/event.
3. Rental fees and charges shall be in effect for a four-hour period and
any part of each and any additional hour that might be required.
Rental fees and charges shall be paid for all time requested for a
scheduled event and shall include, but not be limited to, any setup
and cleanup time as may be required.
4. Any cancellation after 60 days from the date of the deposit payment
shall require forfeiture of 50% of the deposit.
5. Any cancellation within 30 days of the approved event date shall
result in forfeiture of 50% of payment.
6. A damage/cleanup deposit of $100, per room (area), is required at
least one week prior to the scheduled event. This deposit will be
fully refunded if there would be no additional costs (beyond normal
cleanup) incurred due to damage or if there is no excessive cleanup
34.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.36
1:251
required. Any portion of this deposit may be liquidated for damages
or cleanup as may be required.
34.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.36
1:252
ARTICLE VIII
Services of the Tri-Community South EMS System
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 4-9-01]
34.37. Fees established.
34.38. Ambulance transport fees. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 5-13-19]
Type Fee
BLS emergency $900
BLS (nonemergency transport) $900
ALS (nonemergency transport) $1,113
ALS emergency (I) $1,113
ALS emergency (II) $1,406
Oxygen N/A
BLS mileage $12.89
ALS mileage $12.89
Lift assist $200
34.39. No-transport fees. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 12-12-11]
Type Fee
BLS treatment/no transport $200
ALS treatment/no transport $250
Waiting fee/NET N/A
Second crew assist $100
Scene to helicopter $250
34.40. Standby rates. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 11-14-05D;
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 5-13-19]
Type Fee
Individual provider, first hour $85
Additional time, billed per quarter hour $50
Ambulance crew, first hour $200
34.37.1. The fees for Tri-Community South EMS shall be as follows.
34.37 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.40
1:253
Type Fee
Additional time, billed per quarter hour $170
Additional staff $40
34.41. CPR/CTC rates. [Amended 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
11-14-05D; 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06D; 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 12-12-11; 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 5-13-19]
Type Fee
American Heart Association CPR classes (per
student)
Heartsaver AED $50
Heartsaver AED plus first aid $60
BLS (healthcare provider) $50
ACLS $90
PALS $90
American Heart Association training center fees
Roster processing (per roster) $5
Manikin rental (per student) $5
AED simulator rental $25
ACLS and PALS certification card $7
Heartsaver AED; FA; FA CPR (includes
pediatric) certification card
$18
BLS provider card $4
34.40 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.41
1:254
ARTICLE IX
Municipal Claims and Liens Attorney's Fees
[Adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 3-13-06A; amended in its entirety
6-9-2014 by Ord. No 6-9-14]
34.42. Short title.
34.43. Expenses approved.
34.44. Attorney fees approved.
34.42.1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Tax, Tax claim, Tax Lien,
Municipal claim and Municipal Lien Attorney Fees and Servicing
Charges, Expenses and Fees Ordinance."
34.43.1. Title search. In any enforcement proceeding, the actual cost of a
title search in an amount not to exceed $250 shall constitute a
reasonable expense for each title search necessary for the initiation of
each proceeding and compliance with Pa. R.C.P. 3129. The sum not to
exceed $50 shall constitute a reasonable expense for each bringdown or
update of the title search in connection with entry of judgment,
issuance of execution, listing for sale, or other action.
34.43.2. Actual out-of-pocket expenses in connection with any enforcement
action, such as for postage, non-Sheriff's service of process,
investigation of the whereabouts of interested parties and other
necessary expenses, shall constitute reimbursable expenses as part of
each claim recovered.
34.44.1. Flat fee matters. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby
adopted and approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act I and
Act 2040 for all matters described, which fees shall be awarded to the
Municipality, its agents, counsel or assigns in each action initiated
pursuant to the Act for the collection of unpaid claims. The property
owner's obligation to pay the full amount of the flat fee for each phase
of each action shall accrue upon the initiation of any aspect of each
phase. The full amount of each flat fee for each prior phase of the
proceeding shall carry over and be due on a cumulative basis, together
with the flat fee for each subsequent phase.
1. Filing of municipal claim. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation and filing of a
municipal claim as defined under the Act.
2. Preparation and service of writ of scire facias or complaint in
assumpsit as provided in the Act. The sum of $450 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the initiation of each proceeding and
shall include preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of scire
40.Editor's Note: "Act 1" refers to Act 1 of 1966, and "Act 20" refers to Act 20 of 2003, both
of which amended the Municipal claims and Tax Liens Law, 53 P.S. § 7106.
34.42 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.44
1:255
facias or complaint in civil action, Sheriff's direction for service,
notice pursuant to Pa. R.C.P. § 237.1 and the preparation and filing
of the praecipe to settle and discontinue the proceeding. The above
does not include:
a. Federal tax liens, judgments and mortgages. Where there are
federal tax liens, federal judgments, federal mortgages or
other record federal interests, the sum of $200 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for all matters necessary to properly
notify and serve the United States with all required additional
notice and the presentation of related motions to court.
b. Alternative service of legal pleadings. In the event that a
special order of court is necessary to serve original process or
any other pleading, notice, court order or other document, the
following amounts shall constitute reasonable attorney fees as
follows:
[1] Investigation of defendant's(s') whereabouts and
preparation of affidavit of diligent search: $100.
[2] Preparation and presentation of motion for alternative
service, and delivery of the order of court, along with
appropriate directions to the Sheriff for service: $200.
3. Entry of judgment. The sum of $225 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees in connection with entry of judgment which shall
include preparation and filing of the praecipe to enter judgment,
notices of judgment, affidavit of nonmilitary status, and the
praecipe to satisfy judgment.
4. Writ of execution — Sheriff's sale of property or execution upon
assumpsit judgment. The sum of $700 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for preparation of all documents necessary for each
execution upon any judgment pursuant to the Act. This sum shall
include the preparation and filing of the praecipe for writ of
execution, all Sheriff's documents, preparation and service of
notices of Sheriff's sale, staying the writ of execution, and
attendance at one Sheriff's sale.
a. Postponements. The sum of $100 shall constitute reasonable
attorney fees for each continuance of Sheriff's sale at the
request of the defendant.
5. Sale pursuant to Section 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281. The sum of
$700 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for the sale of
property pursuant to Section 31 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7281, including
preparation and service of necessary documents, court
appearances, attendance at sale and preparation of proposed
schedule of distribution of the proceeds realized from such sale.
34.44 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.44
1:256
34.45. Procedure.
6. Sale pursuant to Section 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282. The sum of
$500 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees for a sale of property
pursuant to Section 31.1 of the Act, 53 P.S. § 7282, including the
preparation of necessary documents, service, court appearances,
and the preparation of proposed Sheriff's schedule of distribution.
7. Installment payment agreement. The sum of $150 shall constitute
reasonable attorney fees for the preparation of each written
installment payment agreement.
8. Motions. The sum of $200 shall constitute reasonable attorney fees
for the preparation, filing, and presentation of motions, other than
for alternative service, which shall include, but are not limited to,
motions to reassess damages, motions to amend caption, and
motions to continue the Sheriff's sale.
34.44.2. Hourly rate matters.
1. The following schedule of attorney fees is hereby adopted and
approved as reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Act 1 and Act 20,
which fees shall be awarded to the Municipality, its agents, counsel
or assigns as compensation in all contested matters, and in all
other matters not specifically referenced in Section 34.44.1 above,
undertaken in connection with the collection of claims:
a. Senior attorneys (practicing law for 10 years or more): $185
per hour.
b. Junior attorneys (practicing law for less than 10 years): $160
per hour.
c. Paralegals: $100 per hour.
d. Law clerks: $65 per hour.
each as recorded and charged in units of 1/10 of an hour
for all time devoted to enforcement and collection of the
Municipality's claims. Counsel, whether duly employed or duly
appointed by the Municipality, its agents or assigns, shall not
deviate from this fee schedule absent a subsequent ordinance
amending the same. Hourly rate matters include, but are
not limited to, any matters where any defense, objection,
motion, petition or appearance is entered in any phase of
any proceeding by or on behalf of any defendant or other
interested party.
34.45.1. Required notice. The notice required by the Act, as amended, 53
P.S. § 7106, shall be provided in accordance therewith and shall be
incorporated into an appropriate delinquency notice or notices sent by
the Municipality, its agent, counsel or assigns.
34.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.45
1:257
34.46. Servicing charges, expenses and fees approved.
34.45.2. Fees to be accrued and claims to be filed. Fees shall accrue for all
efforts in collection after the 30th day after the notice, or after the 10th
day of any required second notice under the Act, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 7106, on all accounts referred to counsel for enforcement. Fees
accumulated as a result of enforced collection shall be certified by duly
appointed counsel for the Municipality authorized to pursue collection
of claims pursuant to the Act, or by counsel for the Municipality's
agents or assigns, and, if not collected in due course with the debt as by
voluntary payment, shall be included in any claims filed on behalf of the
Municipality or by its agents or assigns in the course of enforcement,
including any claims originally filed with the Department of Court
Records, any claims filed with the Sheriff or in any other claims filed or
statements provided where attorney fees are due.
34.45.3. The amount of fees determined as set forth above shall be added to
and become part of the claim or claims in each proceeding as provided
by the Act and as provided herein.
34.46.1. The following schedule of charges, expenses and fees (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "servicing fees") is hereby approved and
adopted by the Municipality pursuant to Sections 1, 2, and 3 of the Act
of May 16, 1923, as amended, 53 P.S. §§ 7101, 7103 and 7106, which
amounts are the direct result of each person's or property's failure to
pay claims promptly. The servicing fees established, assessed, and
collected hereunder shall be in addition to the record costs, Section
34.44, attorney fees, and Section 34.43, expenses associated with legal
proceedings initiated by or on behalf of the Municipality to collect its
claims.
34.46.2. Servicing of a claim or claims may result in voluntary payment
without the initiation of enforcement proceedings. It is the intent of this
Section 34.46 to pass the cost of servicing on to the delinquent person
or property as part of each claim. The recovery of servicing fees
established herein shall not be contingent upon the initiation of
enforcement proceedings. However, such servicing fees are due even
where enforcement proceedings are initiated. The purpose of this
section is to pass the cost and expense associated with delinquent
collection on to the delinquent person or property and to make the
Municipality whole on all claims collected.
34.46.3. Schedule. The following schedule of fees shall constitute
reasonable and appropriate servicing fees for each indicated service.
The servicing fees shall be added to and become part of the
Municipality's claims, together with the face, penalties, interest, costs
and attorney fees, and shall be payable in full before, the discharge or
satisfaction of any claim. The schedule of fees is separate and distinct
from any amounts imposed by the Sheriff, Department of Court
Records, court or any other public office in connection with the
collection of the Municipality's claims.
34.45 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.46
1:258
34.47. Effective date and retroactivity.
Type Fee
Assignments $5.00 per claim
Filing tax liens $5.50 per item
Satisfactions $10.00 per claim
Tax claim revivals (i.e., S&A) $25.00 per claim
Act 1/Act 20 compliance $35.00 per case
Filing municipal claim and filing
municipal claim revivals
$25.00 per claim
Municipal claim/short title examination $40.00 per claim
Sheriff sale claim certificates $60.00 per case
Claim certifications $10.00 per year
Servicing, including staffing, computers,
office space, telephones, equipment, and
materials: for all delinquent and liened
taxes, tax liens, municipal claims (filed or
unfiled) and municipal liens
10% of gross collections
Postage and court costs Actual cost
34.47.1. This ordinance shall take effect on the date of enactment set forth
below and with respect to attorney fees pursuant to Sections 34.44 and
34.45 shall apply to all taxes, tax claims, tax liens, municipal claims,
municipal liens, writs of scire facias, judgments, or executions filed on
or after December 19, 1990, or as otherwise provided by law.
34.47.2. In no event shall the Municipality's right to charge and collect
reasonable attorney fees pursuant to Section 34.44 of this ordinance be
impaired by the fact that any claim may also include an attorney
commission of 5% for claims filed prior to December 19, 1990. Any
attorney fees assessed and collected under this or any prior ordinances
pursuant to Act 1 shall be in addition to any five-percent commission
previously included in any claim or judgment thereon.
34.47.3. Attorney fees and expenses incurred in pending enforcement
proceedings prior to the effective date of this ordinance, pursuant to a
prior ordinance adopted under Act 1, but not collected, shall remain
due and owing in accordance therewith and shall be incorporated in
any future statement, claim, pleading, judgment, or execution. Attorney
fees and expenses in any pending or new action incurred after the
effective date of this ordinance shall be incurred, charged, and
collected in accordance with the schedules and procedures set forth in
this ordinance.
34.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.47
1:259
34.48. Assignment.
34.49. Severability.
34.50. Repealer.
34.47.4. The charges, expenses and fees set forth in Section 34.46 of this
ordinance relate to all unpaid claims in favor of the Municipality, its
agents and assigns and shall be retroactive to the date of each claim.
34.48.1. The Municipality assigns the provisions of this ordinance to any
assignee of its claims, unless the assignment limits the assignee's
ability to collect such amounts. The Municipality and its duly authorized
agents and their counsel shall retain all rights to charge reasonable
attorney fees, charges, expenses, and fees in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance in actions commenced under the Act and
for servicing any claims retained by the Municipality.
34.49.1. If any one or more of the provisions or terms of this ordinance shall
be held invalid for any reason whatsoever, then such provisions or
terms shall be deemed severable from the remaining provisions or
terms of this ordinance to the maximum extent possible and shall in no
way affect the validity or enforceability of any other provisions hereof.
34.50.1. All prior ordinances are hereby repealed in whole or in part to the
extent inconsistent herewith.
34.47 BETHEL PARK CODE 34.50
1:260
Chapter 35
FIREARMS AND AIR GUNS
34.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS 34.50
1:261

ARTICLE I
Firearms and Air Guns
[Adopted by Ord. No. 12-1-50]
35.1. Definitions.
35.2. Restrictions on use of weapons; hunting. [Amended by Ord.
No. 45-10-50]
35.3. Discharging toy guns.
35.1.1. The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall
have the meanings ascribed in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
35.1.2. FIREARM — Shall mean any pistol, revolver, rifle or shotgun which
discharges bullet, cartridge, shell, shot or other missile propelled by the
burning or explosion of gunpowder.
35.1.3. AIR GUN — Shall mean any gun which uses air under pressure from
pumping or other means to discharge missiles [through a rifled barrel
at a muzzle velocity in excess of 200 feet per second].
35.1.4. TOY AIR GUN — Shall mean an air gun which does not contain air
under high pressure from pumping or other means but which derives its
force from a spring which is set by a simple cocking operation and
discharges missiles through a smooth barrel at a muzzle velocity of less
than 200 feet per second.
35.2.1. From and after the effective date of this amendment to Ordinance
No. 12-1-50, no firearms or air guns as defined in the ordinance to
which this is an amendment shall be fired or discharged any-where
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Bethel Park, except under
proper supervision at duly established target ranges, and except by
those persons and in those circumstances permitted by the Act of the
General Assembly of June 24, 1939, P.L. 872, as amended, or any other
law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and except by duly licensed
hunters hunting in strict compliance with the game laws of
Pennsylvania and limited to small game and the use of shotguns using
not larger than No. 4 shot.
35.2.2. The use of all rifles, pistols, revolvers as well as shotguns using
single pellets, slugs or "pumpkin balls" are specifically prohibited. No
hunting shall be allowed within two hundred yards of any occupied
dwelling, house, residence or other building or camp occupied by
human beings, or any barn, stable or other building used in connection
therewith, the area within said distance being hereby designated as a
safety zone, nor shall anyone shoot at any wild bird or wild animal while
it is within such a safety zone.
35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 35.3
1:263
35.4. Liability of parents.
35.5. Violations and penalties.
35.6. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
35.3.1. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no toy air gun as
defined in this ordinance shall be fired or discharged within the
corporate limits of the Municipality of Bethel Park, except under
supervision at duly established target ranges, and except where the
firing or discharge of the toy air gun and the flight of its missile are
confined entirely to the user's own property or the premises of another
with his express consent.
35.4.1. Any parent of a child who has not reached his or her eighteenth
birthday, who knowingly permits such child to violate the provisions of
this ordinance, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
35.5.1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to summary conviction and shall be subject to a fine not in
excess of $100 for each and every offense, and in default of payment
thereof, may be compelled to undergo imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
35.6.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed so far as the same
affects this ordinance.
35.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 35.6
1:264
Chapter 36
FIRE LANES
35.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 35.6
1:265

ARTICLE I
Fire Lanes
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-11-90B]41
36.1. Definitions.
36.2. Establishment and creation of fire lanes.
36.3. General.
36.4. Maintenance.
36.1.1. When used in this Ordinance, the following term shall have the
following meaning.
36.1.2. FIRE LANE — An open area in which no parking is permitted or any
obstruction is allowed to exist, the purpose of which is to provide access
for firefighting equipment and other emergency vehicles.
36.1.3. OBSTRUCT OR OBSTRUCTION — Shall mean any object, whether
permanent or temporary, which impedes or prevents the full and
complete entry of emergency vehicles into the fire lane.
36.2.1. Council may require the establishment or creation of a fire lane
serving either an existing or proposed building or group of buildings
when in its opinion it is necessary or desirable to advance the safety of
such buildings or premises. Council may seek advice and
recommendations from the Police Department, Fire Official, and the
Volunteer Fire Department when considering the establishment of a fire
lane. When a new building or complex or an addition thereto is
proposed, Council may require the establishment of a fire lane as a
condition of zoning approval. When the establishment under
consideration by Council is for property that has been developed, the
owner or person in control of such property shall be notified of
Council's intention and be given the opportunity to request a hearing on
the matter.
36.2.2. If Council determines that a fire lane is necessary or desirable, it
shall establish and create such fire lane by Ordinance and communicate
to the owner or person in control of the property its decision in writing.
36.3.1. When a fire lane has been duly established and the property owner
has been notified, it shall be the duty of such property owner to identify
and post such lane with signs and markings whose size and location
shall be as directed by the Municipality.
41.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 33, Fires Out-of-Doors, adopted: Article I by Ord. No. 6-12-67C;
Article II, by Ord. No. 60-8-51, was repealed by 9-14-1970 by Ord. No. 9-14-70C. Former
Ch. 33, Fire Lanes was also repealed by Ord. No. 6-11-90B and the current Chapter was
substituted.
36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 36.4
1:267
36.5. Existing fire lanes.
36.6. Prohibited.
36.7. Penalties.
36.8. Severable.
36.9. Repealer.
36.4.1. It shall be the duty of the owner or person in control of the property
on which a fire lane has been established to maintain any paint
stripping necessary to delineate such fire lane and such signs that are
necessary to identify such fire lane.
36.5.1. Those fire lanes which are presently in existence among which are:
South Park Shops
South Hills Village
Village Square
Ames Department Store/Giant Eagle are hereby established as official
fire lanes subject to the terms of this Ordinance.
36.6.1. It shall be unlawful to park within a fire lane that has been properly
established and identified However temporary parking is permitted for
a period not to exceed a duration of five minutes for loading or
unloading a vehicle when the operator of a vehicle so parked is within
such vehicle in order to promptly remove it in case of emergency.
Further it shall be unlawful to obstruct any fire lane in any manner
whatsoever.
36.7.1. Any person who shall park a vehicle or otherwise obstruct a fire lane
shall pay a fine of not more than $100, plus costs. Each day that such
condition continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense and
notice to the offender shall not be necessary to constitute an offense.
Further, any person who is directed in writing to create a fire lane by
proper identification of such fire lane and the posting of property and
shall after receiving written notification from the Municipality to do and
fails to comply with such directive shall pay a fine of not more than
$300 plus costs for each and every day such condition continues.
36.8.1. That the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable,
and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance shall for
any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this Ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
36.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 36.9
1:268
36.9.1. That any Ordinance or part of Ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this Ordinance be, and the same is hereby, repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
36.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 36.9
1:269
Chapter 37
FIRE PREVENTION
36.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 36.9
1:270
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 5-14-12]
37.1. Designated officer.
37.2. Payment of claims.
37.1.1. The Municipality Secretary, or such official's designee, is hereby
appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all
responsibilities and duties stated herein.
37.2.1. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insuring agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the Municipality of Bethel Park (hereinafter
"Municipality") where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent is
furnished by the Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and unless
there is compliance with Section 508(c) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended,
and the provisions of this ordinance.42
37.2.2. Where, pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992, as
amended,43 the Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that
there are not delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties, or user charges
against real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the
named insured; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the
named insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or
structure, the following procedures must be followed:
1. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the Municipality in the aggregate of
$2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the Municipality shall be
$2,000; or
2. If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agent shall
transfer to the Municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
42.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
43.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 37.2
1:271
3. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
4. After the transfer, the named insured shall submit a contractor's
signed estimate, within 60 days, of the costs of removing, repairing
or securing the building or other structure, and the designated
officer shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the
Municipality in excess of the estimate to the named insured, if the
Municipality has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
5. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Municipality shall
do the following:
a. The designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing, or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the Municipality. Such costs shall
include all reasonable and customary engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with such removal, repair, or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto; and
b. It is the obligation of the insuring agent, when transferring the
proceeds, to provide the Municipality with the name and
address of the name of the insured. Upon receipt of the
transferred funds and the name and address of the named
insured, he shall certify that the proceeds have been received
by the Municipality and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and
c. When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
applicable regulations and orders of the Municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer, and if the Municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the
named insured. If the Municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the costs shall be paid from the fund; and if excess funds
remain, the Municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to
the named insured; and
d. To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the Municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time the proceeds are returned.
37.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 37.2
1:272
37.3. Procedures and regulations.
37.4. Violations and penalties.
37.5. Severability.
37.6. Repealer.
6. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
37.3.1. The Council of the Municipality may, by resolution, adopt procedures
and regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this
ordinance and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for
municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as
amended, and this ordinance, including, but not limited to, issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate
fund accounts.
37.4.1. Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
37.5.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable; and if any of the
provisions hereof shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of this ordinance shall remain in effect.
37.6.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as same affect
this ordinance.
37.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 37.6
1:273
Chapter 38
FIRING RANGE
37.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 37.6
1:274
ARTICLE I
Firing Range
[Adopted by Ord. No 2-10-69A]
38.1. Legislative intent.
38.2. Application.
38.3. Liability insurance.
38.4. Competent and qualified persons must be present.
38.5. Municipality to be released from any and all liability.
38.6. Weapons and all other paraphernalia to be supplied by the
group or organization.
38.7. Inspection following conclusion of firing session.
38.1.1. Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall permit the use of the
firing range situate in the Municipal Building of the Municipality of
Bethel Park by groups or organizations familiar with firearms.
38.2.1. Groups and organizations desiring to use the firing range shall make
and file with the Chief of Police an application for the use of the firing
range, said application to be completed on a form prescribed by the
municipality.
38.3.1. All groups and organizations using the firing range must file with the
Police Department, prior to the granting of a permit, a policy of liability
insurance, issued by a recognized liability carrier, providing minimum
limits of $100,000 and maximum limits of $300,000 to protect against
any and all damage which may occur to individuals or the property.
38.4.1. All groups and organizations must indicate on their application that
competent and qualified persons will be present to supervise firing by
the group or organization.
38.5.1. All groups and organizations using the facilities of the firing range
shall execute and file with the municipality a release whereby the
municipality shall be relieved from any and all liability for any
unforeseen occurrence which may occur during the shooting.
38.6.1. All Weapons, ammunition, targets, cleaning equipment, protective
ear devices and any and all other paraphernalia must be supplied by the
group or organization requesting the use of the firing range.
38.7.1. At the conclusion of each firing session, the firing range must be
thoroughly policed on departure. The person in charge of the group or
organization shall request the Police Department office in charge to
38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 38.7
1:275
38.8. Age restriction.
38.9. Availability of firing-range facilities.
38.10. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
38.11. Violations and penalties.
38.12. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
inspect the firing range to make certain there is no damage, and if so,
to itemize the same.
38.8.1. No person under 11 years of age, whether male or female, shall be
permitted to actively participate with a weapon and live ammunition
within the confines of the firing range.
38.9.1. All groups and associations must arrange with the Chief of Police
and the firing range officer to select a mutual time when firing-range
facilities will be made available to the group or organization. The final
decision as to the time and date shall be with the Chief of Police.
38.10.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park authorizes the Chief of Police and
the range officer to promulgate firing range rules and regulations,
which rules and regulations shall govern the use of the firing range and
shall be clearly posted within the confines of the firing range. In
addition, a copy of the rules and regulations shall be delivered to the
applicant at the time application is made. The Chief of Police and the
range officer shall promulgate these rules and regulations in order to
provide for the safety of the public in the operation of the firing range. A
copy of the rules and regulations is attached hereto and made part of
this ordinance by reference thereto.
38.11.1. Any group or organization violating the rules and regulations shall
be penalized by the suspension or revocation of its privilege to use the
firing range.
38.12.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
38.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 38.12
1:276
Chapter 39
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
38.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 38.12
1:277

ARTICLE I
Collection, Removal and Disposal
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-11-80B]44
39.1. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
39.2. Materials that will be collected.
39.1.1. All definitions in the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act (53 P.S. Section 4000.101 et. seq.) as amended, are
hereby adopted and made a hereof by reference. The following words,
terms and phrases shall be construed in this ordinance to have the
following meanings, except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
39.1.2. ACT 101 — Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, as amended.
39.1.3.MAJOR HOUSEHOLD ITEMS — Includes upholstered furniture,
freezers, refrigerators, washers, dryers, pianos, hot-water tanks, bed
springs, etc.
39.1.4. MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a
municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plan or air pollution control facility. The term
does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
39.1.5. SPECIAL ITEMS — Includes old portable or out-of-ground swimming
pools or parts thereof, children's swing sets or gymnastic-type
apparatus, appliances weighing 100 pounds or greater and carpeting
and padding.
39.1.6. RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — May include clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high grade office paper, newsprint,
corrugated paper and/or plastics as designated by resolution of the
Municipal Council to be recycled from rubbish by those residences
receiving Municipal garbage collection, those residences not receiving
Municipal garbage collection and commercial and institutional
establishments.
39.2.1. The following materials will be collected at the curblines by the
municipality:
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Collection, Removal and Disposal,
adopted 6-12-1972 as Ord. No. 6-12-72C.
39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.2
1:279
39.3. Materials not to be collected.
1. General household rubbish and trash in plastic bags, sound metal
or plastic containers and sound and dry cardboard boxes.
2. All rags, crockery, waste debris and small household refuse placed
in sound containers. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
3. Broken glass, only when placed in a substantial container identified
in clearly printed letters not less than two inches in height with the
following: CONTAINS BROKEN GLASS. Broken glass shall not be
placed in bags of any kind.
4. Leaf waste only when provided for as part of a separate Municipal
leaf collection program. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-14-89C
effective 9/30/90]
5. Old furniture, minor household items, mattresses that are dry and
furnace and filters. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
6. One major household item, as defined above, per weekly pickup.
7. Magazines and newspapers, when tied in bundles weighing less
than 50 pounds. Magazines and newspapers shall not be placed in
plastic bags.
8. Grass clippings, which shall be bagged and shall weigh less than 50
pounds. [Amended by 8-14-89C effective 9/1/90]
39.3.1. The following materials shall not be collected by the Municipality:
1. Building materials, such as lumber, bricks, concrete, ceiling tile,
plaster, plasterboard, shingles, roofing, tar paper, siding materials,
cinder or concrete block, wood or metal gutters and downspouts,
as a result of repair work, alterations, additions or new
construction.
2. Plumbing fixtures, tubs, commodes, stationary tubs, old furnaces
and exterior air conditioner units.
3. Tires.
4. Automobiles or parts of same.
5. Petroleum products or residue.
6. Ashes and cinders from heating plants.
7. Soil of any type, including sod.
8. Stones and rocks.
9. Rubbish, trash and debris generated as a result of commercial
activities.
39.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.3
1:280
39.4. Special items. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
39.5. Municipal program collection coverage. [Amended by Ord.
No. 11-10-86B; by Ord. No. 12-15-94A]
10. Sales samples and displays shall not be picked up.
11. Flammable liquids, acids, strong alkalines or other dangerous,
explosive or corrosive or toxic chemicals.
12. Animal fecal matter (only if not placed in plastic bags).
13. Leaf waste effective September 1, 1990 unless provided for as part
of a separate Municipal leaf collection program. [Added by Ord.
No. 8-14-89C]
39.4.1. The following regulations shall apply to special items, as defined
elsewhere, if they are to be picked up:
1. Children's swings, slides and gymnastic apparatus shall be
dismantled and cut into pieces not more than 36 inches in length
and shall be free of globs of cement or concrete.
2. Old portable and out-of-ground swimming pools shall be dismantled
and cut into pieces having no surface dimension over 48 inches in
length.
3. Carpeting and padding shall be cut and in rolls not over four feet in
length nor 16 inches in diameter and free of tacking strips or sharp
attachments and fasteners.
4. Carpeting and padding shall be protected from the weather in
order to be in a dry condition at the time of pickup.
39.5.1. Garbage, trash and rubbish, as defined and regulated by this
ordinance, shall be picked up only from one family dwellings, twofamily
dwellings, and townhouse dwellings as defined in Chapter 69,
Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance. No pickup shall be made from
apartments, churches, schools or commercial or industrial
establishments.
39.5.2. No pick up shall be made to properties having their frontage on a
public street under construction until formally accepted by the
Municipality pursuant to the terms of the Subdivision Development
Improvement Agreement.
39.5.3. No pick up shall be made to properties having their frontage on a
private street under construction pursuant to the requirements of
Chapter 60, Bethel Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
unless the street meets the specifications for formal acceptance by the
Municipality or when a hold harmless agreement releasing the
Municipality from any and all claims for damages done to the street by
garbage collection vehicles and agreeing to indemnify the Municipality
39.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.5
1:281
39.6. Schedule; holidays; adverse weather conditions.
39.7. Receptacles required; condition; placement; dogs at large.
[Amended by Ord. No. 12-14-81E]45
39.8. Recycling and leaf waste collection. [Added by Ord. No.
8-14-89C]
from any and all claims by third parties for damages to the street is
signed by the owners of said private street.
39.6.1. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the municipality
shall pick up the garbage, trash and rubbish, as defined and regulated
by this ordinance, on all days of the week except Sunday and the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
For weeks which contain a holiday, the schedule shall normally be one
day late and shall include Saturday. During periods of extreme cold or
icing conditions, pickup may be delayed. The homeowner is advised to
contact the municipal offices for revised schedules during such periods.
39.7.1. Garbage or rubbish stored outside must be placed at all times in
portable plastic or metal containers. The container(s), when used for
storage or places at curbside in accordance with the ordinance, shall be
kept in good condition, free of perforated rust or splits and tears. The
same must be watertight, equipped with tight fitting lids and strong
handles and shall not weigh more than 50 pounds when loaded. No
pickup will be made in the event that a resident's dog is either at large
on the premises or chained or tethered in such a location as to present a
hazard to the collectors. All kitchen and table waste or vegetable and
animal matter shall be wrapped in dry paper or placed in plastic bags
before being deposited in the receptacles. All garbage receptacles shall
be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. All garbage receptacles and
containers shall be placed at curbside, ready for collection, in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance, not later than 7:00 a.m. of
the scheduled pickup day.
39.8.1. Residences Receiving Municipal Garbage Collection. Effective
November 1, 1989 all residences receiving Municipal garbage
collection shall separate recyclable materials from each other and from
other refuse. Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb in
containers provided by the Municipality and shall be separated from the
other refuse for collection by a contractor designated by the
Municipality. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to impair the
ownership of separated materials by the person who generated them
unless and until such materials are placed at the curbside for collection.
Upon placement at the curbside the recyclable materials become the
property of the Municipality. Collection of the recyclable materials by
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be effective 2-1-1982.
39.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.8
1:282
any person other than those designated by the Municipality shall be
a violation of this ordinance. Any containers provided to residences
for collection of recyclables shall be the property of the Municipality
and shall be used only for the collection of recyclable materials. Any
resident who moves within or from the Municipality shall be
responsible for leaving the allocated recycling containers for the next
property owner at the existing residence or shall pay the replacement
cost of said containers. Use of recycling containers for any purpose
other than the designated recycling program or use of the recycling
containers by any person other than the person allocated such
container(s) shall be a violation of this ordinance. [Amended by Ord.
No. 5-11-92A]
39.8.2. Recycling by Multifamily Residences. Effective September 1, 1990
all residences not receiving Municipal garbage collection shall separate
and recycle at least three of the following: clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper,
newsprint, corrugated paper or plastics. In addition, all residential
establishments not receiving Municipal garbage collection shall
separate leaf waste from other waste and provide for disposal of said
leaf waste in compliance with Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act effective September 1, 1990. The owner, landlord,
or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing
properties with four or more units may comply with its responsibilities
for recycling by establishing a collection system for recyclables at each
property. The collection system must include suitable containers for
collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning the use
and availability of the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents
of owners and landlords who comply with this ordinance shall not be
liable for noncompliance of occupants of their building. Owners,
landlords or agents of an owner or landlord shall submit a recycling
plan to the municipality for approval by the Director of Community
Development within six months from the date of approval of this
ordinance. Such plan shall indicate materials for collection, location,
type and size of containers to be used, sources for marketing
recyclables, disposal methods for leaf waste and a sample of the letter
notifying occupants of the recycling collection system. Owners,
landlords or agents of an owner or landlord shall submit an annual
report to the municipality by January 31 of each year reporting the
tonnage of materials recycled during the previous calendar year.
39.8.3. Recycling by commercial and institutional establishments. Effective
September 1, 1990, all occupants of commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and all community activities shall recycle
high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, leaf waste and
other materials deemed appropriate by the Municipal Council. Said
occupants shall submit a recycling plan to the municipality for approval
by the Director of Community Development within six months from the
date of approval of this ordinance. Such plan shall indicate materials for
39.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.8
1:283
39.9. Limitations on collection. [Amended 12-15-1994 by Ord. No.
12-15-94A]
39.10. Prohibited acts. [Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
collection, location, type and size of containers to be used, method for
disposal of leaf waste and sources for marketing recyclables. Occupants
of said establishments shall submit an annual report to the municipality
by January 31 of each year reporting the tonnage of materials recycled
during the previous calendar year. [Amended 10-8-1990 by Ord. No.
10-8-90A]
39.8.4. Regulations. The Municipal Manager is hereby empowered to make
reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and enforcement of
this ordinance as he deems necessary, which shall include, but not be
limited to:
1. Establishing collection procedures for recyclable materials.
2. Establishing reporting procedures for amounts of materials
recycled.
3. Establishing procedures for the distribution, monitoring and
collection of recyclable containers.
4. Establishing procedures and rules for the collection of backyard
composting of leaf wastes and grass clippings. [Amended
8-13-1990 by Ord. No. 8-13-90A]
39.9.1. No municipal waste or recyclable materials shall be picked up,
collected or conveyed over the streets, alleys and thoroughfares of this
municipality by any person or persons other than the municipality or its
duly authorized agent, excepting those establishments not included
covered under the municipal garbage and recycling collection program.
39.10.1. The following are prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance:
1. To place or allow deposits of curbside trash and rubbish for pickup
to remain between the hours of 3:00 p.m. Saturday to 6:00 p.m.
Sunday.
2. Bringing or depositing trash, rubbish or garbage to a location other
than the premises where it was generated or produced.
3. To place or allow to remain trash, rubbish, refuse or garbage
containers at the curbline of any property before 6:00 p.m. or one
hour prior to dusk on the day preceding the day designated for the
pickup of trash, rubbish or other refuse from such property.
[Added 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 12-14-81F; amended
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1-12-98A]
39.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.10
1:284
39.11. Standards for storage of municipal waste. [Added 5-11-1992
by Ord. No. 5-11-92A]
4. To permit metal or plastic receptacles or other receptacles not in
violation of this ordinance to remain at the curbside and/or in the
front yard longer than 12:00 midnight of the day of collection
unless said receptacles are screened from view at grade level from
the street or from the abutting property boundary. [Added
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 12-14-81F; amended 3-9-1994 by
Ord. No. 3-9-94B]
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the
municipality, any garbage, rubbish, bulky waste or any other
municipal or residual solid waste except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, any applicable rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and
Regulations, Article VIII.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste within
the municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, any applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article
VIII.
7. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste in
the municipality except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, any Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
Act 97 and the Health Department Rules and Regulations, Article
VIII.
8. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from
any solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the
municipality without prior approval by the municipality.
9. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the municipality except at an approved and
permitted resource recovery facility under Act 97 and any
applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or
cause or permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid waste
in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of water, public or
private property within the municipality except as provided in this
ordinance.
39.11.1. The following standards apply to all Municipal waste, whether
collected by the Municipality or by a private hauler:
1. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to
39.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.11
1:285
eliminate conditions harmful to public health which create safety
hazards, odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
2. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials
generated during periods between regularly scheduled collections,
and shall place and store all waste materials therein.
3. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with
the following preparation standards:
a. All municipal waste shall be drained of free liquids before
being placed in storage containers.
b. All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely
wrapped in paper, plastic bags.
c. All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free
of food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers.
d. When specified by the Municipality special preparation and
storage procedures may be required to facilitate the collection
and resource recovery of certain waste materials.
4. Individual containers and bulk containers utilized for storage of
municipal waste shall comply with the following standards:
a. Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable,
watertight, rust and corrosion resistant material, such as
plastic, metal or fiberglass, in such a manner as to be
leakproof, weather-proof, insect-proof, and rodent-proof.
b. Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a
tight-fitting cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate
collection.
c. Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a
capacity of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 40 gallons,
and a loaded weight of not more than 40 pounds.
d. Disposable plastic bags or sacks are acceptable containers
provided the bags are designated for waste disposal. Plastic
bags shall have sufficient wall strength to maintain physical
integrity when lifted by the top, shall be securely tied at the top
for collection, and shall have a capacity of not more than 30
gallons and a loaded weight of not more than 35 pounds.
e. All containers, either reusable or disposable, shall also comply
with the minimum standards established by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
39.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.11
1:286
39.12. Regulations of haulers. [Added by Ord. No. 5-11-92A;
amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 12-10-18A]
5. Any person storing municipal waste whether by Municipal or
private haulers for collection shall comply with the following
storage standards:
a. Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered at all times.
Solid waste shall not protrude or extend above the top of the
container.
b. Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all
times. The interior of the containers shall be thoroughly
cleaned, rinsed, drained and disinfected, as often as necessary,
to prevent the accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the
bottom or sides of the containers.
c. Containers shall be used and maintained so as to prevent
public nuisances.
d. Containers that do not conform to the standard of this
Ordinance or which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any
other defect that may hamper or injure collection personnel
shall be promptly replaced by the owner upon notice from the
Municipality or its designated representative.
e. Containers shall be placed by the owner or customer at a
collection point specified by the Municipality or its designated
representative.
f. With the exception of pick-up days when the containers are
placed out for collection, the containers shall be properly
stored on the owner or customer premises at all times.
g. Bulk waste items such as furniture, automobile parts,
machinery, appliances, and tires shall be stored in a manner
that will prevent the accumulation of collection of water, the
harborage of rodents, safety hazards and fire hazards.
h. All residential, commercial, institutional, public and industrial
lunchroom and office waste containing garbage shall be
collected at least once a week. Rubbish collection from these
sources shall be made as often as necessary to control health
hazards, odors, flies, and unsightly conditions. The
Municipality reserves the right to require more frequent
collection when deemed necessary.
39.12.1. All rubbish haulers, whether municipal or private, shall comply
with the following standards and regulations:
39.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.12
1:287
39.13. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-14-89C]
39.14. Severability.
39.15. Repealer.
1. All municipal waste collected within the Municipality shall
ultimately be disposed only at a landfill cited in the Allegheny
County Solid Waste Plan - 1990 or on subsequent revisions thereto.
2. Any trucks or other vehicles used for the collection and
transportation of municipal waste must comply with the
requirements of Act 97, and any Department regulations adopted
pursuant to Act 97 and must be licensed by the Allegheny County
Health Department.
3. All collection vehicles conveying municipal waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
4. Collection vehicles for rubbish and other solid waste shall be
enclosed or covered to prevent roadside litter and other nuisances.
5. All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
6. All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
7. Collections shall not commence prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
39.13.1. That any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty
of a summary offense and shall be fined not more than $100. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. In addition, theft of recyclable materials
at the curbside or theft of recycling containers may be prosecuted
under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code.
39.14.1. If any section of this ordinance is declared invalid, the same shall
not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be invalid.
39.15.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
39.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.15
1:288
ARTICLE II
Storage of Refuse
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-14-83B]46
39.16. Enactment.
39.17. Definitions.
39.18. Limitation of outside refuse storage.
39.19. Requirements for refuse bins.
39.16.1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of Chapter 39 of the Bethel
Park Code, said Chapter constituting Ordinance No. 8-11-80B, the
provisions of this article shall control.
39.17.1. For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
39.17.2. REFUSE — Includes garbage, rubbish and trash, including all such
materials removal of which is not a municipal responsibility pursuant to
Section 39.3, and any other materials not collectible by the Municipality
pursuant to Section 39.3.
39.17.3.PERSON — Includes every natural person, firm, partnership,
association or corporation and includes all owners, tenants, occupiers,
contractors, subcontractors and haulers.
39.18.1. No person shall store, allow to be stored or allow to accumulate
refuse outside of a permanent enclosed structure (said structure
subject to all the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 61 of
the Bethel Park Code), except as expressly provided within this article
or allow refuse to escape from a structure or bin.
39.19.1. Refuse may be stored in steel or metal bins, designed for
mechanical emptying, provided the following conditions are met:
1. The bin shall be emptied no less than once each week by a hauler
licensed to do so by the County of Allegheny.
2. The bin is covered by a tarp or metal cover at all times except when
being filled or emptied.
3. The bin is located on a dust-free surface and is not within any yard
area or buffer defined in Zoning Ordinance Chapter 61 of the Code.
When strict application of this provision would result in a practical
difficulty for the property owner, the Municipal Manager may
permit modifications to these requirements upon written request
46.Editor's Note: Former Article, Rates and Changes, adopted by Ord. No. 6-17-70B, was
repealed by Ord. No. 5-1192A. Article Placement and Removal: Certain Hours, adopted by
Ord. No. 5-8-72A and was repealed by Ord. 5-11-92A.
39.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.19
1:289
39.20. Clean of refuse.
39.21. Violations.
39.22. Repealer.
which describes the reasons for the modification and the relief
sought.
39.19.2. The provisions of this section may be temporarily waived by the
Building Official upon issuance of a valid building permit pursuant to
Ordinance No. 9-8-75C, of this Code, for a time period no longer than
the duration of said permit or such lesser period of time as the Building
Official deems necessary based upon the construction work to be done;
provided, however, the permittee shall specifically request same and
the location of the bin on the property is approved by the Building
Official, and provided, further, that all other requirements of this
Subsection are met.
1. The bin is not located in such a position as to restrict sight lines at
intersections, curbs or traffic control points of a public or private
street.
2. The bin is not located in a fire lane, adjacent to a fire hydrant, or in
any location which would interfere with access by firefighters or
fire equipment when fighting a fire on or adjacent to the property.
3. The bin meets all the requirements of the County of Allegheny
Department of Health.
39.20.1. No person shall fail to immediately clean up any refuse generated
from the use of property owned, occupied, leased, worked on, hauled
from by him where said refuse has been flown by the wind or
transported in any other manner onto a public right-of-way or property
of another, provided, however, no person shall be liable under this
section if refused access to that property by the owner or lawful
occupant thereof.
39.21.1. Any person owning, occupying or leasing property upon which
refuse is found not stored in conformance with the provisions of this
article or any contractor or subcontractor working upon such property
or hauler removing refuse from such property shall be jointly and
severally liable for such violations.
39.21.2. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall upon
conviction before a District Justice be sentenced to pay a fine not to
exceed $300 for each offense. Each day that a violation of this article
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
39.22.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
39.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.22
1:290
39.22.2. The provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed
to the extent of such conflict.
39.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS 39.22
1:291
Chapter 40
GRADING OPERATIONS
39.22 BETHEL PARK CODE 39.22
1:292
ARTICLE I
Grading Operations
[Adopted 4-14-1975 by Ord. No. 4-14-75A]
40.1. Title and purpose.
40.2. Definitions.
40.1.1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Bethel
Park Municipal Grading Ordinance."
40.1.2. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide minimum
standards to safeguard persons and property, to protect and to promote
the public welfare by preventing excess erosion, hazardous rock and
soil slippage, sediment production and other soil and water
management problems, and by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of materials, use, location and maintenance of
grading, excavation and fill.
40.2.1. Wherever used in this ordinance, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
40.2.2. ADMINISTRATOR — The person qualified and officially appointed by
the Municipal Council to manage this ordinance.
40.2.3.BEDROCK — Natural rock layer, hard or soft, in place at the ground
surface or beneath unconsolidated surficial deposits.
40.2.4. BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Official pursuant
to the provisions of the Bethel Park Building Code for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
40.2.5. (Reserved)47
40.2.6. ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST — A person who holds a degree in
geology from an accredited college or university and who has training
and experience in the field of engineering geology.
40.2.7. ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice engineering and who is
knowledgeable in the branch of civil engineering.
40.2.8. EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity, including such processes as
gravitational creep.
40.2.9. EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
47.Editor's Note: The definition of "designated floodplain districts," added 6-8-1981 by Ord.
No. 6-8-81C, as amended, was repealed 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14. For current
provisions, see Ch. 72, Floodplain Management.
40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.2
1:293
40.3. Scope.
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, including the conditions resulting
therefrom.
40.2.10. FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, piled, transported or
moved to a new location, including the condition resulting therefrom.
40.2.11.GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
40.2.12. GRADING — Any excavation or fill, or any combination thereof,
including the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
40.2.13. GRADING PERMIT — Any permit required under this ordinance.
40.2.14.HAZARD — A danger or potential danger to life, limb or health, or
an adverse effect or potential adverse effect to the safety, use or
stability of property, waterways, public ways, structures, utilities and
storm sewers, including stream pollution.
40.2.15. INSPECTOR — The Administrator or his authorized representative
whose duty it is to administer compliance with this ordinance.
40.2.16. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park.
40.2.17. MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — That person duly appointed by the
municipal officials to act in such capacity. He shall be the Administrator
of this Grading Ordinance.
40.2.18.PERSON — A natural person, but also including a partnership,
corporation, trust or association.
40.2.19. SITE — A lot, tract or parcel of land, or a series of lots, tracts or
parcels of land which are adjoining where grading work is continuous
and performed at the same time.
40.2.20. SOILS ENGINEER — A person registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as a professional engineer and who has training and
experience in the branch of soils engineering.
40.2.21. SOIL SURVEY — The published and operational soil survey for
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and the accompanying text, "Soil
Survey Interpretations of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania," as prepared
by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service et al. When applicable, "soil survey" shall mean "Soil Survey,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania."
40.2.22. SOLID WASTE — All, or combinations of, ashes, garbage, refuse,
radioactive material, combustible demolition materials and industrial
waste such as food-processing wastes, wood, plastic, metal scrap, etc.
40.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.3
1:294
40.4. Permit required.
40.5. Exceptions to permit requirement.
40.6. Hazardous conditions.
40.3.1.New grading, excavations and fills, or changes, additions, repairs or
alterations made to existing excavations and fills, shall conform to the
provisions of this ordinance.
40.4.1. A grading permit must be obtained from the Administrator for new
grading, excavations and fills, or for changes, additions or alterations
made to existing excavations or fills, all of which shall conform to the
provisions of this ordinance. A separate grading permit shall be
required for each site. One permit may cover the grading, excavation
and fill made on the same site. If excavated material is to be removed
from a grading site, it shall be noted on the application. Such off-site
disposal may require the securing of a separate grading permit. A
grading permit must be obtained where tree cutting or timber
harvesting will result in significant soil disturbance, erosion or
sedimentation production. [Amended 1-10-2005 by Ord. No.
01-10-05B]
40.4.2. Only one permit shall be required for the grading of a large
continuous parcel of land for a proposed major planned development,
such as residential planned unit development or a planned industrial
park, when adequate standards or requirements for grading the parcel
are approved by the Administrator.
40.5.1. A grading permit will not be required when:
1. The fill amount does not exceed 25 cubic yards on any one site.
2. Grading does not exceed new construction authorized by a building
permit properly issued by the Building Inspection Department.
Grading under the authorization of a building permit shall follow
the standards and requirements of this ordinance.
40.5.2. No exceptions are permitted when the proposed grading activities
are to take place in a designated floodplain. [Added 6-8-1981 by Ord.
No. 6-8-81C]
40.6.1. Whenever the Administrator determines that any existing
excavation, embankment or fill has become a hazard as defined in
Section 40.2 of this ordinance, the owner of the property upon which
the excavation, embankment or fill is located, or other person or agent
in control of said property, upon receipt of notice from the
Administrator, shall, within 24 hours or other reasonable period
specified therein, repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation,
embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.
40.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.6
1:295
40.7. Application for permit.
40.6.2. If, after such notification, the property owner or his agent has not
made the necessary repairs within the time specified, then the
Municipal Council may direct municipal employees or hired personnel
to make the required repairs, and the cost thereof shall be borne by the
property owner, said costs to be collected in the manner provided by
law, including the imposition of a lien against the property.
40.7.1. Every applicant for a grading permit shall file a written application
therefor with the Administrator, in a form prescribed by the
Administrator. Such application shall:
1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot,
block, tract or street address, or a similar description which will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed work.
2. Be accompanied by plans and specifications prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer, giving a reasonable picture of
the site and proposed soil erosion controls, if any.
a. Such plans shall include a description of the site proposed for
grading; the accurate location by lot, block, tract, street
address, a location map or other similar information; a contour
map showing the present contours of the land and the
proposed contours of the land after completion of the proposed
grading; and a plan showing cross sections of the proposed cut
or fill which show the method of benching both cut and/or fill.
In addition, a plot plan shall show the location of the grading,
boundaries, lot lines, neighboring streets or ways, buildings,
surface and subsurface utilities and waterways. In addition,
plans shall include a description of the type and classification
of the soil from the soil survey or better; details and location of
any proposed drainage structures and pipes, walls and
cribbing; seeding and/or planting locations and schedules,
debris basins and diversion channels; the nature of fill
material; and such other information as the Administrator may
need to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. All plans shall
be dated and bear the name and seal of the professional
engineer who prepared the same, the name of the applicant
and the owner of the land. Plans shall be submitted in
triplicate, one set of which shall be of reproducible nature.
b. The Administrator may waive the preparation by a professional
engineer when it is evident that the proposed work is simple, is
clearly shown on the plans submitted, creates no potential
nuisance or hazard to adjacent property and does not include
the construction of a fill upon which a structure is to be
erected.
40.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.7
1:296
40.8. Approval or disapproval of applications; fees. [Amended
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
40.9. Completion and performance guaranties.
3. State the estimated dates for the commencement and completion of
grading work.
4. State the purpose for which the grading application is filed.
5. State whether excavated material is to be used as on-site fill or if it
is to be removed from the site. If material is to be removed from the
site, the location and quantity of such disposal must be stated in the
application. A separate grading permit may be required for such
off-site fill as herein required under Section 40.4 of this ordinance.
40.7.2. The Administrator may require, from the applicant or the applicant's
engineer, information and reports from governmental agencies and
scientific and/or engineering journals, if available, and professional
engineers and/or engineering geologists, if necessary. This information
and these reports must be of sufficient detail to ensure that proposed
grading will not create a hazard and that there will be minimum of soil
erosion on the site to be graded.
40.7.3. To be adequate, a geological report shall include a detailed
description of the geological conditions of the site and shall also include
conclusions and recommendations that will demonstrate the
relationship of the geological conditions to the proposed development,
including hazardous conditions, water resources, mineral resources
and environmental impact. A soil conservation report shall include an
existing site description as to topography, drainage, cover and soils;
major resource problems as to soil limitations, erosion, sediment
potential and surface runoff changes; and recommendations to
minimize soil limitations, erosion, sediment and surface water disposal
problems.
40.8.1. The Administrator shall receive the applications and shall collect all
fees. The Administrator shall review all applications and shall indicate
the approval thereon. In the event of disapproval, the Administrator
shall note the reasons therefor, a copy of which shall be sent to the
applicant.
40.8.2. Before issuing a grading permit, the Administrator shall collect a
permit fee based upon the volume of material to be graded. The fee
shall be set in accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses
as determined by Municipal Council.
40.9.1. Before issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall post $200 in
cash plus a performance bond, corporate surety or other approved
security in the amount of 20% of the estimated cost of grading work and
erosion control facilities proposed, to guarantee that said work and
40.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.9
1:297
40.10. Expiration of permit.
40.11. Granting or denial of permit; appeals.
40.12. Grading inspection and supervision.
facilities will be completed in a satisfactory manner and meet the
requirements of this ordinance. No bond shall be required if another
bond or other approved security is posted for construction and/or site
improvements. When all requirements of this permit have been met
and the work has been completed in a satisfactory manner, the security
shall be replaced with a maintenance bond guaranteeing the work for a
period of two years after completion thereof.
40.10.1. Every grading permit shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been
commenced within six months or is not completed within one year from
the date of issue, provided that the Municipal Council, acting upon the
recommendation of the Administrator, may, if the permit holder
presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented
work from being started or completed within the specified time limits,
grant a reasonable extension of time, and provided further that the
application for the extension of time is made before the date of
expiration of the permit.
40.11.1. When the requirements of this ordinance for obtaining a permit
have been met, the Administrator shall approve the proposed plan and
grant a grading permit to the applicant. Approved work may then start.
However, when, in the opinion of the Administrator, work proposed by
the applicant is likely to endanger any property or person, or any street
or alley, or create hazardous conditions, the grading permit shall be
denied. In determining whether the proposed work is likely to endanger
any property or any street or alley, or create hazardous conditions, the
Administrator shall give due consideration to possible saturation by
rains, earth movements, runoff surface waters and subsurface
conditions such as the stratification and faulting of rock, aquifers,
springs and the nature and type of the soil or rock.
40.11.2. The Municipal Council shall, within 45 days, consider appeals from
the decision of the Administrator or from the denial of a permit by the
Administrator, and the Municipal Council, within 45 days, shall consider
alternate methods, standards or materials proposed by the developer
when, in its opinion, strict compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance is unwarranted or creates undue hardship. Any applicant or
permit holder shall have the right to appeal to any court of competent
jurisdiction from any decision of the Municipal Council under the
provisions of applicable state law relating to appeals.
40.12.1. The permittee or his agent shall notify the Administrator in writing
of the start and completion of each continuous grading operation.
40.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.12
1:298
40.13. Standards for excavations.
Notice shall be received by the Administrator, or at his office, at least
two working days before the start or completion of grading operations.
40.12.2. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the
Municipal Engineer, shall be maintained at the site during the progress
of the grading work and until the work has been approved.
40.12.3. Grading work at the various stages, or at any other time, will be
subject to spot inspections at the discretion of the Administrator, to
determine that the work is being performed in compliance with this
ordinance.
40.12.4. Any physical changes in the site, such as surface water drainage,
soil and bedrock dislocations, alteration of groundwater discharge or
any other natural or man-made modification which would cause a doubt
to be cast upon the feasibility of the contents of the original permit
approval, must be reported to the Administrator within 24 hours of
discovery of such condition. Failure to do so is deemed as just reason
for revocation of the permit and forfeiture of the security.
40.12.5. In special cases, when grading occurs in areas of landslide-prone
soil as recognized by the soil survey or better, the Administrator may
require special precautions and/or soil tests from the grader. The
results of all soil tests and core borings made relating to the side
graded shall be submitted to the Administrator, the cost of such tests
and reports to be borne by the permittee.
40.13.1. Maximum slope steepness of a cut shall be three horizontal to one
vertical for minimizing erosion and landslide hazards. However, a
governmental review agency, professional engineer or engineering
geologist may recognize the types of soil on the site to be graded from
the soil survey or better. Maximum slopes can then be determined as
follows:
1. Landslide-prone soils where existing slopes are of a gradient
greater than 25% shall have cut slopes no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical. Soil survey map symbols are: 34-DE-6,
34-E-2, 34-F-1, 65-E-2.
2. Landslide-prone soils where existing slopes are of a gradient less
than 25% shall have cut slopes no steeper than two horizontal to
one vertical. Soil survey map symbols are:
32-B-2 34-C-2 65-C-2 67-C-2 32-C-2 34-D-2 65-D-2 67-D-2
34-B-2 65-B-2 67-B-1.
3. Soils which are not landslide-prone, or have a low probability of
being landslide-prone, shall have a slope no steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical. All soil survey map symbols except the
symbols listed above denote soils of low landslide probability.
40.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.13
1:299
40.14. Standards for fills.
40.13.2. Cut slopes.
1. Cut slopes which are steeper than those specified above may be
allowed under a grading permit, at the discretion of the
Administrator, provided that one or both of the following are
satisfied:
a. The material in which the execution is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope steeper than the slope specified above
for recognized soil conditions on the site. A written statement,
signed and sealed by a professional soils engineer, stating that
the steeper slope will have sufficient stability and that the risk
of creating a hazard will be slight, must be submitted to the
Administrator for approval.
b. A retaining wall or other approved support, designed by a
professional engineer and approved by the Administrator, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
2. General requirements set forth in Section 40.19 of this ordinance
must also be met.
3. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall generally be set back three
feet from adjacent property lines or street right-of-way lines in
order to permit the normal rounding of the edge without
encroaching on the abutting property or street.
4. Excavations shall not extend below the angle of repose or natural
slope of the soil under the nearest point of any footing or
foundation of any building or structure unless such footing or
foundation is first properly underpinned or protected against
settlement or movement.
5. Before commencing any excavation which will in any way affect an
adjoining property or structures thereon, the person making or
causing the excavation to be made shall notify in writing the
owners of the adjacent property or buildings, not less than 30 days
before such excavation is to be made, that the proposed excavation
is to be started. Adjoining properties and structures shall be
protected as provided in the Municipality's Building Code as is then
on file in the office of the Building Inspector and/or as required by
the Administrator.
6. Guidelines for cuts in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook
for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, shall be followed. One or a
combination of guidelines shall be used to minimize hazards,
depending on site conditions and proposed grading.
40.14.1. No fill shall be made in a residentially zoned area of the
municipality or with an exposed face adjacent to such a district which
40.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.14
1:300
creates a slope steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, except
under one or more of the following conditions:
1. The fill, in the opinion of the Municipal Engineer, is located so that
settlement, sliding or erosion of the fill material will not result in
property damage or be a hazard to adjoining property, streets, ways
or buildings.
2. A written statement from a professional civil engineer, licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in soils
engineering, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the standard specified slopes will not
endanger any property or result in personal hazard or property
damage is submitted to approved by the Administrator.
40.14.2. In issuing permits, the Administrator may impose conditions
requiring that a fill be constructed with an exposed surface flatter than
two horizontal to one vertical, if under the particular circumstances
involved such flatter surface is necessary for stability and for the safety
of persons and property.
40.14.3. Whenever a fill is to be made of materials other than clean soil or
earth, the grading permit shall be subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
1. The fill shall be completed within a reasonable length of time as
determined by the Municipal Engineer and so specified on the
grading permit.
2. Clean soil or earth shall be placed over the top and exposed
surfaces of the fill to a depth sufficient to effectively conceal all
materials used in the fill other than clean soil or earth. If the filling
operation is intermittent, the Administrator may require that the
top and exposed surfaces of the fill be so covered at the completion
of each such interruption.
3. No fill of any kind shall be placed over trees, stumps or other
materials which could create a nuisance or be susceptible to
attracting rodents, termites or other pests.
4. No grading permit shall be issued for the filling of materials other
than clean soil or earth until a faithful performance bond in the
amount of at least 20% more than the Municipal Engineer's
estimated cost of adequately covering such fill with clean soil or
earth has been furnished to the municipality. Such bond shall be
executed by a corporate surety, as well as by the principal, and
shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal Solicitor as to
form. The bond shall inure to the benefit of the municipality and be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the work required
under the terms and conditions of the grading permit to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer. In lieu of such bond, a cash
40.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.14
1:301
40.15. Compaction of fills.
40.16. Minimizing erosion and sediment.
deposit or a certified check in the same amount may be made with
the Municipal Treasurer. [Added 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81C]
40.14.4. Standards for Floodplains and Watercourses.
1. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources,
Bureau of Dams, Waterways and Wetlands or any other applicable
governmental agencies.
2. (Reserved)48
3. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area, shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this ordinance and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
4. (Reserved)49
40.15.1. All fills shall be compacted to provide stability of fill material and to
prevent undesirable settlement or slippage. Fills shall be compacted
using modern methods and equipment. Fills shall be constructed under
the supervision of a qualified soils engineer who shall certify in writing
as to the adequacy of the compaction, and he shall submit results of the
compaction tests to the Municipal Engineer.
40.15.2. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall, generally, be set back three
feet from adjacent property lines or street right-of-way lines in order to
permit the normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the
abutting property or street.
40.15.3. Guidelines for fills in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook
for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, shall be followed. One or a
combination of guidelines shall be used to minimize hazards, depending
on site conditions and proposed grading.
40.16.1. All grading shall be done in conformity with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Allegheny County Conservation Soil District. Reports and plans
48.Editor's Note: Former Section 40.14.4.2, regarding relocation of watercourses, was
repealed 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14. For current provisions, see Ch. 72, Floodplain
Management.
49.Editor's Note: Former Section 40.14.4.4, regarding requirements in a floodplain or
watercourse, was repealed 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14. For current provisions, see Ch. 72,
Floodplain Management.
40.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.16
1:302
40.17. Retaining walls.
required to be submitted to these agencies shall also be submitted to
the Municipality. [Amended 11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 11-12-2001E]
40.16.2. Guidelines for minimizing erosion and sediment in the Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and
the Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control Program Manual
(March, 2000 et seq.), Bureau of Water Quality Protection Division of
Waterways, and Erosion Control, Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Office of Water Management, shall be
followed. One or a combination of guidelines shall be used to minimize
hazards, depending on site conditions and proposed grading. However,
the Administrator may approve grading plans not meeting guidelines of
the Handbook if proposed grading will not constitute a hazard.
Governmental and/or engineering reports shall be used as evidence
that proposed grading will not constitute a hazard. [Amended
11-12-2001 by Ord. No. 11-12-2001E]
40.16.3. All slopes shall be sown with crown vetch or other approved antierosion
vegetation.
40.16.4. Care shall be taken to prevent erosion and sedimentation entering
adjoining streams. Approved anti-erosion devices shall be installed
where directed to achieve this requirement.
40.16.5. The owners of property, whose sites are one acre or greater in size,
on which grading work or other significant disturbance of the soil would
occur or any other activity which would increase surface water runoff in
an uncontrolled manner, shall obtain the proper permits for controlling
erosion, sedimentation and stormwater flows from the Allegheny
County Soil Conservation District which authorizes the discharges from
grading, excavation, or fill activities. [Added 11-12-2001 by Ord. No.
11-12-2001E]
40.17.1. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAINING WALL — A structure composed of concrete, steel or other
approved building material constructed for the purpose of supporting
a cut or fill embankment which would otherwise not comply with the
requirements of the standards set forth in this ordinance, and which is
more than four feet in maximum height as measured on the exposed
vertical surface of the wall.
40.17.2. If a retaining wall is constructed to satisfy a requirement of this
ordinance, a building permit, as provided for by other municipal
regulations, shall not be required. The grading permit will apply to the
retaining wall, but the requirements for inspection, etc., as stated
herein are applicable.
40.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.17
1:303
40.18. Drainage provisions.
40.19. General requirements.
40.17.3. Retaining walls must be constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practice. The plans submitted for approval shall bear the
seal of a professional engineer.
40.17.4. The backfilling of retaining walls and the insertion of subterranean
drainage facilities shall be done strictly in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and the appropriate municipal
specifications.
40.17.5. In general, where a wall is replacing an exposed slope, the vertical
face of the wall shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the
adjoining property.
1. A special exception to this requirement may be applied for and
granted by the Administrator if it can be satisfactorily
demonstrated that such a variance is necessary to permit normal
use of the property, i.e., for a sideline driveway, or other reasonable
considerations.
2. The requirement of this subsection may also be set aside when the
proposed retaining wall is a joint venture between adjacent
property owners, and appropriate documents so stating are filed
with the application for the permit.
40.18.1. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface or
subsurface waters from damaging:
1. The cut face of an excavation.
2. The sloping surface of a fill.
3. Adjacent property affected by the change in the existing natural
runoff pattern.
40.18.2. Such drainage provisions shall be indicated on the grading plans
submitted for approval.
40.18.3. To prevent damage, grading plans shall follow Vegetative Control
Methods and Ditch and Conduit Control Methods in the Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, when
they are applicable to the site. The Administrator may approve methods
and materials recommended by governmental agencies and
professional engineers when they are more suitable to the site in
preventing damage. Drainage facilities shall be designed to
accommodate the severest storm that might occur during a twenty-fiveyear
period.
40.19.1. At the top of all cut or fill slopes which are steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical, and eight or more feet in total height, a chain-
40.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.19
1:304
40.20. Maintenance.
40.21. Liability.
40.22. Violations and penalties.
link fence not less than four feet in height, and of a design meeting the
approval of the Municipal Engineer, shall be erected.
40.19.2. The owner of the property being graded shall be responsible to
protect and clean up lower properties of silt and debris which has
washed down onto the lower properties as a result of the grading work
on the higher property.
40.19.3. In order to prevent the denuding of the landscape, wherever
practicable, large trees and other natural features constituting
important physical, aesthetic and economic assets to existing or
impending development work shall be preserved.
40.19.4. When grading activity is to take place in the floodway (FW) portion,
the effect of such grading must be fully offset by accompanying
improvements. [Added 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81C]
40.20.1. The owner of any property upon which an excavation or fill has
been made shall maintain in good condition and repair the excavation
or fill constructed, and also all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage
structures, fences, ground cover and any other protective devices as
may be a part of the permit requirements.
40.20.2. If, at any time subsequent to the completion of the grading work,
the cut face or fill slope shall evidence signs of deterioration, erosion or
other evidence which might be detrimental to the properties above and
below the graded site, the Administrator may direct the property owner
to take necessary remedial steps in accordance with the sound
engineering practice to restore the grading to a safe condition, and to
do so in a reasonable period of time.
40.21.1. Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this
ordinance nor compliance with the provisions hereto or with any
condition imposed by the municipal official hereunder shall relieve any
person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property
resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any
liability upon the Municipality for damages to persons or property.
40.21.2. Compliance with the requirements of this ordinance shall be
incumbent upon the person performing any grading, the presence or
absence of an inspector notwithstanding.
40.22.1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any provision of this ordinance.
40.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.22
1:305
40.23. Other remedies.
40.24. Severability.
40.25. Repealer.
40.22.2. When notice of any violation of, or noncompliance with, the
provisions of this ordinance has been given by the Administrator or the
Code Enforcement Officer, or their representative, to any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately or within a reasonable time
limit specified in such notice. If such violation is not discontinued or
extends beyond the specified time limit, the Administrator shall revoke
the grading permit, and the violator shall be subject to the applicable
penalty.
40.22.3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
liable, on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $100.
Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Code
Enforcement Officer, by service of summons in a prosecution, or in any
other way, that he is committing such violation of this ordinance, each
day that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such
fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now by
law collected.
40.22.4. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance, when certified in
writing by the Administrator, shall incur the automatic forfeiture of the
cash bond of $200 required to be deposited under completion and
performance guaranties section of this ordinance. This automatic
forfeiture is also applicable to partially satisfy costs incurred as
referred to in hazardous conditions section of this ordinance.
40.23.1. In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance, the proper officer of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of
the Municipality of Bethel Park an appropriate action or proceeding,
whether by legal process or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work
and to restrain or abate such violation.
40.24.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any of its
provisions or any part of any provision shall be held unconstitutional,
the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Municipal
Council that this ordinance would have been enacted had such
unconstitutional provisions or parts thereof not been included herein.
40.25.1. Any ordinance or parts of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be, and the same are hereby, repealed
to the extent of such conflict, and specifically Ordinance No. 8-12-68C is
repealed in its entirety.
40.22 BETHEL PARK CODE 40.25
1:306
Chapter 41
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION
40.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 40.25
1:307

ARTICLE I
Legal Authorization and Purposes
[Ordinance adopted by referendum vote November 6, 1990]
41.1. Legal authorization.
41.2. Purposes.
41.1.1. Pursuant to authority contained in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, amended 1988, and the Home Rule Charter Law of 1972
as amended, there are hereby created historic landmarks or sites within
the Municipality of Bethel Park.
41.1.2. This Ordinance shall conform to Pennsylvania History Code sections
that relate to preservation of historic landmarks and sites.
41.1.3. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Bethel Park
Historic Preservation Ordinance.
41.2.1. Historic landmarks or sites are created for the following purposes:
1. To protect those landmarks or sites of the Municipality of Bethel
Park which reflect the cultural, economic, social, political,
educational and architectural history of the Municipality of Bethel
park, the State and Nation.
2. To promote the use and reuse of landmarks or sites in the
Municipality of Bethel Park for the education, cultural enrichment,
pleasure and the general welfare of the people of Bethel Park, the
State and Nation.
3. To awaken in our people an interest in our historic past.
4. To enhance the sense of stability, and to maintain the quality of life.
5. To strengthen the economy of Bethel Park by stabilizing and
improving property values in and near historic landmarks and sites
throughout the municipality.
6. To encourage new buildings and developments, and renewal of
existing properties that will be harmonious with existing
historically significant buildings and sites.
41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.2
1:309

ARTICLE II
Definitions
41.3. Definitions.
41.3.1. ALTERATION — Any change, modification or addition to a part or all
of the exterior of any building or structure;
41.3.2. BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure which is a combination
of materials to form a construction for occupancy and/or use;
41.3.3. BUILDING PERMIT — An approval statement signed by the Building
Permit Officer authorizing the construction, alteration, reconstruction,
repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or part of any building
within an historical landmark or site.
41.3.4. BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION — The request filed by a person
with the Building Permit Officer that seeks authorization to construct,
alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, demolish or raze all or a part of any
building at an historic site or historic landmark;
41.3.5. BUILDING PERMIT OFFICER — The officer of the Municipality of
Bethel Park designated by Bethel Park Council as the individual who
issues the permit for the construction, alteration, reconstruction,
repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all of a part of any building at
an historic landmark or site; CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS -
The approval statement signed by the Bethel Park Council which
certifies the appropriateness of a particular request for the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition
or razing of all or a part of any building at an historic landmark or site,
and authorizes the issuance of a building permit for said request;
41.3.6.CONSTRUCTION — Any or all work necessary for the erection of any
building or structure from a combination of materials to form safe and
stable structures;
41.3.7. DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of
any building and all operations incidental thereto;
41.3.8.RECONSTRUCTION — Any or all work needed to remake or rebuild
all or a part of any building to a sound condition, but not necessarily
original materials;
41.3.9. REPAIRS — Any or all work involving the replacement of existing
work with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance, but not
including any addition, change or modification in construction;
41.3.10. RESTORATION — Any or all work connected with the returning to
or restoring a building or a part of any building to its original condition
through the use of original or nearly original materials;
41.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.3
1:311
41.3.11. SIGN — A lettered board, structure or other surface, or any other
device used to visually announce, advertise or convey information to the
public for any purpose. Included would be:
1. ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing lights or
color changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or
manufactured sources of supply, but not including wind actuated
elements such as flags, banners, or pennants;
2. BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which announces or directs attention to
a business, product or service or activity sold or conducted on the
premises where such sign is located;
3. ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign incorporating a source of light in
order to make the message readable. Included are internally and
externally lighted signs.
41.3.12. BETHEL PARK HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
(HARB) — The entity that advises Bethel Park Council on any requests
for authorization to construct, alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, or
demolish all or a part of any building within a historic district, at an
historic site or historic landmark.
41.3.13. BETHEL PARK PLANNING COMMISSION — The entity which
advises Bethel Park Council on planning and planning related matters;
41.3.14. BETHEL PARK COUNCIL — The governing body of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
41.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 41.3
1:312
ARTICLE III
Delineation of Historic Landmarks/Sites
41.4. Delineation of historic landmarks/sites.
41.5. Interpretation of boundaries.
41.4.1. Municipality of Bethel Park historic landmarks and sites shall be
determined in a community-wide survey of historical landmarks and
sites, delineated in writing to Bethel Park Council, and designated on an
Official Map of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
41.4.2. The Official Historic Landmarks/Sites Map shall be signed by the
Municipality of Bethel Park Council and located in the office of the
Building Permit Officer.
41.5.1. Where uncertainty and/or discrepancies exist as to the boundaries of
the landmarks or sites as shown on the Official Municipality of Bethel
Park Historic Landmarks/Sites Map described in the above, the
following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in the above, shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on this Official Map shall be determined by
the scale of the Map.
4. Where physical or cultural features existing ou the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by the above, the Bethel Park Council
shall interpret the boundaries of the District.
41.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.5
1:313

ARTICLE IV
Creation and Membership of the Historical Architectural Review
Board
41.6. Creation and membership.
41.7. Powers and duties of HARB.
41.6.1. Bethel Park Historical Architectural Review Board, hereafter
referred to as HARB, shall be established as the entity that advises
Bethel Park Council on any requests for authorization to construct,
alter, reconstruct, repair, restore or demolish all or part of any historic
landmark or site.
41.6.2. An HARB is hereby established to be composed of nine members
appointed by Bethel Park Council. The membership of HARB shall be as
follows:
1. One member shall be a registered architect; one shall be a licensed
Realtor; one shall be the Building Permit Officer; one shall be a
Planning Commission member; and five shall be persons with
knowledge of and/or interest in the preservation of historic
landmarks and sites who are members in good standing of Bethel
Park Historical Society or who reside in Bethel park but are
members in good standing of another preservation entity.
41.6.3. Initial terms of the first members shall be so fixed that no more than
three members shall be replaced or reappointed during any one
calendar year. Appointees shall initially have terms of one year (three
appointees), three years (three appointees), and five years (three
appointees), then five years each thereafter. Appointments to vacancies
shall be for the unexpired portion of the previous member's unexpired
portion of the term.
41.6.4.HARB members shall disqualify themselves from voting on any
project in which their own financial interests are directly or indirectly
involved. Subsequent discovery of a member's financial interest shall
declare previous action potentially beneficial to the member as null and
void if their vote was affirmative and a part of the majority.
41.6.5. Council shall appoint the HARB within 30 days after certification of
this legislation.
41.7.1. Advisory Rule. HARB shall give recommendations to Bethel Park
Council regarding the advisability of issuing any Certificates of
Appropriateness required to be issued in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code and Home Rule Law of 1972 as
amended, and this ordinance.
41.7.2. Board Rule Making Power. HARB may make and alter rules and
regulations for its own organization and procedure, provided that they
41.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.7
1:315
41.8. Additional powers and duties of HARB.
are consistent with the laws of the Commonwealth and all provisions of
this Ordinance.
41.7.3. Annual Reports. The members of HARB shall make an annual report
to Bethel Park Council which would include any recommendations for
change in the Ordinance.
41.7.4. Expenses. HARB may, within the constraints of appropriations by
Bethel Park Council, incur necessary expenses consistent with the
expense procedure of existing Bethel Park commissions and boards,
and the reasonable performance of HARB duties and powers.
41.7.5. Meetings. HARB shall meet at least once annually. Further, HARB
may hold any additional meetings it considers necessary to carry out its
powers and duties indicated in this Ordinance. Such meetings shall be
open to the public. A majority of HARB shall constitute a quorum and
action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a
majority (five members) of HARB.
41.8.1. In addition to the above, HARB shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. To conduct a survey of buildings for the purpose of determining
those of historic and/or architectural significance and pertinent
facts about them; action in coordination with the Bethel Park
Planning Commission and other appropriate groups and to
maintain and periodically revise the detailed listings of historic
sites and buildings and data about them, appropriately classified
with respect to national, state or local significance, to period or
field of interest or otherwise;
2. To propose, from time to time as deemed appropriate, the
establishment of additional historic landmarks and sites, and
revisions to existing historic designations;
3. To formulate recommendations concerning the establishment of an
appropriate system of markers for selected historic landmarks or
sites, including proposals for the installation and care of such
historic markers;
4. To formulate recommendations concerning the preparation and
publication of maps, brochures and descriptive material about the
Bethel Park historic and/or architectural buildings, sites and
districts;
5. To cooperate with and advise the Bethel Park Council, the Bethel
Park Planning Commission, and other Bethel Park agencies
involving historically and/or architecturally significant buildings or
sites (such as appropriate land usage, parking facilities and signs,
41.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 41.8
1:316
as well as adherence to lot dimensional regulations and minimum
structural standards);
6. To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the National Park
Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservations, the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission and other
agencies, public and private, from time to time, concerned with
historic landmarks or sties.
7. To advise owners of historic buildings about historic preservation;
8. To promote public interest in the purposes of this Ordinance by
releasing to news media and other communications media,
information about HARB activities.
41.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.8
1:317

ARTICLE V
Design Guidelines
41.9. Design guidelines.
41.9.1. In determining the recommendations to be made to the Bethel Park
Council concerning the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness,
HARB shall consider only those matters that are pertinent to the
preservation to this historic and/or architectural aspect and nature of
the building, site, area or district, certified to have historical
significance, including the following:
a. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the historic landmark, site or district;
b. The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features which
can be seen from a public street or way;
c. The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings or structures in the proximity to the historic
landmark, site or district. Consideration shall be given but not
limited to the following:
d. Proportion of Buildings Front Facades - the relationship between
the width of the front of the building and the height of the front of
the building.
e. Proportion of Openings within the Building - the relationship of
width to height of windows and doors.
f. Rhythms of Solids to Voids in the Front Facade - Since rhythm is a
repeated and recurrent alteration of strong and weak architectural
elements, a rhythm of masses to openings in a building should be
maintained.
g. Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings and Streets - In moving past a
series of buildings, a rhythm of recurrent or repeated building
masses to spaces between them should be experienced.
h. Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projections - Moving past a series
of structures, one experiences a rhythm of entrances or projections
at an intimate scale.
i. Relationship of Materials - Within an area the predominant
materials may be brick, stone stucco, wood siding or other
material.
j. Relation of Textures - The predominant textures of an area may be
smooth, such as stucco or rough as brick with tooled joints or
horizontal wood siding, or other textures.
41.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.9
1:319
k. Relationship of Color - Insofar as the mass and detail such as trim
are concerned, a predominant color that may be of a natural
material or a patina colored by time. Blending colors of trim is also
a factor.
l. Relationship of Architectural Details - Architectural details and
their relationship to the structure in question and adjacent ones,
including but not limited to cornices, lintels, arches, quoins,
balustrades and iron work, chimneys, etc.
m. Relationship of Roof Shapes - Building should have compatible roof
shapes such as gable, mansard, hip, flat, gambrel and/or other
kinds of roof shapes.
n. Walls of Continuity - Physical ingredients such as brick walls,
wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, building
facades, or combinations of these, form continuous, cohesive walls
of enclosures along the street.
o. Relationship of Landscaping - There may be predominance of a
quality and quantity of landscaping although emphasis herein shall
be with the amounts and continuity of landscaping.
p. Paving Materials - There may be a predominance in the use of brick
pavers, cobblestones, granite blocks or others.
q. Directional Expression of Front Elevation - Structural shape,
planning of openings and architectural detail may provide a
predominately vertical, horizontal or non-directional character to
the building facade.
r. Scale - Scale is created by the size of units of construction and
architectural detail that relate to the size of man. It can also be
determined by building mass and how it relates to open space. The
major elements of scale may be brick or stone units, window or
door openings, porches and balconies, etc.
1. Variations - The HARB shall grant variations in a manner that
will be in harmony with the character of the other buildings or
structures on the street and/or districts.
2. The height of any new building or structure shall not exceed
the height of the tallest adjacent building or structure by more
than 10%. This requirement shall also apply to any proposed
modification to existing buildings or structures.
3. In cases where applications for proposed demolition occur,
HARB shall, where deemed necessary, recommend to the
Bethel Park Council that the proposed demolition be postponed
for a period not exceeding nine months. However, in the event
demolition cannot be avoided, the moving of a building shall be
41.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 41.9
1:320
41.10. Signs.
encouraged as an alternative to demolition if there is no other
way to preserve the building.
4. In addition to the above, all other Bethel Park laws and
ordinances shall be complied with including the zoning and
subdivision ordinances.
41.10.1. No sign or permanent external advertising display of any kind shall
be erected, altered or used with an historic landmark or historic site,
except for advertising informing the public about a service, business,
occupation or profession carried on or about the property on which
such sign or permanent external advertising display appears. In
conjunction with this, no such sign or advertising display of any kind or
for any purpose shall be erected or altered until an application for
permit to make such erection or alteration has been reviewed by HARB
for its conformity in exterior material composition, exterior structural
design, external appearance and size with similar advertising or
information media used in the architectural period.
41.10.2. In addition to the above, and other matters considered in Section
500, the following shall be adhered to:
1. No animated, revolving or moving signs shall be permitted.
2. Illumination of any sign shall be indirect, shielded, or otherwise
arranged to prevent direct glare.
3. No free-standing sign shall be more than 15 feet high.
4. Projecting signs extending more than two feet over any public walk
or right-of-way shall be at least eight feet above the walk grade and
at least 14 feet above any vehicular right-of-way.
5. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location
where by reason of its position, shape or color it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device.
6. No sign shall be located so as to prevent or hinder free ingress to or
egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
7. No sign shall be attached to or placed on any public utility pole or
tree located within any public right-of-way.
41.10.3. All other requirements of any Municipal Ordinance must be
complied with. Historical markers may be authorized by HARB subject
to the provisions stipulated and such markers shall not be considered as
signs but are to be erected in accordance with the requirements
established for historic markers by HARB.
41.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.10
1:321

ARTICLE VI
Administration - Application Review Procedure
41.11. Application review.
41.11.1. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for work to be
done at the landmark or historic site, the Building Permit Officer shall
act in accordance with the procedures then being followed in that
office, except those procedures that are necessarily modified by the
following requirements. The Building Permit Officer shall:
1. Forward copies of the application for a building permit together
with copies of any plot plan, and building plans and specifications,
filed by the applicant to HARB.
2. Not issue a permit for any construction, alteration, reconstruction,
repair, restoration, or demolition of all or a part of any landmark or
historic site, until Bethel Park Council has issued a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
3. Require applicants to submit a sufficient number of additional
copies of material required to be attached to an application for a
building permit so that the information needed to make the
determination set forth in Section 41.11.7 will be available.
4. Maintain in his office a record of all such applications and final
disposition of same.
41.11.2. Review of Applications. Upon receipt of any building permit
application under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, HARB shall
consider such at its next regularly scheduled meeting or special
meeting.
41.11.3. Notification to Applicant. The person(s) applying for the permit
shall be advised of the time and place of said meeting and be invited to
appear to explain his reasons therefore at least 10 days beforehand.
HARB may invite such other persons as it desires to attend its meeting.
41.11.4. Design Guidelines. In determining the recommendations to be
presented to the Bethel Park Council concerning the issuing of a
Certificate of Appropriateness authorizing a permit for the
construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, or
demolition of all or a part of any historic landmark or site, HARB shall
consider the Design Guidelines set forth in Sections 41.9 and 41.10.
41.11.5. Time Frame for Board Decision. HARB shall render a decision and
recommendation on any application for a building permit under its
review no later than one month after the hearing/meeting provided for
in Section 41.7 of this Ordinance and shall submit, in writing to the
Bethel Park Council recommendations concerning the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness.
41.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.11
1:323
41.11.6. Application Disapproval by HARB. If the HARB decides to advise
against the granting of a Certificate of Appropriateness, it shall indicate
to the applicant for a building permit. The disapproval shall indicate to
the applicant the changes in plans and specifications, if any, which
would protect the distinctive historical character of the historic
landmark or site. The HARB shall withhold its report for a period of five
days to allow the applicant to decide whether or not to make the
suggested changes in his plans and specifications. If the applicant
determines that he will make the necessary changes, he shall so advise
the HARB which shall in turn advise Bethel Park Council accordingly.
41.11.7. Contents of Written Report. The written report to Bethel Park
Council concerning HARB's recommendations on the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness shall set out the following matters:
1. The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done;
2. The exterior changes to be made or the exterior characters of the
structure to be erected;
3. A list of the surrounding structures with their general exterior
characteristics;
4. The effect of the proposed changes upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the site or District;
5. The appropriateness of exterior architectural features of the
building which can be seen from the public street or way;
6. The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the
7. Relation of such factors to similar features of building or structures
at the site or in an historical District;
8. The opinion of HARB (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy
the historic aspect and nature of the historic landmark or site.
9. The specific recommendations of HARB as to the issuance by
Bethel Park Council or its refusal to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
41.11.8. Notification to Applicant. Upon receipt of the written report from
HARB as provided in 41.11.7 of this section, the Bethel Park Council
shall consider at the next regularly scheduled or special meeting, the
question or issuing to the Building Permit Officer a Certificate of
Appropriateness authorizing a permit for work covered by the
application. The applicant shall be advised by Bethel Park Manager at
the time and place of the meeting at which his application shall be
considered. The applicant shall have the right to attend this meeting
and be heard as to the reasons for filing the said application.
41.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 41.11
1:324
41.11.9. Design Guidelines. In determining whether or not to certify the
appropriateness of the proposed construction, alteration,
reconstruction, repair, restoration or demolition, of all or a part of any
historic landmark or site, Bethel Park Council shall consider the same
factors as HARB of Historical Architectural Review set forth in Sections
41.9 and 41.10 of this Ordinance and the report of the HARB.
41.11.10. Approval by Council. If Bethel Park Council approves the
application, it shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizing
the Building Permit Officer to issue a permit for the work covered.
41.11.11. Disapproval by Council. If Bethel park Council disapproves, they
shall do so in writing, and copies shall be given to the Building Permit
Officer and the applicant. The disapproval shall indicate what changes
in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting
the distinctive historical character of the historic landmark or site.
Upon receipt of a written disapproval of Bethel Park Council, the
Building Permit Officer shall disapprove the application for a building
permit and so advise the applicant. The applicant may appeal from the
disapproval as provided by law.
41.11.12. Final Notification. In either case, the Bethel park Council shall
notify the applicant within five days of its meeting at which the
application was considered.
41.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.11
1:325

ARTICLE VII
Administration
41.12. Enforcement.
41.13. Repealer.
41.14. Severability clause.
41.15. Amendments.
41.16. Effective date.
41.12.1. The Building Permit Officer shall have the power to institute any
proceedings at law or in equity necessary for the enforcement of this
Ordinance in the same manner as in the enforcement of Bethel Park
Building Permit Ordinance as enacted and as may be amended from
time to time.
41.12.2.HARB shall have the power to recommend action to Council that
HARB deems necessary for preservation efforts.
41.13.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
41.14.1. If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this
Ordinance shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a
whole, or any part thereof.
41.15.1. The provisions of this Ordinance may be amended by Bethel park
Council by a 2/3 majority, after notice and hearing as provided by law,
following HARB concurrence.
41.15.2.HARB shall initiate amendments from time to time that, if not
adopted by Council following appropriate notices and hearings, shall be
placed on the next possible ballot without the need for petitioning that
requires 20% of registered voters from the previous Gubernatorial
election. No action requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness or
Building Permit may continue until action placed on the ballot is
resolved in keeping with guidelines in the Home Rule Charter.
41.16.1. Immediately upon the adoption of this Ordinance, the Bethel Park
Manager shall file an official copy of the Ordinance in the official
Ordinance file.
41.16.2. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon
certification of the Bureau of Elections, Allegheny County.
41.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 41.16
1:327
Chapter 42
HUNTING
41.16 BETHEL PARK CODE 41.16
1:328
ARTICLE I
Hunting
[Adopted by Ord. No. 124-3-54]
42.1. Acts declared unlawful.
42.2. Violations and penalties.
42.3. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
42.1.1. The following acts are hereby declared to be unlawful and
prohibited:
1. To hunt within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel or take
therefrom any game birds or game animals.
2. To shoot or discharge any firearm or deadly weapon within the
municipality limits while hunting or trapping for game birds or
game animals of any kind, or to use any bow and arrow except in a
supervised target range.
42.2.1. Any person or persons violating the above sections of this chapter of
this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any
Justice of the Peace, be subject to a fine of not more than $25 for each
offense, and in default of the payment of the said fine and the costs of
prosecution shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding five days.
42.3.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed so far
as the same affects this ordinance.
42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 42.3
1:329
Chapter 43
IDENTIFICATION SIGN
42.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 42.3
1:330
ARTICLE I
Identification Sign
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3-12-84C]
43.1. Definitions.
43.2. Sign requirements.
43.3. Responsible party.
43.4. Number size.
43.5. Multiple-family residences.
43.1.1. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
43.1.2. RESIDENCE — Single-family houses, duplexes, townhouses, garden
apartments and any other buildings used in part or exclusively for
dwelling purposes.
43.1.3. RESIDENCE SIGN — A sign no more than 75 feet from and facing
the cartway of the street upon which the residence has been assigned a
street number. A residence sign shall not be considered a sign under
the terms of Ordinance 12-29-66A, Zoning, provided however, no
residence sign shall have a surface area exceeding two square feet,
except as provided in Section 40.5 below.
43.2.1. It shall be the duty of the owner or person in control of any residence
to display a residence sign mounted on the residence at or near the
main entrance thereto. In the alternative, proper identification may be
installed on both sides of a free standing mailbox, provided however,
the location of the mailbox meets the location requirements for a
residence sign. When the residence to be identified is located more than
75 feet from the improved portion of the street, a residence sign shall
be installed on an elevated sign with a height of 1-1/2 feet above the
ground and located in such a manner as to be conspicuous.
43.3.1. It shall be the duty of any builder, developer, contractor, owner or
person in control of any residence now existing or hereafter erected
within said Municipality, to display and maintain a residence sign in
accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance before such
residence may be occupied or continue to be occupied.
43.4.1. Proper identification shall be arabic numerals not less than four
inches in height and shall be clearly distinguishable from the
background upon which they are installed.
43.5.1. A residence containing more than one unit with multiple main
entrances shall erect residence signs meeting design standards set
forth in regulations issued by the Municipal Manager, provided
43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 43.5
1:331
43.6. Penalty.
43.7. Notification.
43.8. Repealer.
however the surface area of such a residence sign shall not exceed 1-1/
2 square feet for each street address thereon and one square foot for
each unit number thereon and in no event shall the total surface area
of any residence sign exceed 10 square feet.
43.6.1. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates the
provisions of this Ordinance by the failure, omission or refusal to
comply with same shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine not to exceed $100 plus costs, and each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not be
effective until six months after the effective date of this Ordinance.
43.7.1. The Municipal Manager shall publish notice of this residence sign
requirement in two newspapers of general circulation once each month
for the first three months after the Ordinance's effective date.
43.8.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
43.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 43.8
1:332
Chapter 44
JUNKYARDS
43.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 43.8
1:333

ARTICLE I
Junkyards
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3-12-62B]
44.1. Short title.
44.2. Definitions.
44.3. License.
44.1.1. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Municipality of
Bethel Park Nonconforming Junkyard and Refuse Ordinance."
44.2.1. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this ordinance to have the meanings
herein indicated:
44.2.2.PERSON — Shall include any partnership, association, firm and
corporation.
44.2.3. COUNCIL — Shall mean the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
44.2.4. JUNKYARD — Shall mean any place where any junk, as hereinafter
defined, is stored, disposed of or accumulated.
44.2.5. JUNK — Shall mean any discarded material or article, and shall
include, but not be limited to, scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or
junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass containers
and structures. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in a
proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
44.2.6. JUNK DEALER — Shall mean any person, as hereinafter defined,
who shall engage in the business of selling, buying, salvaging and
dealing in junk and who maintains and operates a junkyard within the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
44.2.7. LICENSE — Shall mean the permit granted to a person who
accumulates, stores or disposes of junk as hereinbefore defined.
44.2.8. MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Council of the Borough of Bethel
Park.
44.3.1. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer, or maintain a
junkyard, without first having obtained a license from the municipality,
for which license a fee in accordance with the schedule hereinafter set
forth shall be paid to the municipality for the use of the municipality.
The license shall be issued for the twelve-month period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the following year, and each
license must be renewed annually on or before the first day of January
of each year.
44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 44.4
1:335
44.4. Application for license.
44.5. Issuance of license.
44.6. License fee.
44.7. License limitation.
44.8. Transfer of license.
44.4.1. The license provided for in this ordinance shall be issued by the
Municipality Council after written application shall have been made
therefor by the person desiring to be licensed. Such license shall state
the name of the person to whom such license is issued and the premises
on which such business is to be conducted, or such junkyard is to be
maintained. Such license shall be posted conspicuously upon the
premises licensed thereunder. The written application for license
hereinabove mentioned shall be accompanied by a form, every question
of which must be answered, which form will be supplied by the
municipality. Applicant shall also submit therewith a plot of the
premises used or to be used in connection with such license.
44.5.1. Upon receipt of an application by the Municipality Council, the
Council shall issue a license or shall refuse to issue a license to the
person applying therefor such terms and conditions, in addition to the
regulations herein contained and adopted pursuant to this ordinance,
as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this
ordinance.
44.6.1. The license fee shall be paid immediately upon the issuance or
renewal of a license. The amount of the license fee shall be calculated in
accordance with the following schedule as determined by the actual
land to be used by the person to whom the license is issued, excluding
all setback areas:
1. Less than 15,000 square feet: $50.
2. More than 15,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet:
$100.
3. More than 40,000 square feet: $200.
44.6.2. No license shall be issued for the use of a tract of land in excess of 20
acres, excluding setback areas.
44.7.1. No person licensed under this ordinance shall, by virtue of the one
license, keep more than one place of business within the municipality or
maintain more than one junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling and
dealing in junk. No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer in
any place other than the place designated upon his license, or maintain
a junkyard in any place other than the place designated upon his
license.
44.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 44.8
1:336
44.9. Transfer fee.
44.10. Records.
44.11. Delay in disposal.
44.12. Regulations.
44.8.1. No license issued by the Council shall be transferable by the licenser
to any other person, unless such a transfer is authorized by the Council.
Any person desiring to transfer his license shall notify the Council in
writing, which notification shall be accompanied by an application for a
license, as described in 44.4 of this ordinance, by the transferee.
44.9.1. In the event the Council shall approve the transfer of a license, the
transferee shall immediately pay to the municipality a transfer fee of
$10.
44.10.1. Every person, licensed under this ordinance shall provide and shall
constantly keep a book, in which shall be fairly written down in the
English language, the time of the purchase of any junk, a description of
every article or material purchased or received by him, the date and
hour of such purchase and a receipt and the person from whom such
article or material was purchased, received or handled, and such
records shall at all times be subject to the inspection of any official of
the municipality.
44.11.1. Every person licensed under this ordinance shall keep and retain
upon the licensed premises for a period of 48 hours after the purchase
or receipt thereof, all junk received or purchased by him, and he shall
not destroy or reduce the same or alter the original form, shape or
condition until such period of 48 hours shall have elapsed.
44.12.1. Every person licensed under this ordinance shall constantly
maintain the licensed premises in accordance with any special
provisions imposed by the Council and in the manner prescribed by this
section and any subsequent regulations adopted by the Council.
44.12.2. Such premises shall at all times be maintained so as not to
constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health of the community, of
residents nearby, or a place for the breeding rodents and vermin.
44.12.3. No garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in such
premises.
44.12.4. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as
junk, all gasoline and oil shall be drained and removed therefrom.
Gasoline in an amount not exceeding 10 gallons may be stored
aboveground in said junkyards, provided the same be placed in
containers approved by the Council. All other gasoline which is kept in
44.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 44.12
1:337
44.13. Violations and penalties.
44.14. Abatement of nuisances.
44.15. Severability.
44.16. Construal.
the premises shall be stored underground, which underground storage
must be approved by the Council.
44.12.5. The Manner of storage and arrangement of junk, and the drainage
facilities of the premises, shall be such as to prevent the accumulation
of stagnant water upon the premises, and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
44.12.6. All junk kept, stored or arranged on the licensed premises shall at
all times be kept, stored and arranged within the junkyard as described
in the application for license hereunder and as limited under Paragraph
above.
44.12.7. No oil, grease, tires, gasoline or other similar materials that might
be dangerous or tend to produce obnoxious smoke or odors shall be
burned within a junkyard at any time.
44.12.8. The premises to be licensed shall be set back a minimum distance
of 25 feet from the right-of-way lines on all streets or roads and a
minimum distance of 25 feet from all other property lines. The area
between the setback line and the right-of-way line and all streets and
roads and all other property lines shall be at all times kept clear and
vacant.
44.12.9. When the Council shall deem it necessary and desirable, the
premises to be licensed shall at the setback lines be enclosed by a fence
of type and style to be determined by the Council or by evergreen
screen plantings, or both. The Council may set forth the fence and
planting requirements at the time of the issuance of a license or at the
time of renewal or transfer of a license.
44.13.1. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, by a summary proceeding, be sentenced
to pay not more than $100 and the costs of prosecution, provided that
each day's violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
constitute a separate offense.
44.14.1. In addition to the remedies provided in 44.13 above, any continued
violations of this ordinance which shall constitute a nuisance in fact or
which shall, in the opinion of the Council, constitute a nuisance, may be
abated by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
44.15.1. If any section of this ordinance shall be found to be invalid, the
other sections of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
44.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 44.16
1:338
44.16.1. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall in any way repeal, alter
or amend the specific terms of Ordinance No. 70-11-51, the official
Municipality Zoning Ordinance,*03 or any amendments thereto
affecting zoning.
44.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 44.16
1:339
Chapter 45
TENANT OCCUPANCY REPORTING
44.16 BETHEL PARK CODE 44.16
1:340
ARTICLE I
Tenant Occupancy Reporting
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-13-73D; Amended by Ord. No. 4-11-88A]
45.1. Tenant occupancy reporting.
45.2. Definitions.
45.1.1. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Bethel Park
Tenant Occupancy Reporting Ordinance."
45.2.1. For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Ordinance, the
following words shall have the meaning or meanings hereby ascribed to
them:
45.2.2.LANDLORD — Shall mean any person who either alone, jointly, or
severally with others shall have title to any premises, or shall have
charge, care or control of the premises as agent for the person holding
legal title, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee or guardian of the estate of any person holding legal title, or,
and person selling under an article of agreement unless said article of
agreement has been properly recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
45.2.3.PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, corporation,
association or combination thereof, including those acting in a fiduciary
or representative capacity, whether appointed; by a court or otherwise.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the
term "Person" as applied to the partnerships or associations shall
include the partners of members thereof, and if applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
45.2.4. PREMISES — Shall mean a building or any portion thereof suitable
of adaptable for human occupancy for residential, commercial or other
purposes.
45.2.5. LEASE — Shall mean any permissive occupancy by a Person or
Persons (other than members of the Landlord's immediate family) of
any Premises, regardless of whether or not any charges, fees or other
considerations are made or levied therefor.
45.2.6.TENANT — Shall mean any Person who shall inhabit, occupy or
possess any Premises owned or controlled by a Landlord under a Lease
as hereinbefore defined.
45.2.7.OCCUPANCY REPORT — Shall mean a writing, on forms supplied by
the Municipal Secretary or a substitute form approved by the Secretary
or his designee, containing at least the following information, legibly
inscribed thereon:
1. The full name, current post office address and telephone number of
the landlord(s) and the location, and current post office address of
45.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 45.2
1:341
45.3. Occupancy report.
45.4. Supplemental information.
45.5. Penalty.
each Premises under the ownership control or possession of the
Landlord within the Municipality and stating which residential or
commercial units are occupied or unoccupied.
2. The full name(s), employment status (i.e. employed within the
Municipality, or outside of Municipality or unemployed), complete
and current post office address of each Tenant occupying any such
premises for residential, commercial or other purposes, date of
occupancy and date the occupancy terminated. Where the tenant is
an individual, only those tenants over the age of 17 years need be
identified.
45.3.1. All landlords shall, on or before June 1, 1988, file an Occupancy in
the Office of the Municipal Secretary concerning any existing Lease
within the Municipality of Bethel Park, on forms provided by the
Municipality.
45.3.2. After the effective date of this Ordinance, all Landlords shall within
30 days of the Lease of any Premises within the Municipality of Bethel
Park, file an Occupancy Report in the Office of the Municipal Secretary,
on forms provided by the Municipal Secretary.
45.4.1. All Landlords shall, within 30 days of any and every change of
occupancy of each Premises, file a supplemental Occupancy Report in
the office of the Municipal Secretary, on forms to be supplied by the
Municipality, or on a substitute form approved by the Municipal
Secretary or his designee, indicating the date upon which any tenant
previously identified in an Occupancy Report terminated their
occupancy, along with the forwarding, or other last known address of
that Tenant. Such supplementary reports, apart from the initial report,
shall be limited to the changes which have occurred.
45.5.1. The Municipal Secretary, or the Municipal Secretary's designee, may
and is hereby authorized to institute summary proceedings in
accordance with the applicable Rules of Court for violation of this
Ordinance. This action shall be brought in the name of the Municipality
of Bethel Park, and any Landlord convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, that is, failing, neglecting or refusing to
file any required Occupancy Report within the time limits prescribed by
this Ordinance, or refusing to notify the Municipal Secretary of any
change in occupancy within the time limits prescribed by this
Ordinance, or who shall knowingly make any incomplete, false or
fraudulent report, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution, or shall undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, provided, however,
45.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 45.5
1:342
45.6. Severability.
45.7. Number and gender defined.
45.8. Repealer.
the Landlord shall not be subject to any penalties provided for under
this Ordinance for incorrect or misinformation furnished to the
Landlord by any Tenant(s). A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which, or during which a violation of this
Ordinance occurs, or continues.
45.6.1. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, and, if any of the
provisions hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, void, or
otherwise unenforceable, such shall not affect the validity of any of the
remaining provisions of said Ordinance.
45.7.1. As used in this Ordinance, whenever the context so indicates the
masculine, feminine or neuter gender, and the singular or plural
number, shall each be deemed to include the other.
45.8.1. Sections 43.1 through 43.5 inclusive, of Ordinance No. 5-9-87A, the
Bethel Park Code, all hereby specifically repealed in this entirety as
well as all other ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any
of the provisions of this Ordinance, insofar as the same affects this
Ordinance.
45.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 45.8
1:343
Chapter 46
NOISE
45.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 45.8
1:344
ARTICLE I
Noise
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-13-84]
46.1. Definitions.
46.2. Unnecessary loud noise prohibited.
46.3. Radios, television sets, phonographs and similar devices.
46.4. Animals.
46.1.1. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the
provisions of this Ordinance:
46.1.2.PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
46.1.3.UNNECESSARY LOUD NOISE — Shall mean sounds which disrupt
the conduct or enjoyment of basic human activities, e.g. conversation,
sleep, listening to music or the radio or watching television.
46.2.1. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, permit or
cause to be made or continued, any unnecessary noise within the
Municipality.
46.3.1. Use Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or
permit to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
television, phonograph, drum or other machine or device for the
production or continued any unnecessary noise as heard at the property
line nearest the source which is clearly audible and distinguishable
from the customary and ordinary background noise as heard at the
property line nearest the source which is clearly audible and
distinguishable from the customary and ordinary background noise in
the District.
46.3.2. Noise in Public Right-of-way. In the case of a device operated by a
person within public rights-of-way, the point of measurement above
shall be 25 feet or farther away.
46.3.3. This section shall not apply to any person who is participating in a
scheduled school band activity or in a parade for which a permit has
been issued by the Municipality.
46.4.1. No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, on any
premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or
bird otherwise permitted to be kept, which by frequent or habitual
howling, barking, meowing, squawking, or other noise unreasonably
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort
or annoyance to any person.
46.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 46.5
1:345
46.5. Penalty.
46.6. Court proceedings.
46.7. Similar Ordinances.
46.8. Severability.
46.9. Repealer.
46.5.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the
Ordinance shall be fined not more than $300 for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
46.6.1. The Council may, in its sole discretion, and in the name of the
Municipality, institute proceedings in courts of equity to restrain the
continued violation of this Ordinance.
46.7.1. The remedies provided in this Ordinance are cumulative and are not
intended to repeal or replace any ordinance heretofore or hereinafter
enacted which prohibits nuisances in general or specific nuisances in
particular, and provided further that this Ordinance shall not repeal or
affect in any manner whatsoever Ordinance No. 12-19-66A.
46.8.1. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this Ordinance shall not be
affected or impaired thereby.
46.9.1. Any ordinance or parts of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this Ordinance, except as provided 46.7 are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
46.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 46.9
1:346
Chapter 47
NUISANCES
46.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 46.9
1:347

ARTICLE I
Nuisances
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-8-82E]
47.1. Nuisances prohibited.
47.2. Council able to determine if actions are nuisances.
47.3. Power of entry upon private property.
47.4. Exercise of power of Council to declare nuisances.
47.5. Declaration of nuisance.
47.1.1. It shall be unlawful for any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s),
association(s), municipal or quasi-municipal corporation(s) or other
entity(s) (all hereinafter called "person"), either singularly or jointly, to
carry on any conductor allow any condition to exist on public or private
property owned, leased, occupied or controlled by such a person within
the Municipality of Bethel Park, which constitutes a danger or hazard to
the health, safety, tranquility, comfort or welfare of the community,
thereby constituting a nuisance, where, pursuant to the procedures
hereinafter provided, the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park has
declared said conduct or said condition to be a public nuisance.
47.2.1. The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park, or its delegates, shall
have the power to review any conduct or condition maintained or
carried on, on public or private property by any person to determine if
said conduct or condition constitutes a public nuisance.
47.3.1. The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park, and its duly
constituted agents and other municipal officers and employees shall
have the power to enter upon and into any private grounds or
structures for the purpose of reviewing any condition or conduct to
determine whether a public nuisance exists; provided, however, that
where a legitimate expectation of privacy exists, no agent shall enter
onto private property without the consent of the owner or occupier
thereof in the absence of a search warrant duly issued by a District
Justice.
47.4.1. The power of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park relative
to the declaring of conditions or conduct to be public nuisances shall be
exercised in the following manner: investigate, or cause to be
investigated, all complaints of activity or conditions constituting a
public nuisance as described in "nuisances prohibited" section. In all
cases where the matter under review involves any continuing conduct
on the part of any person, Council shall direct the Municipal Manager
or his designee to witness the conduct on at least three separate
occasions and on different dates, and to render a written report to the
Council concerning the conduct and its continuing nature.
47.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 47.5
1:349
47.6. Service of notice; contents.
47.7. Failure to comply.
47.8. Violations and penalties.
47.5.1. Where, after review of the Manager's report and any other facts
available to it, the Council, based upon these facts, determines that the
condition or conduct under review constitutes a public nuisance, then it
shall, by proper motion, declare said condition or conduct to be a public
nuisance, stating in its resolution the specific findings of fact upon
which its determination is based, and direct the Municipal Manager in
the manner hereafter provided to notify the owner of the premises or
person carrying on the conduct or allowing the condition to exist, or
both, as the case may be, to abate said public nuisance within 10 days of
the receipt of said notice under penalty or suit as provided herein.
47.6.1. The notice aforementioned shall be served personally or by certified
or registered mail and shall contain the following.
1. The name and address of the person to whom or to which it is
directed.
2. The dates and conditions under which the nuisance or conduct was
observed.
3. The date upon which the Council declared the conduct or condition
to be a public nuisance.
4. A description of the condition or conduct declared to be a public
nuisance sufficient to allow the person to identify the public
nuisance to be abated.
5. A direction to abate the nuisance within 10 days of the receipt of
the notice.
6. A designation of the penalties or remedies which may be imposed
or employed hereunder in case of default.
7. A copy of the Council's resolution.
47.7.1. After notice as herein provided and upon default of the person
thereof in the complete abatement of the public nuisance, the Council
may direct the Municipal Manager to abate said public nuisance and
collect the cost of abatement or removal from the person so notified in
the same manner as like debts are by law presently collectable.
47.8.1. Any person violating this ordinance by failing to abate, after due
notice, any nuisance determined hereunder shall, upon conviction in
summary proceedings, pay a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$250. Each day that the public nuisance exists after notice and the
47.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 47.8
1:350
47.9. Responsibility of abatement.
47.10. Effect on other ordinances.
47.11. Repealer.
expiration of the ten-day abatement period shall constitute a separate
violation.
47.9.1. Where multiple owners, lessees or occupiers or any combination
thereof exist, the responsibility of abatement is joint and several, and it
shall be no defense to any ordinance violation citation or collection
proceeding that another was responsible for the public nuisance;
provided, however, that such a person received notice as required in
47.6 above and provided further that such a person shall not be liable if
he has legal action necessary to abate said nuisance or to remove the
person responsible for the nuisance from the property.
47.10.1. The remedies provided in this ordinance are cumulative and are not
intended to repeal or replace any ordinance prohibiting any specific
nuisance previously or hereafter enacted by this Council, and provided
further that this ordinance shall not repeal or affect in any manner
whatsoever the following ordinances, as amended:
1. Ordinance No. 7-14-75B.
2. Ordinance No.3-12-62B.
3. Ordinance No. 6-9-80E.
4. Ordinance No. 12-19-66A.
47.11.1. Any ordinance or parts of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance, except as provided in 47.10 above, be and the same
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
47.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 47.11
1:351
Chapter 48
LICENSED OCCUPATIONS
47.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 47.11
1:352
ARTICLE I
Licensed Occupations
[Adopted 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 11-12-90B]50
48.1. License required.
48.2. Definitions.
48.3. Exemptions.
48.4. General.
48.1.1. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or canvasser, as defined in the
definition section of this ordinance, to engage in any activity regulated
by this ordinance without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provision contained herein.
48.2.1. When used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
48.2.2.CANVASSER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the
Municipality of Bethel Park or not, who goes from house to house, place
to place, or from street to street soliciting funds or contributions, or
soliciting or attempting to take orders from individuals for sale of
goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals
or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery or for
service to be performed at that time or in the future, whether or not
such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject
of such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payment on
such orders, or conducts or attempts to conduct surveys for research
purposes (other than those conducted by an agency of the state or
federal government, or surveys of a political, religious or charitable
nature, provided the surveyor is not soliciting funds or donations), to
make analyses, to take opinion polls to compile rating data and to
conduct any similar work which, by its nature, involves door-to-door or
place-to-place activity. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03]
48.2.3. PEDDLER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the
Municipality of Bethel Park or not, who goes from house to house, from
place to place or from street to street conveying or transporting goods,
wares or merchandise for sale or offering or exposing the same for sale
or making sales or delivering articles, goods, wares or merchandise to
purchasers.
48.3.1. The terms of this ordinance shall not be held to include the acts of
persons delivering products on a scheduled or prearranged basis, such
as milk and newspaper delivery.
50.Editor's Note: Originally adopted by Ord. No. 64-9-51. Ord. No. 64-9-51 was repealed and
replaced by Ord. No. 11-12-90B. Loud Noise and Speaking Devices section was replaced by
Ord. No. 8-12-91C.
48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 48.4
1:353
48.5. Application.
48.6. Investigation and issuance of license.
48.4.1. Every individual canvasser or peddler whether or not he is employed
by, directed by or supervised by a person holding a license shall secure
a license pursuant to the terms of this ordinance before engaging in any
activity regulated by this ordinance.
48.5.1. Applicants for license under this ordinance must file with the Police
Department of the Municipality a sworn application in writing on a form
to be furnished by the Municipality, which will give the following
information: [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03]
1. Name and physical description of applicant.
2. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant, and
in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which
proposed sales will be made or goods shipped.
3. A brief description of the business and the goods to be sold.
4. The manufacturer, producer or maker of the goods or property
proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof; and the
proposed method of delivery.
5. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
proof of employment.
6. A recent photograph of the applicant, which shall be approximately
two inches square, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
in a clear and distinguishable manner.
7. If the person shall use a motor vehicle in relation to his canvassing
or peddling activity, the make, year and color of the vehicle, the
license number and the registered owner.
48.5.2. The completed application shall be submitted to the Police
Department of the Municipality together with the initial fee to cover the
expenses of investigation of $5 payable to the Municipality of Bethel
Park. An application which is not totally complete or one that contains
erroneous information shall not be acted upon and shall be rejected
until such application is totally complete and correct.
48.6.1. Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred to the Chief of
Police or his designee, who shall immediately institute such
investigation of the application for the protection of the public, health,
safety and welfare. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03]
48.6.2. If the application is found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall, upon payment of the prescribed initial license fee,
deliver to the applicant his or her license within three working days
48.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 48.6
1:354
48.7. Regular route; exception. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No.
9-8-03]
48.8. Religious and charitable organizations, Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts and similar scouting groups and representatives of activities
sponsored, authorized or approved by the Bethel Park School
District; exemption. [Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-2003]
48.9. Fees. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 8-12-91C]
after it has been filed by the applicant with the Clerk. [Amended
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03]
48.6.3. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, and
shall show the name, address and photograph of said licensee, the class
of license issued and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the
amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the expiration date, as well
as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle
used in such licensed business. Each peddler or canvasser must secure
an individual license. No license shall be used at any time by any person
other than the one to whom it is issued. The Police Department shall
keep a permanent record of all licenses issued and those rejected.
48.7.1. After investigation of the application and approval of the application
by the Chief of Police as set forth in Section 48.6 (Investigations and
issuance of license) hereof, the Police Department shall issue the
license without the payment of fees as set forth in Section 48.9 (Fees),
provided the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The product to be sold by the applicant is a nationally known and
advertised brand of household article or articles, and
2. The applicant serves a regular route or clientele of not fewer than
50 customers in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
48.8.1. Upon being satisfied that such organization, society, association, or
corporation is a religious and charitable organization, group or other
organization whose purpose is to advocate and advance the causes and
interests of the consumer and other persons representing a group or
organization dedicated to advancing concerns of the environmental or
other sociological or ecological issues or is a scouting organization or is
a group or representative of an activity sponsored, authorized or
approved by the Bethel Park School District, the Police Department
shall issue a permit without the payment of fees as set forth in Section
48.9 (Fees), provided the applicant presents proof of the
aforementioned. Upon completion of the application and presentment
of proof of the aforementioned, the Chief of Police shall issue a license
immediately without an investigation as set forth in Section 48.6
(Investigations and issuance of license).
48.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 48.9
1:355
48.10. Use of streets and time restrictions. [Amended 9-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 9-8-03]
48.11. Exhibition of license.
48.9.1. Every applicant for a license under this ordinance except those that
qualify for an exemption under Sections 48.7 (Regular route; exception)
and 48.8 (Religious and charitable organizations) shall pay, in addition
to the initial fee to the Police Department, fees as follows: [Amended
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03]
1. One hundred dollars per week.
2. Two hundred and fifty dollars per month.
48.9.2. None of the license fees provided for under this section shall be so
applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce nor
upon the manufacturers within this commonwealth and their agents
who are within Section 2922 of Act Number 568, approved the 10th day
of July, A.D. 1947, P.L. 1621, commonly known as the "Municipality
Code."
48.10.1. No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the
public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon,
nor shall any licensee or person be permitted to operate in a congested
area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public
use of such streets or sidewalks or endanger the public health, safety or
welfare.
48.10.2. No licensee shall be permitted to solicit on weekends (Saturday or
Sunday) before 12:00 noon or after 8:00 p.m. or to solicit on weekdays
(Monday through Friday) before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., Eastern
standard time or daylight saving time, whichever then shall be in effect,
except as provided in the subsection below. [Amended 4-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 4-10-17B]
48.10.3. Religious and charitable organizations, groups or other
organizations whose purpose is to advocate and advance the causes and
interests of the consumer and other persons representing a group or
organization dedicated to advancing concerns of the environmental or
other sociological or ecological issues as determined by Section 48.8
(Religious and charitable organizations) whether licensed or not, may
solicit on any day of the week between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Eastern standard time or daylight saving time, whichever then
shall be in effect.
48.11.1. Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the
request of any citizen or municipal officer or employees.
48.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 48.12
1:356
48.12. Posting of signs prohibiting soliciting; no-soliciting list.
[Amended 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 9-8-03; 4-10-2017 by Ord. No.
4-10-17B]
48.13. Regulation.
48.14. Violations and penalties.
48.15. Severability.
48.12.1. No person, whether a licensee or not, shall be permitted to solicit
upon posted private property for any purpose whatsoever when said
property is posted in the manner set forth below:
1. A sign posted on the property which is plainly visible and legible
and which states "No Solicitors or Peddlers Invited" or "No
Soliciting" or "No Peddling or Canvassing" or any equivalent
language which would inform a peddler, canvasser or transient
merchant that solicitation was not desired.
2. Such a sign shall be placed in conformance with the regulations on
signs established in the Zoning Chapter of the Code.51
48.12.2. An owner or occupant of any private property within the
Municipality may notify the Chief of Police, in writing, that no person is
permitted to solicit upon the private property. The Chief of Police shall
create a no-soliciting list which includes the addresses of each
residence that has opted out of solicitation in this manner. The nosoliciting
list shall be provided to each licensee under this article and
shall be published on the Municipality of Bethel Park website. No
person shall be permitted to solicit upon private property included on
the no-soliciting list.
48.13.1. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make reasonable rules
and regulations for the operation and enforcement of this ordinance as
he deems necessary.
48.14.1. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit and pay to the Municipality of
Bethel Park for each and every separate offense a sum of not less than
$100 nor more than $300, to be sued for and recovered as other fines
and penalties are now by law recoverable, and in default of payment of
the fine and cost of prosecution, shall be committed to the County jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
48.15.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 69, Zoning.
48.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 48.15
1:357
48.16. Repealer.
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
48.16.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
48.15 BETHEL PARK CODE 48.16
1:358
Chapter 49
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES
48.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 48.16
1:359

ARTICLE I
Temporary Outdoor Activities
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1-12-81C]
49.1. License required.
49.2. Definitions.
49.3. License application.
49.4. Conditions for license; renewal; license availability for
inspection.
49.1.1. No person, on or after the effective date of this ordinance, shall
conduct or allow to be conducted any temporary outdoor activity as
defined in this ordinance without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
49.2.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
49.2.2.OUTDOOR ACTIVITY — Any activity conducted outdoors within or
about tents or other such contrivances within any commercially zoned
districts in the Municipality, including carnivals, outdoor displays of
merchandise, vehicles or manufactured products, promotions,
amusements, gatherings of people, the outdoor sale of merchandise or
products that are normally available for purchase within a completely
enclosed building located on the same lot or premises on which the
activities are being conducted. [Amended by Ord. No. 6-11-84]
49.2.3.TEMPORARY — A period not to exceed seven consecutive days or
seven days within a thirty-day period. [Amended by Ord. No.
6-11-84D]
49.2.4.PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, institution, agency, authority, department or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
49.3.1. A sworn application, in writing on a form furnished by the
Municipality, shall be filed with the Municipal Manager at least 14 days
prior to commencement of the temporary outdoor activity. The
applicant for the license shall be the owner or lessee of the property on
which the temporary outdoor activity is to be conducted.
49.4.1. The license shall contain conditions which the Municipal Manager
may deem necessary and appropriate to minimize inconvenience to the
public. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the hours
during which the temporary outdoor activity may operate and the
duration of said activity. Further, the Municipal Manager may require
the applicant to make arrangements with the Police Department of the
Municipality for traffic and crowd control. All costs for said control
49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 49.4
1:361
49.5. Applications for exemption; written exemption notice.
measures shall be borne entirely by the applicant. Violation of the
conditions of the license shall render the license null and void,
constitute a violation of this Ordinance and subject the licensee to the
penalties provided in this Ordinance.
49.4.2. Upon application by a licensee, the Municipal Manager may renew
the license, in his sole discretion, for a period of not more than seven
days.
49.4.3. The license shall be maintained on the property where the subject
temporary outdoor activity is conducted at all times and shall be
available on demand for inspection and review by any municipal official,
representative or employee.
49.5.1. Any person who conducts or sponsors a temporary outdoor activity
for a charitable, religious or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt
from the provisions of this ordinance, provided that said person files
with the Municipal Manager a sworn application in writing on a form
furnished by the Municipality which includes the following information:
1. The name and address of the person, including the name and
address of any officers, directors or sponsors of any organization or
other entity involved.
2. The period during which the temporary outdoor activity is to be
conducted.
3. A specific statement of the charitable, religious or philanthropic
purpose.
4. The relationship between the temporary outdoor activity and that
stated purpose.
5. That the exempt organization agrees to pay for all costs to the
Municipality associated with traffic and crowd control. [Added by
Ord. No. 8-13-90B]
6. Temporary activities of exempt organizations may include items not
normally available for purchase on the property where the
activities are to be conducted and may occur at any location within
the Municipality. [Added by 9-10-91C]
7. Temporary activities of exempt organizations under these
provisions are limited to two times per calendar year with each
occurrence not to operate longer than 48 consecutive hours.
[Added by 9-10-91C]
49.5.2. If the Municipal Manager is satisfied that the stated purpose is
charitable, religious or philanthropic and that the temporary outdoor
activity is in furtherance of that purpose, the exemption of this section
shall apply, and he shall no notify the applicant in writing. The
49.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 49.5
1:362
49.6. Exemption of sidewalk sales. [Added by Ord. No. 8-13-90B]
49.7. Exemption of Christmas tree sales. [Added 8-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 8-13-90B; amended 10-11-1995 by Ord. No. 10-11-95A]
Manager's written exemption notice shall be maintained on the
property where the subject temporary outdoor activity is conducted at
all times and shall be available on demand for inspection and review by
any municipal official, representative or employee.
49.6.1. The outdoor sale of merchandise or products that are normally
available for purchase within a completely enclosed building located on
the same location or premise on which the activities are being
conducted is exempt from the provisions of this chapter, if the following
conditions are met:
1. No sales take place within any established parking lot area or
within any fire lane.
2. That at least a three foot walkway be maintained for pedestrian
access along any sidewalk located adjacent to any building.
3. That all sales occur within 10 feet of any building.
4. That no portable or movable signs such as an "A-frame" sign be
used in conjunction with said sales.
5. That sales do not interfere with safe access by pedestrians to the
building.
6. That the sales area be separated from vehicular access by a curb,
fence or similar such device.
49.7.1. The outdoor sale of Christmas trees is permitted between November
15th and December 31st if the following conditions are met:
1. That sales do not interfere with safe access by pedestrians to the
building.
2. That all sales areas be free and clear of all trees and rubbish and
sales paraphernalia and equipment by January 5th of each year.
3. That no sales shall occur in any residentially zoned area or on
vacant lots without buildings.
4. That no trailers or other temporary structures (except racks to hold
trees) be used in conjunction with the Christmas tree sales.
5. That no parking spaces required by the Zoning Ordinance be used
for the sale of trees.
6. That a copy of the certificate to collect sales tax be displayed at the
sales location and be provided to the Municipality upon request.
49.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 49.8
1:363
49.8. License fees. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 12-11-1995A;
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
49.9. Responsibility of licensee.
49.10. Violations and penalties.
49.11. Severability.
49.12. Repealer.
49.8.1. At the time the license application is filed, the applicant shall pay the
Municipality a license fee. The fee shall be set in accordance with a
schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal
Council.
49.9.1. No licensee shall permit the following on the licensed premises:
1. Shouting or crying out.
2. Musical instruments, drums, sound-making devices or amplifiers
played or used in such manner as to be heard on any abutting or
adjacent residential property.
3. Activity or conduct in violation of any municipal, state or federal
laws or duly enacted ordinances or regulations.
49.10.1. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall
be guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed
$300 for each violation. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
49.11.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable; and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
49.12.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
49.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 49.12
1:364
Chapter 50
PORNOGRAPHY
49.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 49.12
1:365

ARTICLE I
Pornography
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-9-80E]
50.1. Definitions.
50.1.1.KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having
knowledge of the contents and character of the patently offensive
sexual conduct or other content which appears in the motion-picture
film, publication or live theater production or knowledge of the acts of
lewdness, assignation or prostitution which occur in any place.
50.1.2.LEWD MATTER — Any matter:
1. Which the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest; and either 50.1.2.2 or 50.1.2.3 or both below.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-12-81E]
2. Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
c. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
3. Which is used to sexually stimulate or arouse sexual stimulation or
is displayed or offered for sale on the basis that it can be used for
sexual stimulation or arousal whether or not the claim by the seller
is true or not and whether or not the matter taken out of the
context of its display or sale could be used in a non-lewd fashion.
[Added by Ord. No. 4-12-82E]
50.1.3. Nothing herein contained is intended to include or proscribe any
matter which, when considered as a whole and in the context in which it
is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
50.1.4. LIVE THEATER PRODUCTION — Any dramatic, musical or comedic
production performed in the presence of a live audience.
50.1.5.MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the
human body, for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of
rubbing, stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by
hand or by the use of any instrument.
50.1.6.MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof,
located within the municipality, which is open to members of the
general public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which massage
services are offered.
50.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 50.1
1:367
50.1.7.MATTER — A motion-picture film, live theater production,
publication or any sculptured, molded, formed or shaped device or
artifact, or all four. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-12-81E]
50.1.8. MODEL STUDIO:
1. Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being
observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted
for persons who pay a fee or other consideration or compensation
or a gratuity for the right or opportunity so to depict the figure
model, or for admission to, or for permission to remain upon, or as
a condition for remaining upon the place; or
2. Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing or
providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to be
observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
3. Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
a. Any studio which is operated by any state college, public or
private school or any governmental agency wherein the
person, firm, association, partnership or corporation so
operating has met the requirements established by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring
of and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a
diploma or honorary diploma; or
b. Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection a of this definition.
50.1.9. MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
1. Film or plate negative.
2. Film or plate positive.
3. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
4. Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen.
5. Video tape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce
images on a screen.
50.1.10. NUDE — Includes:
1. Completely without clothing; or
50.1 BETHEL PARK CODE 50.1
1:368
50.2. Films or live theater declared public nuisance; abatement
ordered.
50.3. Publications declared public nuisance; abatement ordered.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-12-812E]
2. With the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks
with less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
50.1.11.PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
50.1.12. PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or
space or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or
not, or the ground itself.
50.1.13. PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet,
writing, printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or a motionpicture
film which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for
sale or exhibited in a coin-operated machine.
50.1.14. SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a
buyer for valuable consideration and shall include, but is not limited to,
any lease or rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or
whereby any valuable consideration is received for the use of or
transfer of possession of lewd matter.
50.2.1. Any and every place in the municipality where lewd motion-picture
films or live theater productions are publicly exhibited or possessed for
the purpose of such exhibition, and any and every place in the
municipality where a lewd motion-picture film or live theater
production is publicly or repeatedly exhibited or possessed for the
purpose of such exhibitions, is a public nuisance.
50.2.2. Any and every lewd motion-picture film which is publicly exhibited or
possessed for such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under
50.2.1 above, is a public nuisance per se.
50.2.3. From and after service on the theater or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct
copy of this ordinance and a true land correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in 50.6 hereof, all moneys
paid thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions or productions
are also declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
50.3.1. Any and every place in the municipality where lewd publications or
lewd matter or both constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a public
nuisance.
50.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 50.3
1:369
50.4. Massage parlors or model studios declared public nuisance;
abatement ordered.
50.5. Persons operating or maintaining public nuisance liable;
abatement required.
50.6. Action to be taken by Council; procedure.
50.3.2. Any and every place in the municipality where lewd publications or
lewd matter or both constitute a part of the stock-in-trade is a public
nuisance.
50.3.3. From and after service on the place or the manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such a place of a true and correct
copy of this ordinance and a true copy of the resolution and order of
summary abatement provided for in section "Action to be taken by
Council" hereof, all valuable consideration received for the sale of such
lewd publications or lewd matters or both is declared to be a public
nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and maintaining a
declared public nuisance.
50.4.1. Every massage parlor or model studio, which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or
prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of lewdness, assignations or prostitution are held or occur, is
a public nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.
50.4.2. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such place of a true land correct
copy of the resolution and order of summary abatement provided for in
section "Action to be taken by Council "hereof, all moneys or other
valuable consideration paid for services rendered to customers are also
declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
50.5.1. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this ordinance and a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in 50.6 hereof, any and every
person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain, manage,
conduct or operate a place in the municipality which is declared to be a
public nuisance, as set forth and stated in 50.2, 50.3 and 50.4 of this
ordinance, is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such
nuisance for the purpose of this ordinance and is, thereafter,
responsible for its maintenance and shall be liable therefor.
50.5.2. The places and matters declared to be public nuisances under 50.2,
50.3 and 50.4 shall be abated as provided for herein.
50.6.1. The Council shall investigate or cause to be investigated all
complaints that activity constituting a public nuisance, as defined in
50.2, 50.3 and 50.4 of this ordinance, exists in the municipality. Upon
50.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 50.6
1:370
the Council's specific finding that a public nuisance exists in the
municipality, the Council, in applying the provisions of this ordinance to
such nuisance, shall provide for the following, by resolution:
1. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
2. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of
the place which constitutes the nuisance.
3. Set forth the evidentiary facts considered by the Council in arriving
at its factual determination.
a. In the case of a motion-picture film or live theater production,
such shall include a recitation of the particular sexual conduct
and acts which the Council finds are patently offensive and the
basis for the finding by Council that such motion-picture film or
live theater production is publicly exhibited or produced in the
course of business or that such motion-picture film or live
theater production is publicly or repeatedly exhibited or
produced or held for such exhibition or production at the place
declared to be a nuisance.
b. In the case of a publication or matter or both, such shall
include a recitation of the particular publications or matter or
both or types of publications or matter or both considered by
the Council and those which the Council finds to be patently
offensive and the basis for the finding by the Council that such
publications or matter or both are displayed, sold or held for
sale at any place found by the Council to be a public nuisance
and the basis of the finding by the Council that such
publications or matter or both constitute a part of the stock-intrade
of such place of business or other place. [Amended by
Ord. No. 4-12-82E, approved 4-20-1982]
c. In the case of a massage parlor or model studio, such shall
include a recitation of the particular acts of lewdness,
assignations or prostitution which have occurred and the basis
for the finding by the Council that such acts occur in the course
of business.
4. Order all persons described in 50.5.1 hereof to summarily abate
such public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order on
any such persons, by terminating the exhibition, sale or possession
for sale of such lewd matter or by ceasing to use the place where
the nuisance is declared to exist or by terminating the use of said
place for the purposes of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or
causing the same to be terminated and notifying the Council of
compliance therewith by sworn affidavit as ordered by the action of
the Council in such resolution.
5. Order the Municipal Solicitor to proceed to do all things necessary
to abate such public nuisance through judicial proceedings and to
50.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 50.6
1:371
conclude such proceedings as expeditiously as is permissible under
the law, including requesting the court to advance such
proceedings on the calendar of the court.
6. Inform and give notice to persons designated in 50.5.1.
a. That the Council has determined that a public nuisance
presently exists at such place and address and that, under
50.5.1 of said ordinance, they are deemed to have knowledge
thereof and are responsible therefor.
b. That, in the event the order of the municipality is not complied
with within 24 hours, the Council has ordered the Municipal
Solicitor, as provided for under 50.8 hereof, to commence
necessary legal proceedings naming such persons as
defendants in a civil action to abate the public nuisance,
judicially, under this section, and that, under 50.7.1 and 50.7.2
of this ordinance, the costs of abatement of such civil
abatement action filed, including investigative costs, court
costs, attorney's fees and other expenses, are made a special
assessment against the parcel of land upon which such
nuisance is being maintained and, upon their determination in
such court action, will, by separate legal procedure, be made a
lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person deemed to be in violation of this ordinance.
c. All lewd motion-picture films, lewd publications or lewd matter
being used in conducting and maintaining such public
nuisance are contraband and the subject of forfeiture.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-12-82E]
d. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting
manager or person then in charge of such a place of a true and
correct copy of this ordinance and a true and correct copy of
such resolution, any and all moneys paid as admission price to
or for the exhibition or exhibitions of lewd motion-picture films
or production of such lewd live theatre productions and
valuable consideration received for the sale of such lewd
publications and/or lewd matter or both and all moneys or
other valuable consideration received for services rendered in
such massage parlors or model studios are a public nuisance,
as personal property used in conducting and maintaining such
nuisance and, as such, as the subject of forfeiture. [Amended
by Ord. No. 4-12-82E]
7. In order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true
and correct copy of this ordinance be delivered forthwith in any
manner normally used to effectuate personal service of process to
all persons of record having any legal or equitable interest in the
real property and to the regular or acting manager or persons in
charge of the place therein declared a public nuisance.
50.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 50.7
1:372
50.7. Forfeiture of funds to general fund; cost of abatement;
collection.
50.8. Action to be taken by Municipal Solicitor.
50.9. Severability.
50.7.1. Upon judgment for the municipality in legal proceedings brought
pursuant to this ordinance, an accounting shall be made by such
defendant or defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration
received by them which have been declared to be a public nuisance
under 50.2.3, 50.3.3 or 50.4.2 of this ordinance. Such moneys or their
equivalent and any valuable consideration received shall be forfeited to
the general fund of the municipality or to the municipality as property
of the municipality if any valuable consideration received is not money.
50.7.2. Cost of abatement. The cost of the abatement shall include the
following:
1. Investigative costs.
2. Court costs.
3. Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and
trial of the cause and appeals therefrom and other costs allowed on
appeal.
4. Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed
in such proceeding.
50.7.3. Such cost of abatement is hereby made a special assessment against
the parcel of land upon which such nuisance in maintained. Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall, by separate legal proceeding,
be made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes
shall be applicable to such special assessment.
50.8.1. Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Council that a public
nuisance exists at a particular location, the Municipal Solicitor, with the
approval of the Council, is authorized to take whatever action is
appropriate to carry out this ordinance.
50.9.1. If any court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or subsection of this ordinance is unconstitutional, the court
shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
provision so as to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed
or construed. If the court cannot so limit or construe such word or
provision narrowly so as to render the same constitutional, it shall
50.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 50.9
1:373
50.10. Repealer.
strike or modify only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses,
sentences or paragraphs as well be absolutely necessary to render the
remainder constitutional. In no case shall a clause or phrase or word or
other portion hereof render any other word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph or section unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed
therefrom entirely, with the balance of this ordinance in its entirety
remaining in full force and effect.
50.10.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
50.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 50.10
1:374
Chapter 51
PARKS
50.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 50.10
1:375

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 4-13-1981 by Ord. No. 4-13-81A]
51.1. Definitions.
51.2. Rules and regulations.
51.1.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
51.1.2. PARK — Property within the Municipality of Bethel Park owned and
operated by the municipality to serve the recreational needs of the
community.
51.1.3. PARKS-RECREATIONAL BOARD — The duly constituted Parks,
Recreation and Leisure Services Board of the Municipality of Bethel
Park. [Amended 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 3-11-85B]
51.2.1. The following rules and regulations shall be effective and apply to all
municipal parks:
1. Conduct.
a. Children under seven years of age shall at all times be under
the supervision and control of a parent, guardian or custodian.
b. No parent or guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit
or allow him to do any act prohibited by this ordinance.
c. There shall be no alteration, removal or placement of foreign
objects on any existing structures, markers, shrubbery or the
natural habitat of birds or animals.
d. There shall be no interference with areas occupied by other
persons.
e. There shall be no littering throughout the parks area.
f. No person shall throw stones or other missiles so as to annoy
other persons. Games involving throwing of missiles shall be
performed only in designated areas.
g. It shall be the responsibility of the park permit holder, as well
as all casual users of park facilities, to be familiar with all park
rules and regulations and to ensure that such rules and
regulations are complied with during any park use. [Amended
6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03A]
h. No person shall climb or stand upon any wall, fence, shelter,
seat, statue or other structure.
51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 51.2
1:377
i. No person shall fail to obey nor shall any person interfere with
an employee in the proper performance of his/her duties.
j. No person shall remove or open permanent or temporary
barriers, signs, directionals, gates or fences.
k. No person shall remove or operate any vehicle upon any grass
area unless specifically permitted to do so.
l. There shall be no vending, posting, soliciting, dramatic
performance or games of chance unless by special permission
from the Parks-Recreation Board, Municipal Council or their
representative(s).
m. No alcoholic beverages, including wine and beer, except for onpremises
purchases only, and when the sale and consumption
of alcoholic beverages is authorized by Municipal Council
during special events sponsored by the Municipality of Bethel
Park. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3-12-18]
n. No person shall use profane language or engage in disorderly
conduct.
o. No smoking or other use of tobacco products shall be
permitted in any park area. [Added 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
6-12-17A]
2. Permitted activities; prohibited activities.
a. The following activities are prohibited unless written
authorization is obtained from the Parks-Recreation Board:
[1] Swimming; wading or fishing.
[2] Model aviation or boating.
[3] Use of archery, darts, missiles, etc.
[4] Discharge of fireworks.
[5] Camping.
[6] Fund-raising events.
[7] Golfing.
[8] Skiing.
b. The following activities are permitted in areas designated for
these purposes:
[1] Field games (football, soccer, baseball, etc.).
[2] Basketball.
51.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 51.2
1:378
[3] Tennis.
[4] Horseshoes.
[5] Track.
[6] Picnicking.
[7] Sledding or ice skating.
[8] Other general recreation activities not specifically
prohibited in this section.
c. Restriction of animals in the parks. Animals are prohibited in
the following areas of all municipal parks: [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 7-11-94E]
[1] Active sport play areas including athletic fields.
[2] Picnic groves.
[3] Active play areas including playgrounds and tot lots.
[4] Parking lots.
3. Traffic regulations. No person in a park shall:
a. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the vehicle and
traffic laws of the State of Pennsylvania, together with such
supplemental regulations as herein set forth.
b. Fail to obey all police officers, traffic officers, members or park
officials whenever such persons are directing traffic or parking
in the park, such police officers, traffic officers, members and
park officials being hereby authorized and instructed to direct
traffic and parking whenever and wherever needed in the park.
c. Fail to observe and obey all traffic and parking signs indicating
speed, directions, caution, stopping and parking and no
parking signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life
and property.
d. Park and leave a motor vehicle overnight in any area of the
park.
e. Park a motor vehicle on park property unless the operator or
owner thereof shall use or be making use of the recreation
facilities of such park during the time that the said motor
vehicle is parked in said park.
f. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved road or parking area, or
park said vehicle in any place other than a bicycle rack, when
so provided, or other than a parking area designed for the
parking of bicycles.
51.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 51.2
1:379
51.3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
6-9-03A]
51.4. Severability.
g. Park vehicles on roads or driveways used as accesses to and
from park grounds. No washing or servicing of motor vehicles.
4. General. [Amended 2-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2-10-92C]
a. The Municipality or the Parks-Recreation Board shall not be
responsible for loss or theft of personal property.
b. The Parks-Recreation Board is authorized to post such
additional special regulations at any recreational area in the
Municipality of Bethel Park as it deems necessary to promote
the public health, safety and welfare and recreation of the
users thereof.
c. Any damage to park facilities shall be wholly chargeable to
those to whom permits are issued or to individuals specifically
liable for such damage.
d. It shall be the responsibility of the park permit holder, as well
as all casual users of park facilities, to be familiar with all park
rules and regulations and to ensure that such rules and
regulations are complied with during any park use. [Amended
6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03A]
e. Permits for use of the parks may be obtained by written
request addressed to the Recreation Office. Permits will be
issued in accordance with the policy set forth by the Parks-
Recreation Board of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
f. In the event a person, group or organization is denied a permit
by the Parks-Recreation Board or its representative, said
person or group or organization may appeal the denial of said
permit to the Municipal Council by filing a written notice of
appeal to the Council within 48 hours after being officially
notified of the denial of the permit by the Recreation Office.
The Council shall thereafter, as soon as possible, ascertain all
of the facts involving the application for the permit and the
Council may overrule the decision of the Parks-Recreation
Board or its representative and authorize the issuance of a
permit.
51.3.1. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates this
ordinance shall pay a fine of not more than $500, which amount shall be
payable to the Municipality of Bethel Park upon conviction of violation
of this ordinance before the District Magistrate.
51.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 51.4
1:380
51.5. Repealer.
51.4.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
51.5.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
51.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 51.5
1:381

ARTICLE II
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 9-11-1978 by Ord. No. 9-11-78G]
51.6. Parks closed at sunset.
51.7. Violations and penalties.
51.8. Repealer.
51.6.1. All municipal parks shall be closed at sunset unless otherwise
posted.
51.7.1. Any persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance, upon conviction thereof before a Magistrate of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not in
excess of $100, to be paid to the Municipality of Bethel Park for the cost
of prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment in the County jail for a
period of not more than 10 days, or both.
51.8.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
51.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 51.8
1:383
Chapter 52
(RESERVED)
Former Ch. 52, Plumbing Code, adopted 3-9-1998 by Ord. No.
3-9-98A, was repealed 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 4-12-04A. For current
provisions, see Ch. 26, Building, Art. I, Uniform Construction Codes.
Chapter 53
REWARD FOR INFORMATION
51.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 51.8
1:384
ARTICLE I
Reward for Information
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1-13-75B]
53.1. Reward offered.
53.2. Dissemination of information.
53.3. Repealer.
53.1.1. The Council hereby offers a reward up to the sum of $200 to any
individual or group of individuals who furnishes information which
leads to the apprehension, arrest and conviction of any individual or
individuals found guilty of damaging and/or destroying any traffic
signal, sign or device within the Municipality of Bethel Park.
53.2.1. The Municipal Manager is directed to disseminate information
concerning the offering of a reward and to implement a program to
investigate the information given to the Council and to pay from the
general funds of the municipality, after Council's approval of the same,
a reward not to exceed $200 to any individual or group of individuals
who furnishes information which leads to the apprehension, arrest and
conviction of any individual or individuals for damaging or destroying
any traffic signal, sign or device within the Municipality of Bethel Park.
53.3.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
53.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 53.3
1:385
Chapter 54
SANDBLASTING
53.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 53.3
1:386
ARTICLE I
Sandblasting
[Adopted 3-10-1986 by Ord. No. 3-10-1986C]
54.1. Enactment. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
54.2. Definitions.
54.3. Permit application.
54.4. Permit.
54.5. Permit fees. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
54.1.1. No person, on or after the effective date of this ordinance, shall
conduct or allow to be conducted any sandblasting or spray painting out
of doors without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the
terms of this ordinance.
54.2.1.PERSON — Any person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm,
corporation, institution, agency, authority, department or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
54.2.2. SANDBLASTING — Procedures whereby abrasive material, not
necessarily limited to sand or silicon compounds, is propelled by
compressed air or other gasses in preparation for this application of
paint or other coatings.
54.2.3. SPRAY PAINTING — The application of paint or similar coatings to a
surface wherein compressed air or other gasses are used.
54.3.1. An application in writing on a form furnished by the Municipality
shall be filed with the Municipal Manager at least 14 days prior to the
commencement of sandblasting or spray painting activities. The
applicant shall be the owner, lessee or person in control of the property
upon which the activities are to take place.
54.4.1. The permit shall contain conditions which the Municipal Manager
may deem necessary and appropriate to minimize inconvenience to the
public. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the hours
during which the sandblasting or spray painting may be performed,
provisions to contain abrasive material and paint overspray, requiring
measures to clean up and remove abrasive material which is deposited
beyond the property on which the sandblasting or spray painting is
being performed, as well as financial security to be posted with the
Municipality to guarantee such removal. Violation of the conditions of
the permit shall be cause for revocation of such permit and shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance and subject the permit holder to
the penalties provided in this ordinance.
54.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 54.5
1:387
54.6. Violations and penalties.
54.7. Severability.
54.8. Repealer.
54.5.1. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the
Municipality a permit fee. The fee shall be based upon the operation,
whether it is for sandblasting, commercial spray painting or residential
spray painting. The fee shall be set in accordance with a schedule of
fees, charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal Council.
54.6.1. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed $300
for each violation. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
54.7.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable; and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
54.8.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
54.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 54.8
1:388
Chapter 55
SEWERS
54.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 54.8
1:389

ARTICLE I
Sewer Charges and Rentals
[Adopted 11-11-1957 by Ord. No. 11-11-57A]
55.1. Enactment, Payment of rentals required. [Amended
12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 12-13-76D]
55.2. Rates based on water usage and customer service charge.
[Amended 5-13-1963 by Ord. No. 5-13-63F; 1-11-1971 by Ord. No.
1-11-71B; 2-12-1973 by Ord. No. 2-12-73D; 12-13-1976 by Ord. No.
12-13-76D; 3-15-1981 by Ord. No. 3-16-81A; 11-28-1984 by Ord. No.
11-28-84D; 2-12-1990 by Ord. No. 2-12-90B; 7-9-1990 by Ord. No.
7-9-90A; 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 8-9-93A; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No.
11-30-94D; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 5-13-96A; 11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
11-22-99B; 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 7-10-00; 11-14-2005 by Ord. No.
11-14-05C; 11-3-2006 by Ord. No. 11-13-06B; 10-8-2007 by Ord. No.
10-8-07]
55.1.1. All owners of property connected or connecting with the sewers,
sewage system and sewage treatment works as owned or leased by the
Municipality of Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and all of
the owners of property wheresoever located who may hereafter connect
with and use the same shall pay sewer charges or rentals, payable
quarterly as hereinafter provided, for the use of such sewage facilities,
based upon the following schedule of rates.
55.2.1. The service charge for any person, firm or corporation, owners of
property discharging sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids
into said system shall be based upon the quantity of water used on or in
said premises, owned as aforesaid, as the same is measured by water
meters in use or other meters to be installed, plus a customer service
charge, and shall be charged monthly at the following rates: [Amended
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12C; 9-9-1913 by Ord. No. 9-9-13;
11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 11-9-15B; 8-8-2016 by Ord. No. 8-8-16]
1. Metered water users.
a. Effective October 1, 2016:
[1] Single premises.
Water Usage Rate
For each 1,000 gallons $8.60
[2] Multiple premises.
Water Usage Rate
For each 1,000 gallons $8.60
[3] Customer service charge. A customer service charge is
hereby established, which charge shall equal $15 per
55.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.2
1:391
premises, per month. This charge shall be in addition to
the rates based upon the quantity of water used and shall
be payable as a minimum charge whether or not there is
any water usage in the premises during a month.
b. Effective July 1, 2017:
[1] Single premises.
Water Usage Rate
For each 1,000 gallons $9.00
[2] Multiple premises.
Water Usage Rate
For each 1,000 gallons $9.00
[3] Customer service charge. A customer service charge is
hereby established, which charge shall equal $15 per
premises, per month. This charge shall be in addition to
the rates based upon the quantity of water used and shall
be payable as a minimum charge whether or not there is
any water usage in the premises during a month.
c. Exclusion: quantity of water used in residential user's lawn
sprinkler system as measured by municipality-inspected lawn
sprinkler system water meter.
[1] Residential users with lawn sprinkler systems on their
residential premises may install lawn sprinkler system
water meters, either a counter meter attached to the main
water line or a meter attached to an independent water
line used solely for the lawn sprinkler system. The quantity
of water so used and measured shall be excluded from the
quantity used on or in the premises as a basis for the sewer
service charge imposed by this ordinance; provided,
however, that the residential user must:
[a] Notify the Municipal Manager in writing of the
intention to install such a meter and of the proposed
date and time of installation of the meter;
[b] Have the installation of the meter monitored in person
and inspected and approved by the designated
municipal representative; and
[c] Pay to the Municipality, on or before the installation
date, an inspection fee of $25.
[2] In the event that a counter meter is installed, it shall be
read annually by the Municipality at a charge of $25 to the
residential user. The residential user who has installed a
55.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.2
1:392
counter meter shall notify the Municipality in writing of
the amount of water used quarterly.
[3] In the event that such a meter is attached to an
independent water line used solely for lawn sprinkler
system, the meter shall be read by the water company with
the water usage reported to the Municipality. In the event
that the Municipality is required to read such a meter to
obtain the water usage amount, $25 will be charged to the
residential user.
[4] Any lawn sprinkler system water meter installed and
approved under this section shall not be part of the public
sewage system as owned or leased by the Municipality and
shall remain the property and sole responsibility of the
residential user.
d. Exclusion: commercial usage of water through meters which
are not connected, at any time, to the Municipality's sewage
system.
[1] Upon the approval of an application in a form prescribed
by the Municipality and payment of an application fee of
$25, commercial usage of water through meters which are
not connected, at any time, to the Municipality's sewage
system shall be exempt from the payment of sewer rental
fees under this article. No exemption shall be provided for
any usage which occurs prior to the filing of such
application.
[2] The Municipality shall retain the right, as a condition of
this exemption, to require appropriate documentation,
including verification from the Allegheny County Health
Department Plumbing Division, to ensure that a meter
qualifies as exempt.
[3] The Municipality reserves the right, at its discretion and
on an ongoing basis, to make any inquiries or
investigations it deems necessary in order to ensure that a
meter continues to meet the qualifications required for
exemption.
[4] The determination as to whether a meter meets the
qualifications for exemption under this section shall be
within the full discretion of the Municipality.
2. Flat rate and spring and/or well-water users. The following
schedule of rates shall be applicable to water users whose water
bills are based upon a flat rate, as distinguished from those water
users who do not receive a water bill (e.g., spring and/or well-water
users). All flat-rate water residential customers, and those who are
spring and/or well-water users, will be billed upon an equivalent
55.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.2
1:393
55.3. Multiple billing. [Added 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 11-13-72G;
amended 2-12-1973 by Ord. No. 2-12-73D]
residential unit basis (ERU). The average residential usage is
estimated at 16,000 gallons per quarter. Each residential flat-rate,
and spring and/or well-water users' account will be billed for sewer
service based upon this average unless proof is established that
the customer's usage is less. In addition to the charge based on
estimated usage of 16,000 gallons, or such other usage as
established by appropriate proof, the customer service charge, as
established above, shall be imposed.
55.3.1. General. All premises shall be subject to multiple billing.
55.3.2. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein
are defined as follows:
55.3.3. PREMISES — The property or area, including the improvements
thereon, to which sewer service is or will be furnished, and as used
herein, shall be taken to designate:
1. A building under one roof, owned or leased by one customer, and
occupied as one residence or one place of business; or
2. A group or combination of buildings owned by one customer, in one
common enclosure, occupied by one family, or one organization,
corporation or firm, as a residence or place of business, or for
manufacturing or industrial purposes, or as a hotel, hospital,
church, parochial school or similar institution, except as otherwise
noted herein; or
3. The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall;
or
4. Each side or each part of a house or building occupied by one
family even though the closet and/or other fixtures are used in
common; or
5. Each apartment, office or suite of offices, and/or place of business
located in a building or a group of buildings, even though such
buildings in a group are interconnected by a tunnel or passageway,
covered areaway or patio, or by some similar means or structure;
or
6. A public building devoted entirely to public use, such as a town
hall, school house, fire engine house; or
7. A single lot or park or playground; or
8. Each house in a row of houses; or
9. Each dwelling unit in a house or building, a "dwelling unit" being
defined as a building or portion thereof with exclusive culinary
55.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.3
1:394
facilities designed for occupancy and used by one person or one
family (household); or
10. Each individual and separate place of business and/or occupancy
located in one building or group of buildings commonly designated
as shopping centers, supermarket areas, and by such other terms;
or
11. Each dwelling unit in a public housing development owned and
operated by the United States of America, a municipal subdivision
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or an agency or
instrumentality of the United States or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; by a philanthropic foundation or organization or
some such similar body or organization; or operated under private
ownership.
Each premises shall be served through a separate premises or
building service line, except where physical conditions prevent
the installation of separate service facilities as determined by the
Municipality.
55.3.4. Charges for service. The charge for sewer service in all cases where
more than one premises is served through one premises or building
sewer line shall be determined as follows:
1. Number of premises. The potential number of premises in any
building or group of buildings and the charges therefor are subject
to determination by the Municipality prior to original approval of
the Municipality to furnish sewer services, and are subject to
determination subsequent to any alterations, additions or changes
in the building or group of buildings. The customer or customers or
Sewage Agency shall notify the Municipality promptly relative to
any changes in the number of premises; the number at any time
always being subject to determination by the Municipality.
2. Different types of property use. This regulation shall apply
regardless of whether a business may be owned by a customer also
receiving household sewer service through the same building
sewer, or the two or more premises are located in one building or in
different buildings, the ownership of the property or business not
being significant.
3. Billing of tenant. Should the owner desire that the Authority
conduct business directly with the tenant of each premises, he
must first provide means of billing and collecting the sewer service
charges therefor.
4. Service charges based on fixtures. The total charge for sewer
service shall be equal to average fixture charges for each premises,
subject to all minimum charges, multiplied by the number of
premises.
55.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.3
1:395
55.4. Payment procedures. [Amended 10-24-1960 by Ord. No.
10-24-60A; 12-13-1976 by Ord. No. 12-13-76E; 4-12-1982 by Ord.
No. 4-12-82A; 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 8-13-84B; 7-9-1990 by Ord.
7-9-90A; 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 4-13-92A; 11-30-1994 by Ord. No.
11-30-1994]
5. Service charges based on water consumption. The total charge
based on water consumption shall be determined as follows:
a. The average use of water for each billing period for each
premises shall be equal to the total number of gallons
registered by the water meter or meter installation divided by
the number of premises to be billed. Each premises shall then
be assessed for water consumption in accordance with the rate
schedule set forth in Section 55.2 of this ordinance. The
average use of water for each billing period for each premises,
as thus determined, shall provide the basis for billing, subject
to minimum charges.
b. The total charge for sewer service shall be equal to the average
charge for each premises, subject to minimum charges,
multiplied by the number of premises determined as just set
forth, and the total charge shall be submitted to the customer
or customers or Sewage Agency as the proper charge for
sewer service furnished to the type of building and/or buildings
included hereunder.
6. Miscellaneous bases for sewer service charges. The municipality
may use miscellaneous bases for determination of sewer service
charges, such other methods to be subject, essentially, to the
general principles just outlined.
55.4.1. Billing Periods and due dates. Sewer charges or rentals shall be
billed monthly in accordance with the billing procedures established by
the Pennsylvania American Water Company, and shall be paid monthly
in accordance with the payment due dates established by the
Pennsylvania American Water Company. [Amended 11-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 11-13-06C; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 6-11-07A]
55.4.2. An administrative fee of $10 is hereby imposed for any payment for
sewer charges or rentals which is returned by the Municipality's
collection agent or depository for nonsufficient funds, or any other
reason.
55.4.3. Charges for sewage services shall be subject to a penalty of 1.5% if
not paid in full on or before the prescribed due date. If payment of a
lesser amount is made prior to the due date, the penalty shall be
assessed upon the balance remaining unpaid. [Amended 6-11-2007
by Ord. No. 6-11-07B]
55.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.4
1:396
55.5. Surcharges Applicable to High-Strength Sewage Dischargers.
[Added by Ord. No. 7-9-90A]1
55.6. Maximum chemical concentrations.
55.4.4. Thereafter, an additional penalty of 1.5% shall be assessed on the
unpaid balance for each thirty-day period or part thereof that has
elapsed since the due date until said balance is paid in full. Any
payments made on a delinquent account shall be applied first to penalty
charges, and then to reduce the remaining unpaid sewage service
charges. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 6-11-07B]
55.5.1. In any case in which a discharger's wastes have an unusually high
concentration of suspended solids and/or biochemical oxygen demand
and/or chlorine demand, the sewage charges calculated as
hereinbefore provided shall be increased according to the following
formula:
1. Suspended Solids.
F = 1 +
0.50
0.44 (SS - 275) / 275
Where:
F = Factor to be applied to basic rate
SS = Suspended solids of particular wastes in parts per
million (ppm).
2. Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
F = 1 +
0.50
0.27 (BOD - 300) / 300
Where:
F = Factor to be applied to basic rate
BOD = Biochemical Oxygen Demand of particular
wastes in parts per million (ppm)
3. Chlorine Demand.
Rc = 0.00835 Pc (C - 5)
Where:
Rc = Surcharge rate for chlorine demand in cents per
thousand gallons of wastes
Pc = Contract price of chlorine in cents per pound
C = Chlorine demand of particular waste in parts per
million (ppm.)
55.6.1. The following concentrations of chemical substances shall not be
exceeded in the sewage originating from any customer.
55.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.6
1:397
55.7. Prohibited discharges.
Chemical Symbol Parts per million
Cyanides CN 1
Cyanates CNO 10
Iron Fe 5
Trivalent Chromium Cr 3
Hexavalent Chromium Cr 0.5
Nickel Ni 3
Copper Cu 2
Zinc Zn 2
Phenol compounds — 1
55.6.2. The waste of any customer containing excessive quantities of these
chemicals may be refused entry into the system, until such waste has
been pretreated to bring it under the allowable limits set forth above.
55.7.1. It is prohibited to discharge into the sanitary sewer system:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
2. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, and not
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely
under normal sewer flow conditions and with no particle greater
than 1/2 inch in dimension.
5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
6. Any waters or wastes have a pH lower than five point five or higher
than nine point zero, or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works.
7. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
55.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.7
1:398
55.8. Charges and rentals collectible as lien.
55.9. Disposition of receipts.
55.10. Commencement of rentals and charges.
55.11. Extent of liability of municipality and Authority.
8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
9. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
55.8.1. All sewer charges or rentals hereby imposed shall be a lien from the
due date thereof on each and every lot or tract of real property served
by the sewage systems of the Municipality of Bethel Park or in the
Township of Snowden, or in any other surrounding municipalities.
55.8.2. All liens for unpaid assessments shall be filed in the office of the
Prothonotary of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal
claims.
55.9.1. Funds received by the municipality from the collection of charges or
rentals herein provided for shall be used only for the following purposes
and for such purposes only.
1. Defraying the expense of the Municipality in the operation,
maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other
expense in relation to such sewers, sewer system and sewage
treatment works.
2. Such payments as the Municipality may be required to make under
any lease or agreement which it may enter into for said sewers,
sewage system and sewage treatment work with the Municipal
Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park, County of Allegheny
and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with the
provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
55.10.1. The rentals or charges hereby imposed shall become effective
immediately or at the time or connection to the sewage system, as the
case may be.
55.11.1. Neither the Municipality of Bethel Park nor the Municipal Authority
of the Municipality of Bethel Park, County of Allegheny and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall be liable for any damage
resulting from leaks, broken pipe or any other cause occurring to or
within any house or building or in connection with the building sewer
between the sewer line and any house or building; and neither the said
municipality nor the Authority shall be liable to any owner for any claim
55.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.11
1:399
55.12. Right of entry.
55.13. Meters required on private water sources.
55.14. Violations and penalties.
55.15. Severability.
55.16. Periodic adjustment of rentals and charges.
for damage arising by reason of any leaking or breaking of any main,
trunk, interceptor, lateral or collecting sewer or any building
connection, sewer line or any attachment to the sewer.
55.12.1. The duly authorized agents of the Municipality of Bethel Park and
the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park, County of
Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall have access at all
reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the premises to which sewer
service is supplied to make necessary inspections.
55.13.1. In cases where residences or other establishments have private
springs or private wells, these establishments will be required to
provide a meter on the spring or well. This meter and its installation
must be furnished by the property owner, must be acceptable to the
municipality, and shall be available to municipal employees for meter
readings at any time.
55.14.1. Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be served by the Municipality of Bethel Park with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit of 30 days
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
55.14.2. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in 55.14.1 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
55.14.3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
become liable to the Municipality of Bethel Park for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned the Municipality of Bethel Park by reason of such
violation.
55.15.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any of its
provisions are held to be illegal, such illegality shall not affect or impair
any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance. It is hereby declared
to be the intent of the municipality that this ordinance would have been
ordained and enacted had such illegal provision not been included
therein.
55.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.16
1:400
55.17. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
55.16.1. The Municipal Council shall, at its regular meeting in December of
each year, review the rate schedule then in effect for the municipality to
determine if such schedule is producing revenues in excess of the
amount needed for operation and maintenance of the sewer system and
for payment of all the rentals and other requirements of the
municipality under the agreement of lease with the Authority. If such
rate schedule is found to be producing a material surplus of funds in
excess of such needs, it shall be adjusted by the Municipal Council for
the next succeeding fiscal year of the municipality so that the estimated
revenues to be derived therefrom shall be reasonably in balance with
the estimated operation and maintenance expenses, rentals and other
fiscal requirements of the sewer system.
55.17.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
55.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.17
1:401

ARTICLE II
Sewerage Connections
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-13-56E]
55.18. Definitions.
55.18.1. AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park heretofore created by the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park by Ordinance No. 35-7-50.3
55.18.2.SEWAGE — Shall mean a combination of water-carried wastes from
the residences, business and commercial buildings, apartments,
institutions, and industrial establishments.
55.18.3. SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
55.18.4. PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public
authority.
55.18.5. SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer which carries sewage
and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
55.18.6. PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sanitary sewer which
has been constructed and is owned by the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, or has been constructed by private parties
and has been accepted by the Municipality of Bethel Park or the
Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park as a sanitary
sewer.
55.18.7.SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS
— Shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
55.18.8.SEWAGE WORKS — Shall mean all facilities for collecting,
transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
55.18.9.STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — Shall mean a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
55.18.10.GARBAGE — Shall mean solid wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce.
55.18.11. PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Shall mean the wastes from
the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded
to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
55.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.18
1:403
55.19. Connections required.
55.20. Disconnection of private sewage disposal systems.
55.18.12. BUILDING DRAIN or HOUSE DRAIN — Shall mean that part of
the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
sewage or discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
55.18.13. BUILDING SEWER or HOUSE SEWER — Shall mean the
extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
55.18.14.SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and
which are removable by laboratory filtering.
55.18.15.NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet directly or indirectly
into a watercourse, pond, gutter, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
55.18.16.WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
55.18.17. INSPECTOR — Shall mean the person appointed by the
Municipality of Bethel Park to inspect sewage works, including both
public and semipublic sewers, and including also inspection of building
sewers and all other connections between occupied homes and other
buildings and the public sewers.
55.18.18.PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation or group.
55.18.19. SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY - Is permissive.
55.19.1.Within 60 days after the passage of this ordinance, the owner of all
occupied buildings located on premises now accessible to a public
sanitary sewer shall connect, or cause to be connected, the said
building or buildings with the sanitary sewer to which this property is
accessible, in the manner hereinafter provided; and
55.19.2. Further, hereafter, as public sanitary sewers are laid and provided
in other and additional areas of the Municipality of Bethel Park, the
owners of all occupied buildings accessible to such public sanitary
sewers so laid and provided shall, within 60 days, connect or cause to
be connected, the said occupied buildings with the sanitary sewer to
which the property is accessible, in the manner hereinafter provided.
55.20.1. When connection has been made with the public sanitary sewer, the
owner or owners of such property shall forthwith abandon any and all
privies, privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks then existing on said
55.18 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.20
1:404
55.21. Sewage disposal systems prohibited on premises accessible
to public sewers.
55.22. Connecting private disposal systems to public sewers.
55.23. Unlawful connections to private disposal systems.
55.24. House-sewer standards.
premises and shall use them no longer. Any and all connection or
connections with the occupied building which has been served shall
be broken or destroyed in such a manner that sanitary sewage can no
longer enter therein.
55.21.1. From and after the passage of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to erect or construct any privy, privy
vault, cesspool, septic tank or any other type of
55.21.2. Disposal receptacle or structure in, on or under any premises
accessible to any public sanitary sewer in the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
55.22.1. From and after the passage of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to connect any privy, privy vault,
cesspool, septic tank or any other type of disposal receptacle or
structure to any public sanitary sewer in the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
55.23.1. From and after the passage of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful in
areas where public sanitary sewers have been provided and where the
owner or owners of premises have connected with the public sanitary
sewer, or are by this ordinance duty bound so to do, to connect the
occupied building with a privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or any
other type of disposal receptacle or structure.
55.24.1. In all cases where a sanitary sewer connection is made from an
occupied building to the sanitary sewer system, either cast-iron or
cylindrical terra-cotta pipe, of the kind and quality hereinafter
specified, or the equivalent thereof, as approved by the Municipality of
Bethel Park, of at least six-inch diameter, shall be used and shall be
given an even grade to the sanitary sewer system. Where the ground is
of sufficient solidity for a
55.24.2. proper foundation cylindrical terra-cotta pipe of the best quality,
free from flaws, splits or cracks, perfectly burned and well glazed over
the entire inner and outer surfaces, may be used if lain on smooth
bottom with a special groove cut in the bottom of the trench for each
hub, in order to give the pipe a solid bearing on its entire length, and
the soil well rammed on each side of and around the pipe. The spigot
and hub ends of the pipe shall be tightly joined, the joints to be
thoroughly caulked with an approved material, no particle of the
55.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.24
1:405
55.25. Service connections: applications charges, requirements;
regulations for house sewers.
caulking material to remain on the inside of the finished joint; where
cement mortar or a poured asphalt material is used for jointing, the
joint must first be caulked with hemp or oakum; where cast-iron pipe
is used, joints to be caulked with oakum, and leaded. On filled or made
ground, cast-iron pipe or equivalent is to be used; all work to be done
in a workmanlike manner.
55.25.1. All connections to the sewer lines that are a part of the sewerage
system of the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park will
be made by the Authority. Upon application for a service connection by
a property owner or the developer of a subdivision, the Authority will
insert a connection with a six-inch branch for each house and provide
an adequate bend to bring the service connection at right angles to the
sewer main and extend a six-inch vitrified clay service connection to the
curbline. Beyond this point, the property owner shall install the service
line at his own expense, making connection to his house sewer. For this
connection, a tapping charge of $40, plus $5 for the permit and
inspection fee will be due and payable with the application for the
connection, provided such application is made prior to the construction
of the collector sewer in front of the property for which the application
is made. Should application be made subsequent to this time, the
inspection and permit fee of $5 shall be made, and the entire cost of the
service connection, plus 10% for overhead and other costs shall be
made for each service connection. The amount of such costs shall be
estimated at the time the application is made, and deposit of this
amount shall accompany the application. After the installation is
completed, all costs shall be totaled plus 10%, and any excess over the
estimated costs shall be returned to the applicant, and any costs under
the estimated amount shall be paid by the applicant.
55.25.2. No connection less than six inches in diameter will be permitted to
the main sewer lines, and the construction of the property owners'
connection shall be in accordance with the general requirements of
sewers, except that a grade of not less than 0.6 foot per 100 feet for sixinch
pipe shall be employed. Curblines shall be designated as being 15
feet from the center of the street. Where sewers are laid in rights-ofway,
the service connection will be laid to the edge of the right-of-way
granted, but not more than 15 feet from the center line of the sewer.
The applicant will also be required to conform to all other requirements
of the Municipality of Bethel Park as regards changes for sewage
transportation, collection, etc. as outlined under the Municipality of
Bethel Park rules and regulations, and as necessary to establish, to
meet the management, overhead, operation and fixed charges to retire
the capital cost of the system.
55.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.25
1:406
55.26. Groundwater and seepage drains.
55.27. Downspout and roof drainage; violation and penalty.
55.28. House trap.
55.29. Cross-connections.
55.30. Right of entry.
55.25.3. House sewers shall be installed by competent, skilled pipe-layers,
in accordance with approved standards, plans and specifications of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
55.26.1. No basement seepage or groundwater drainage or any other
uncontaminated source of water shall be discharged to the sanitary
sewerage system, and all applicants desiring connection to the
sewerage system shall certify that no groundwater or seepage drains
are or shall be connected to their system. After connection to the sewer
is made, the applicant shall maintain his house system in such a manner
that no such seepage or drainage enters his sanitary sewage system.
55.27.1. No downspouts, roof drainage or surface or areaway drainage shall
be connected into the sanitary sewerage system, and before attachment
to the sewer system, the property owner or applicant for service shall
remove such connections and adequately and rightly plug his system to
prevent the entrance of any downspout, roof, surface or areaway
drainage.
55.27.2. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section of the ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before the
Mayor or any Justice of the Peace, be fined not less than $50 for each
and every day each violation continues, and in default thereof, any such
person be sentenced to undergo an imprisonment of not less than five
days nor more than 30 days in the County jail.
55.28.1. Each user of the system, before connections are made thereto, shall
provide in-house sewering system, just outside the building wall, a trap
with a fresh-air vent on the house side, in accordance with the
standards approved by the Municipality of Bethel Park.
55.29.1. No cross-connections shall be made between the sanitary sewerage
system and the potable water system whereby vacuums or back
siphonage could permit sanitary wastes to enter the potable water
system. No cross-connections shall be made between the sanitary
sewerage system and storm drains or storm sewers.
55.30.1. The inspector and other duly authorized employees of the
Authority, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection,
55.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.30
1:407
55.31. Prerequisites for sewerage connections; supervision of work.
55.32. Notice to owners to connect.
observation, sampling, testing and retesting, in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
55.31.1. No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection of his property with any public sanitary sewer until he has
fulfilled all of the following conditions:
1. Prior to the leasing of the sewerage system by the Municipal
Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park to the Municipality of
Bethel Park, he shall notify the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park of his desire and intention to make such
connection.
2. Subsequent to the leasing of the sewerage system by the Municipal
Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park to the Municipality of
Bethel Park, he shall notify the Municipality of Bethel Park of his
desire to make such connection.
3. He shall notify the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of
Bethel Park of his desire and intention to make such connection.
4. He shall pay such inspection fees and tapping-in or connection fees
or expenses as are fixed for such services by the Municipality of
Bethel Park and the Municipal Authority.
5. He shall have applied for and obtained a permit from the Sewer
Inspector. Cost of the permit shall be part of inspection fee. No
work shall commence before the issuance of this permit.
6. He shall have given the Sewer Inspector at least 24 hours' notice of
the time when such connection shall be made, in order that the
Sewer Inspector can be present to supervise and inspect the work
of connection.
55.31.2. At the time of inspection, the owner or owners of properties shall
allow and permit the full and complete inspection of all sanitary and
drainage arrangements and facilities in his building and in and about all
parts of his property.
55.31.3. All work contemplated by this ordinance shall be under the direct
supervision and inspection of the Sewer Inspector appointed by the said
Municipality of Bethel Park, and no building sewer line shall be covered
over or in any manner concealed until after it is inspected and approved
by said Sewer Inspector.
55.32.1. Hereafter, when sanitary sewering is or has become available to
any property, and the property owner or owners have failed to connect
or cause to be connected his or their property to the sanitary sewer, the
55.30 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.32
1:408
55.33. Noncompliance procedure.
55.34. Violations and penalties.
55.35. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
55.36. Severability.
Municipality of Bethel Park may give, or cause to be given, written
notice to the said owner or owners to connect or cause to be connected
his, her or their property to the sanitary sewer, within 60 days from the
date thereof, and failure to comply with the said notice shall subject the
property owner or owners to the penalties of this ordinance.
55.33.1. If any owner or owners of any occupied building or buildings shall
neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, the
Municipality of Bethel Park may serve a written.
55.33.2. Notice upon said owner or owners, or upon the tenant or party in
possession of the premises, if said owner or owners cannot be found on
the said premises, requiring said owner or owners to comply in every
respect with the provisions of this ordinance within 60 days after the
service of such notice, and if said owner or owners shall neglect or
refuse to comply with said notice, the Municipality of Bethel Park may
perform or cause to be performed such work and labor, and furnish or
cause to be furnished such material as may be necessary to comply with
the provisions of this ordinance, at the cost and expense of such owner
or owners together with 10% additional thereof, and all charges and
expenses incident thereto, which sum shall be collected from said
owner or owners for the use of the Municipality of Bethel Park, as debts
are by law collectible, or the said Municipality of Bethel Park may, by its
proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefor against said
premises as provided by the Act or Acts of Assembly in such cases made
and provided.
55.34.1. In addition to any penalty hereinabove prescribed, any person,
firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof before the Mayor or any Justice of the
Peace, be fined not less than $5 nor more than $100, and in default of
payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo an imprisonment of not less
than five days nor move than 30 days in the County jail.
55.35.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or
conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance be and the same are
hereby repealed insofar as they affect the provisions of this ordinance.
55.36.1. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
55.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.36
1:409

ARTICLE III
Installment Payments for Sewer Improvements
[Adopted by Ord. No. 88-9-53]
55.37. Installment payments authorized.
55.38. Payment procedures.
55.39. Defaults.
55.40. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
55.37.1. From and after the passage of this ordinance, it shall be lawful to
pay in installments, as herein set forth, the cost of construction of
sanitary sewer improvements assessed against the properties in the
Municipality of Bethel Park abutting on such improvements, either by
the foot-front rule or according to benefits.
55.38.1. In order to secure the benefit of this ordinance, any person desiring
to pay any sanitary sewer assessment made against property abutting
on said improvement shall, within 30 days from the date of any
assessment made for sanitary sewer improvements, pay to the
Treasurer of Bethel Park Municipality (1/2) of the total assessment
made against the property abutting on such sanitary sewer
improvement, and shall within one year thereafter pay (1/2) of the
balance remaining unpaid, together with interest thereon at the rate of
6%, and shall, within one year after the second payment thereof, pay
the balance of said assessment, together with interest thereon at the
rate of 6% per annum.
55.39.1. In case of default in the payment of any installment due as
aforesaid for a period of 30 days after such installments, together with
interest, shall have become due, the balance on such due assessment
and interest accrued thereon shall be filed by the Solicitor in the office
of the Prothonotary, in the same manner as municipal claims are filed
and collected.
55.40.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed insofar
as the same affects this ordinance.
55.37 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.40
1:411

ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Discharges
[Adopted by Ord. No. 3-9-70D]
55.41. Certain discharges prohibited.
55.41.1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation
to discharge or to permit the discharge or infiltration into any municipal
sewer which is connected directly or indirectly with the Sanitary
Authority's sewage disposal system, or into a sewer connected to such
municipal sewer, or into the Sanitary Authority's sewage disposal
system of any of the following substances:52
1. Mineral acids, waste acid pickling or plating liquors from the
pickling or plating iron, steel, brass, copper, or chromium, or any
other dissolved or solid substances which will endanger health or
safety, interfere with the flow in sewers, attack or corrode sewers
or sewage structures or otherwise interfere with the operation of
the sewers or other facilities of the municipality or the Sanitary
Authority.
2. Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating
hydrocyanic gas on acidification.
3. Fats, entrails and the like from meat-processing plants, rendering
plants and similar industries and establishments.
4. Gas, tar, phenols, residues from petroleum storage, refining or
processing, fuel or lubricating oil, gasoline, naphtha, benzene or
explosive or inflammable liquids, solids or gases.
5. Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, lime, or acetylene sludges, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, sawdust,
paunch manure, hair, hides, dead animals, spent mash and grain,
pulp from food processing, water or wastes containing grease in
excess of 100 parts per million, or any other solids or viscous
substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of municipality's or
Sanitary Authority's facilities.
6. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities or
from sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water
treatment plants.
7. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded
garbage in a private dwelling, apartment building, hotel,
commercial restaurant or retail food store, resulting from the
proper use of a garbage grinder or disposer of a type approved by
52.Editor's Note: Refers to agreement entered into 12-17-1951 by Ord. No. 73-12-51 with the
City of Pittsburgh and the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to construct and operate a
sewage collection, treatment and disposal system.
55.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.41
1:413
55.42. Present discharges to cease.
55.43. Penalties for violation.
55.44. Validity.
55.45. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
the municipality, the Allegheny County Health Department and the
Sanitary Authority, and maintained in good operating condition;
provided, however, that no retail food store shall operate more
than one grinder or disposer which shall be not greater than three
horsepower in size and, when so required by the Allegheny County
Health Department, shall be equipped with an approved water
meter and limited in use to the consumption of an average of not
more than 1,500 gallons of water per day.
8. Water or wastes having a pH lower than five point five or higher
than nine point zero, having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel
of the municipality or the Sanitary Authority.
55.42.1. Any person, firm, association or corporation discharging or
permitting the discharge of infiltration of any of the foregoing wastes or
materials into a municipality sewer which is connected directly or
indirectly with Sanitary Authority's sewage disposal system or into a
sewer connected to such municipality sewer or into the Sanitary
Authority's sewage disposal system shall immediately cease to
discharge or permit the discharge of such materials or wastes
thereinto.
55.43.1. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision
of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to
exceed the sum of $100 for each offense, recoverable with costs, and in
default of payment of the fine and costs, shall be subject to
imprisonment in the County jail or workhouse for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that a violation is continued shall
constitute a separate offense. In the case of firms or associations, the
penalty may be imposed upon the partners or members thereof, and in
the case of corporations, upon the officers thereof.
55.44.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of
any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall not
affect or impair the validity of any other part of the ordinance which can
be given effect without the invalid part or parts.
55.45.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed so far as the same
affects this ordinance.
55.41 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.45
1:414
ARTICLE V
Prohibited Discharges in ALCOSAN System
[Adopted by Ord. No. 5-8-95A]
55.46. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms have the meaning
hereafter designated:
55.46.1.ALCOSAN — Allegheny County Sanitary Authority including its
treatment facility and any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
waste of a liquid nature.
55.46.2. CORROSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which has any of the
following properties:
1. It is aqueous and has a pH of less than or equal to five or greater
than or equal to 10, as determined by pH meter.
2. It is a liquid and corrodes steel (SAE1020) at a rate greater than
6.35 mm (0.250 in.) per year at a test temperature of 55$C (130$F).
55.46.3. REACTIVE/EXPLOSIVE WASTE — A waste or substance which can
create an explosion hazard in the sewage collection system or the
ALCOSAN treatment facility; which has any of but is not limited to the
following properties:
1. It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change
without detonating.
2. It reacts violently with water.
3. It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water.
4. When mixed with water, it generates toxic gasses, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment.
5. It is a cyanide or sulfide bearing waste which can generate toxic
gasses, vapors, or fumes in a quantity sufficient to present a danger
to human health or environment.
6. It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is subjected to
a strong initiating source or if heated under confinement.
7. It is readily capable of detonation, explosive decomposition or
reaction at standard temperature and pressure.
8. It is forbidden explosive as defined in 40 CFR 173.51, or a Class A
explosive as defined in 49 CFR 173.53 or a Class B explosive as
defined in 49 CFR 173.88.
55.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.46
1:415
55.46.4.HAZARDOUS WASTE — All wastes that are defined as hazardous
under the regulations enacted pursuant to the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA) as specified in 40 CFR 261 or under the
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste.
Management Act as specified in 25 PA Code 261.
55.46.5. IGNITABLE WASTE — A waste or substance which can create a fire
hazard in the sewage collection system or the ALOCSAN Treatment
Facility which has any of but is not limited to the following properties:
1. It is liquid with a flash point less that 60$C (140$F) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21
2. It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 CFR 173.151
55.46.6. INTERFERENCE — A discharge originating in the Borough/
Township which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, both:
1. Inhibits or disrupts the ALCOSAN facilities, its treatment processes
or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
2. Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
ALCOSAN's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(hereinafter referred to as "NPDES") Permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by ALCOSAN in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section
405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including
Title 2 or more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act and including state regulations contained in and
State Sludge Management Plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of
the solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air Act and the Toxic
Substances Control Act.
55.46.7. PASS-THROUGH — The term pass-through shall mean any
discharge of a pollutant through ALCOSAN into the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with or other discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the ALCOSAN's NPDES
Permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
55.46.8.PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
Governmental Entity, or any other legal entity, or its legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
55.46.9.pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration
of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
55.46 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.46
1:416
55.47. Prohibited discharges of toxic pollutant.
55.48. Other prohibited discharges.
55.46.10. POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, emissions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or other industrial, municipal or
agricultural waste discharged into water.
55.46.11. POLLUTION — The man-made or man induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of water.
55.46.12.THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et. seq.
55.46.13. TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, pursuant to
Section 307 (A) of the Act.
55.46.14.WASTE WATER — The liquid and water carried industrial or
domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed directly or indirectly into the facilities
of ALCOSAN.
55.46.15.WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, water ways, wells, springs, reservoirs,
aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border
upon the Commonwealth of PA or any portion thereof.
55.47.1. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced directly or
indirectly into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any sewer, pipe or other
conveyance located in the Borough/Township and transmitting
substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN, any toxic pollutant or other
wastewater which will:
1. Cause interference with the operation or performance of
ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities; or
2. Pass through ALCOSAN's treatment plant or other facilities.
55.48.1. No person shall introduce, permit or cause to be introduced,
directly or indirectly, into the facilities of ALCOSAN or into any piped
sewer, pipe or other conveyance located in the Municipality and
transmitting substances into the facilities of ALCOSAN any of the
following:
55.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.48
1:417
1. Any substance which will endanger the life, health or safety of the
treatment plant sewer maintenance and plant operations personnel
or which would preclude safe entry into the sewer system or any
portion of the treatment plant.
2. Any ignitable, reactive, explosive, corrosive, or hazardous waste,
except as provided for by ALCOSAN's Rules and Regulations.
3. Any wastewater with a temperature greater than 140$F (60$C).
4. Any waste which exceeds the naturally occurring background
levels for either Alpha, Beta, or Gamma radiation and/or any
wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half life or concentration not in compliance with applicable State or
Federal regulations.
5. Any solids or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operations
of ALCOSAN's facility or facilities discharging into the ALCOSAN
system.
6. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gasses or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes may create a public
nuisance or adversely affect public health or safety.
7. Pathological wastes from a hospital or other medical establishment.
8. Garbage, whether ground or not, except properly shredded food
waste garbage resulting from the proper use of a garbage grinder
or disposer type approved by ALCOSAN and maintained in good
operating condition.
9. Sludges or other materials from septic tanks or similar facilities for
from sewage or industrial waste treatment plants or from water
treatment plants: unless the discharge of such sludges and other
materials is specifically approved by ALCOSAN.
10. Any pollutant including oxygen demanding pollutants released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference with the ALCOSAN facilities.
11. Any substance which will cause ALCOSAN's effluent or any other
product of the ALCOSAN facilities such as residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation processes, including any
substance which will cause the ALCOSAN facility to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposable criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations promulgated pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
State Laws or regulations applicable to the treatment or disposal of
such effluent or such product.
55.48 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.49
1:418
55.49. Violation of ALCOSAN rules.
55.50. Penalties.
55.51. Severability.
55.52. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
55.49.1. No person shall take any action or do so or cause to be done
anything in violation of any rule or regulation of ALCOSAN.
55.49.2. The pretreatment Regulations of the Allegheny County Sanitary
Authority are incorporated into this Ordinance by reference as though
fully set forth herein.
55.50.1. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000, for
each offense, recoverable with costs, and in default of payment of the
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment in the Allegheny County
Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day a violation is
continued shall constitute separate offense. In addition, any person
violating any provision of the ALCOSAN Pretreatment Regulations may
be subject to administrative and civil penalties as provided for by the
Pretreatment Regulations and administered by ALCOSAN. Such
penalties may include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief and
penalties of up to $25,000 per day, per violation as provided for by the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law, 35 PS 752.1 et seq.
Authority to so enforce the Pretreatment Regulations is granted to
ALCOSAN, and is in addition to but not in place of any other remedy
available to the Municipality.
55.51.1. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of
any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not
affect or impair the validity of any other part of the Ordinance which
can be given affect without the invalid part or parts.
55.52.1. Any Ordinance or part of Ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this Ordinance is hereby repealed, so far as the same conflicts with
this Ordinance.
55.49 GENERAL PROVISIONS 55.52
1:419
Chapter 56
ENFORCEMENT OF SPEED RESTRICTIONS
55.52 BETHEL PARK CODE 55.52
1:420
ARTICLE I
Excessive-Speed Preventer Equipment
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1-25-82A]
56.1. Use of equipment authorized.
56.2. Approval of equipment; testing.
56.3. Standards for equipment operators.
56.4. Repealer.
56.1.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park adopts and authorizes the use of
excessive-speed preventer (E.S.P.) equipment by the Bethel Park Police
for enforcement of speed restrictions within the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
56.2.1. The excessive-speed preventer (E.S.P.) equipment shall be of a type
approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth,
which appoints stations for calibrating and testing of the device and
may prescribe regulations as to the manner in which calibrations and
tests shall be made.
56.3.1. The operators of excessive-speed preventer (E.S.P.) equipment shall
be duly educated and certified in the use of such device and only those
certified operators shall be authorized to operate, control or manage
the device.
56.4.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance which conflicts with the
provisions of this ordinance be and same hereby is repealed to extent of
the conflict.
56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 56.4
1:421
Chapter 57
SKATEBOARDS
56.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 56.4
1:422
ARTICLE I
Skateboards
[Adopted by Ord. No. 10-13-86A]
57.1. Definitions.
57.2. Restriction of skateboard use.
57.3. Penalty.
57.4. Severability.
57.5. Repealer.
57.1.1. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the
provisions of this ordinance:
1. SKATEBOARD — Shall mean a gravity or muscle-powered platform
supported by wheels intended for operation by a single person the
direction of which is controlled solely by body manipulations of the
operator.
2. PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, firm,
association, corporation or other legal entity.
57.2.1. After the effective date of this ordinance it shall be unlawful to ride,
use or operate a skateboard on any public sidewalk, public street,
highway or on any private property unless the owner or person in
control of such private property has given express written permission to
do so.
57.3.1. The person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each offense.
57.4.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this ordinance shall not be
affected or impaired thereby.
57.5.1. Any ordinance or parts of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance, be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
57.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 57.5
1:423
Chapter 58
STANDARDS FOR PAVEMENT, DRAINS, AND SEWERS
57.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 57.5
1:424
ARTICLE I
Drawings and Specifications
[Adopted by Ord. No. 5-9-66A]
58.1. Adoption by reference. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-11-69E]
58.2. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
58.1.1. The official paving, drainage and sewering standards of the
Municipality of Bethel Park be and the same are hereby adopted as
shown on the paving, drainage and sewering standards revised by the
Department of Public Works of the Municipality of Bethel Park by
Drawing No. E68-7-1D. A copy of same is attached hereto, made part
hereof and marked Exhibit "A".53
58.2.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
53.Editor's Note: Copies of Exhibit "A" are available for inspection in the Municipal Offices.
58.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.2
1:425

ARTICLE II
Standards for Sewers
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-13-56F]
58.3. Short title; purposes; specifications.
58.4. Definitions.
58.3.1. This ordinance shall be known and designated as the Public Sanitary
Sewer Ordinance. The following regulations have been drafted and
adopted by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park to establish
standards generally for the design, construction, maintenance and
protection of sanitary sewers. They have been drafted not only for the
purposes of the municipality generally, and for the Municipal Authority
of the Municipality of Bethel Park, but also for the guidance of property
owners and subdivision developers in excavating for, constructing and
laying sanitary sewers and other sewage facilities. Reference is made to
a Booklet of Plans and Specifications for the construction and laying of
sewers and construction of manholes, under date of April 1953, revised
March 1956, which is on file at the office of the Municipality Secretary,
and also at the office of the Secretary of the Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park. The plans and specifications in said booklet
explain and visualize the verbal description of said plans and
specifications contained herein.
58.4.1. AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park heretofore created by the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, by Ordinance No. 35-7-50.
58.4.2.SEWAGE WORKS — Shall mean all facilities for collecting,
transporting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
58.4.3. INSPECTOR — Shall mean the person appointed by the Municipality
of Bethel Park to inspect sewage works, including both public and
semipublic sewers, and including also inspection of building sewers and
all other connections between occupied homes and other buildings and
public sewers.
58.4.4. SUPERINTENDENT — Shall mean the Superintendent of Sewage
Works of the Municipality of Bethel Park or his authorized deputy, agent
or representative. He shall be appointed by the Municipality of Bethel
Park as soon as the operation of sewage disposal plant or plants is
begun.
58.4.5.SEWAGE — Shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes
from the residences, business and commercial buildings, apartments,
institutions and industrial establishments.
58.4.6. SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
58.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.4
1:427
58.4.7. PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public
authority.
58.4.8. SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and
to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
58.4.9. PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sanitary sewer which
has been constructed and is owned by the Municipality of Bethel Park
or constructed and is owned by the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, or has been constructed by private parties
and has been accepted by the Municipality of Bethel Park or the
Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park as a sanitary
sewer.
58.4.10.SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS
— Shall mean any arrangement or devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
58.4.11.STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — Shall mean a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
58.4.12. INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Shall mean the liquid wastes from
industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
58.4.13.GARBAGE — Shall mean solid food wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce.
58.4.14. PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Shall mean the wastes from
the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than 1/2 inch in dimension.
58.4.15. BUILDING DRAIN — Shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the sewage or discharge
from soil, waste and other drainage pipes, inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.
58.4.16. BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
58.4.17. B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — Shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C.,
expressed in parts per million by weight.
58.4.18.pH — Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. [The pH of a liquid is the
58.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.4
1:428
58.5. Construction and laying of sanitary sewers required of
developers.
measurement of the alkalinity or acidity of that liquid. A pH of 7.0 is
considered neutral, with a pH above 7.0 being alkaline and a pH below
7.0 being acid]
58.4.19.SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which are removable by laboratory filtering.
58.4.20.NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet directly or indirectly
into a watercourse, pond, gutter, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
58.4.21.WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
58.4.22.PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation or group.
58.4.23. SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY — Is permissive.
58.4.24. DEVELOPER — Shall mean, for the purposes of this ordinance, any
person or persons, firm, corporation or property owner who erects and
builds, or causes to be erected or built one or more buildings houses or
dwellings on one or more lots or tracts of land, and in connection with
said building operation provides or causes to be provided streets or
other facilities.
58.4.25. SEMIPUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sanitary sewer
constructed and laid by a developer in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance and other ordinances of the Municipality of Bethel
Park relating to sewers with the intent that the said sanitary sewer shall
eventually become a part of the public sewer system, but the
responsibility for laying, construction and maintenance of said sanitary
sewer and the disposal of sewage therefrom still remains with the
developer or other private persons.
58.5.1. In areas where sanitary public sewers have been made available, no
person, persons, firms, corporations, property owners or developers
shall hereafter develop any lot or tract of land in the Municipality of
Bethel Park without installing sanitary sewers as a part of said
development and in compliance with the terms and conditions of this
ordinance.
58.5.2. Hereafter no person or persons, firms, property owners or
developers shall excavate for, construct, install, lay or use any sanitary
sewers anywhere within the Municipality of Bethel Park without
compliance with this ordinance.
58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.5
1:429
58.6. Regulations for the design of sewers.
58.5.3. Before any collecting or other sewers are constructed by any
property owner or subdivision developer, complete sets of plans and
specifications and engineering data of the proposed installation shall be
delivered in sextuplet to the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, for their approval, if such construction is performed on a
project prior to the leasing of the project by the Authority to the
Municipality of Bethel Park. Following the leasing by the Authority to
the Municipality of Bethel Park, complete sets of plans and
specifications and engineering data of the proposed installation shall be
delivered in sextuplet to the Municipality of Bethel Park for its
approval. Such data shall in all ways conform to the present or future
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health and the
Sanitary Water Board. They shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a
registered professional engineer legally qualified to practice in
Pennsylvania, whose work and experience is satisfactory to the
Department of Health and Sanitary Water Board. The Municipality of
Bethel Park or Authority will present such plans to the above
department for approval, and it will be necessary that the applicant pay
the necessary filing fee charged by the Department of Health and which
is required to accompany the application for the permit. At the present
time this charge is $25 for each permit. Any corrections or revisions in
the plans shall be made as required by the Department of Health, and
after the permit is granted, all construction shall be strictly in
accordance with such plans and specifications.
58.5.4. Plans and engineering data intended to be submitted to the
Municipality of Bethel Park or Authority shall be prepared on sheets 24
by 36 inches in size with 1/2 inch border on the top, bottom and righthand
edge, and a 1 1/2 inch border on the left-hand edge for binding. A
three-by-five title box shall be located in the lower right-hand corner.
The name of the professional engineer who prepared the plans, his
signature and his seal will appear near the title box. This engineer shall
hereinafter be referred to as the Engineer.
58.5.5. The plan of the entire subdivision showing the complete sanitary
sewer layout shall be accurately presented, together with a carefully
prepared profile of the individual sewers showing the ground surface,
the proposed street grades and the elevations of the flow line of the
manholes. All elevations shall conform to the United States Government
Sandy Hook datum and each subdivision shall have a permanent bench
mark established in the convenient central location.
58.6.1. Velocity of flow. No sewers shall be laid on a grade such that the
mean velocity of flow when full or half full is less than two feet per
second when using Kutter's or Manning's formula with a roughness
coefficient of N = .013.
58.6.2. Sewer capacities. In the design of the system, the capacity of the
sewers, both collecting and transportation, which in the future will be
58.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.6
1:430
58.7. Sewer construction.
58.8. Special construction and requirements.
installed by property owners or owners of subdivisions should conform
to and adhere to the following. The minimum size collecting sewer to
be used shall be eight-inch diameter, using salt-glazed vitrified clay
pipe or approved equal, and the minimum grade for this size sewer
shall be 0.4 foot per one-hundred-foot length. An eight-inch sewer on
this minimum grade shall not have attached to it more than 240 single
houses or equivalent population for apartment houses, commercial
establishments, industrial or other type usage. Each apartment shall be
considered the equivalent of single house. Commercial establishments
shall be rated on the basis of the amount of sewage contributed
equivalent to the discharge from a single-family house or 450 gallons
per 24 hours. Where this condition is exceeded, larger sewers at
adequate grades shall be supplied as may be required by the Authority.
58.6.3. Tightness. All sewers shall be constructed watertight and shall be
tested before connection into the sewers, and will not be acceptable if
there is a greater leakage than the equivalent of 10,000 gallons of
water per day per mile of sewer, including manholes proportioned to
the length of sewer installed. Manholes shall be placed on all sewers at
junctions and at each change in grade or alignment, and in straight
lines on sewers up to 15 inches in diameter at intervals of not more than
400 feet.
58.6.4. Test for watertightness. Before the sewer will be accepted and can
be attached to deliver sewage to the sewerage system, it shall be tested
by the Engineer of the subdivision or property owner, who shall certify
that it has passed the required tests as set forth stating the amount of
leakage observed during the test. Such statement shall be forwarded to
the Municipality of Bethel Park or Authority in triplicate and must be
attested by a notary public.
58.7.1. All sewers shall be laid to exact line and grade showing a full circle
of light from manhole to manhole. The pipe shall be adequately bedded
so as to prevent any settling or cracking. Where the depth of trench is
excessive, the pipe shall be adequately cradled. All backfill shall be
adequately tamped in place within the pipe zone, which shall extend not
less than one foot above the crown of the pipe. Where sewers are laid in
streets, the backfill shall be adequately and thoroughly compacted for
the entire depth of the trench. All manholes shall have channels in the
bottom extending up to the center of the outlet, and shall be so
constructed as to smoothly and evenly divert the sewage into the outlet
of the manhole. Manholes shall be equipped with ladder bars of durable
material and so protected to have a long and adequate life. Cast-iron
covers shall be used of a type and size meeting the standard
requirements of the Authority. All manholes shall be watertight and
shall be thoroughly plastered outside to accomplish this end.
58.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.8
1:431
58.9. Clearing and grubbing.
58.8.1. Where construction conditions or locations of sewers are such that
standard construction is not adequate, special construction shall be
used which will meet the requirements of the Authority, its Engineer
and the Department of Health. Should the sewers cross rights-of-way of
public utilities, the construction shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of the Authority owning or operating that utility.
58.8.2. Where the contractor lays sewers across, along or through rights-ofway,
roadways, etc., belonging to the state, County, municipality or
township, the regulations and stipulations set up and required for those
owners shall be observed, and all work shall be in conformance with the
requirements set forth by that said owner.
58.8.3. The contractor is warned that at certain locations where his
construction is to be performed there may be existing under ground or
concealed structures, mainly utility mains and services, and in some
cases drainage, storm and other pipe lines, conduits, etc. Before the
contractor begins excavation on any work, he shall ascertain from the
public utility companies supplying the residences of the municipality as
to whether they have any mains or services in the location he proposes
to perform his work, and to obtain as near as possible the locations of
the same so that he may protect them from damage. Failure on the part
of the contractor to protect any such concealed structures during his
operations shall impose the requirement upon him to restore and put
back into good condition any such structures damaged. This shall be
done in a manner satisfactory to the authority owning or having
jurisdiction over the structure.
58.9.1. Clearing and grubbing shall consist of the removal of all trees, brush
and other vegetation and old structures or obstructions from the site of
the work, which will be required to be removed so that the planned
construction may be made. All live trees shall be protected and not
removed unless permitted or ordered by the Engineer. Where existing
major structures are to be removed, the work to be performed is
described in the detail specifications which shall be prepared by the
engineer. All brush or other disposable matter shall be burned. All work
under this heading shall be done sufficiently ahead of topsoil removal
and excavation so as not to interfere with those operations. The
contractor shall remove stumps and large roots and refill the
depressions with suitable earth fill compacted as outlined under the
various types of backfill. Clearing and grubbing shall be considered as a
part of the work done under general excavation, unless otherwise
covered in the detail specifications.
58.9.2. Before beginning of the general excavation, all topsoil over the areas
of the site where general excavation is to be done; fill to made; or the
storage of excavation is to be made, shall be stripped off to the depth
determined by the Engineer, or usually about a depth of eight inches,
and shall be stored until construction is completed and backfill is made.
58.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.9
1:432
58.10. Excavation for sewers.
The topsoil shall then be replaced as the upper layer of backfill to a
depth of not less than six inches, and leveled to an even grade so that
the final grade shall be required by the plans.
58.10.1. Sewer lines are to be laid in trenches with cover as specified on the
plans or called for or as is necessary to secure proper alignment. Bell
holes must be excavated around all joints, and trenches must be of a
sufficient width to permit a thorough caulking of the joints and
inspection of the work. Care must be taken in excavating the bottom of
the trench to secure a uniform grade so that the pipe can rest upon it
throughout its entire length. The bottom of the trench should be
excavated so as to conform to the curvature of the pipe and afford good
bearing surface, and, to this end, machine work shall be permitted to no
greater depth than 2/3 the diameter of the pipe below the crown
elevation of the pipe. Contractor shall excavate all bell holes before
lowering the pipe into the trench. Where rock is encountered, the
excavation shall be carried below the bottom of the pipe for a distance
of six inches, which shall be backfilled with earth or clay well tamped to
proper grade. Surplus materials shall be disposed of as directed. No
more than 400 feet of open trench shall be permitted at any time.
58.10.2. Where the contractor passes through areas which are cultivated or
grassed, he shall remove all topsoil first before performing his trench
work, depositing such topsoil carefully so that it may be used as the
final backfilling of the trench for restoration of final grade. The trench
shall be brought to the proper shape by trimming with suitable tools to
lines stretched between the outside of the pipe and template. When
excavation work is done under unit price items, pavement lines shall be
as to depth, the amount required to adequately bed the pipe of a firm
foundation and as to width, the diameter of the pipe, for pipes up to
twenty-four-inch diameter plus 18 inches, and for pipes 24 inches and
over in diameter the diameter plus twice the wall thickness of the pipe
plus two feet for depths of trench up to six feet above the outside
bottom of the pipe. The width of the trench shall be increased 18 inches
for each six feet of extra depth above six feet to provide for sheeting
and bracing. Any excavation for cradle shall be included.
58.10.3. Materials excavated from trenches shall be deposited or stored on
the side of the trench furthest from the road metal or pavement in such
manner that there will be in interference with the flow of water in any
gutter, drain pipe, culvert, ditch or waterway, unless the contractor is
specifically permitted to do otherwise by both the public authority
having jurisdiction over the highway and the Engineer. When excavated
materials are deposited on or along a public high way, the contractor
shall protect the traveling public by placing watchmen, warning
signals, or both, as required. During the time trenches are open, the
contractor shall provide and maintain free access to all adjacent
58.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.10
1:433
58.11. Backfill procedure at pipe zone.
58.12. Rock and boulder exclusion.
properties. All excess excavation shall be immediately removed from
the right-of-way.
58.10.4. Where necessary, the trench shall be provided with sheeting
properly braced to protect the lives of the labor employed on the work
and property adjoining the trench. In any case, the contractor shall
provide sheeting and bracing in all trenches six feet or more in depth,
and in accordance with state and municipal regulations. The width of
the trench shall be sufficient to permit ample space for the workmen to
construct the sewers in an efficient manner, and additional space shall
be provided where required for sheeting, bracing and equipment.
Sheeting, where used, shall not be removed before first securing the
permission of the Engineer. When sheeting is removed, contractor shall
assume full responsibility for any damage to structures, property, etc.,
arising from failure to leave in place a sufficient amount of sheeting and
bracing. The contractor is warned there where other underground
structures such as power, telephone, gas, water, sewer or other services
are located, care shall be taken to determine their locations and protect
them from damage. However, should any such structures or services be
damaged, they shall be repaired or replaced in a manner satisfactory to
the Engineer or the owners of such structures. All necessary sheeting
and shoring shall be provided to protect these structures and on all
ditches six feet or over in depth, or as may be required by state or
municipal regulations for the protection of workmen. Material used for
the repair or replacement of any damaged structures shall be similar to
that of the existing structure. All cost of repair or replacement shall be
borne by the contractor, unless otherwise provided for by the detail
specification.
58.11.1. Selected backfill material free from rock or boulders shall be
deposited in the trench simultaneously on both sides of the pipe for the
full width of the trench, in layers, and to an elevation of at least one foot
above the top of all pipe, leaving the joints exposed for examination
during the pressure test. The backfill material shall be moistened if
necessary, tamped in thin (maximum four-inch) layers, and thoroughly
compacted under and on each side of the pipe to provide solid backing
against the external surface of the pipe.
58.11.2. Succeeding layers of backfill may contain coarser materials, and
shall be compacted thoroughly by puddling with hose, and long pipe
nozzle, or by tamping in layers of not more than four inches with
mechanical tampers as may be ordered by the Engineer, if the material
does not puddle readily. (Note exception where settlement is
important.) Contractor shall furnish necessary water at his own
expense. Topsoil shall be placed upon the upper six inches where
planting, seeding or sodding is required.
58.10 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.12
1:434
58.13. Procedure where settlement is important.
58.14. Procedure where settlement is unimportant.
58.15. Deficiency of backfill; by whom supplied.
58.16. Restoration of surface.
58.17. Clay envelope.
58.12.1. No rock or boulders shall be used in the backfill for at least one foot
above the top of the pipe, and no stone larger than eight inches in its
greatest dimension shall be used in the backfilling.
58.13.1. Where it is important that the surface of the backfill be made safe
for vehicular traffic as soon as possible, or where a permanent
pavement is to be placed within a short time, all but the upper 12 inches
of backfill shall be of approved moist material, thoroughly compacted in
thin (about four-inch) layers by tamping, and shall be brought to the
required surface grade. Stone, gravel, granulated slag or cinders shall
be the material used for the temporary fill in the upper 12 inches.
Should settlements occur in excess of 1 1/2 inches below the street
grade, the contractor shall furnish and install additional material to
maintain the surface at street grade.
58.14.1. Wherever, in the opinion of the Engineer, surface settlement is not
important, tamping may be permitted in the layers above those
described under 58.11, Backfill procedure at pipe zone, and the backfill
shall be neatly rounded over the trench to a sufficient height to allow
for settlement to grade after consolidation, and future settlements
within the period of a year shall be rectified by adding material to bring
the surface to a little above grade. Topsoil shall be placed to a depth of
not less than six inches where planting, seeding or sodding is to be the
final surface.
58.15.1. Any deficiency in the quantity of material for backfilling the
trenches, or for filling depressions caused by settlement, shall be
supplied by the contractor.
58.16.1. The contractor shall replace all surface material, and shall restore
paving (unless otherwise stipulated), curbing, sidewalks, gutters,
shrubbery, fences, sod and other surfaces disturbed to a condition equal
to that before the work began, furnishing all labor and material
incidental thereto. In restoring paved surfaces, new pavement is
required, except that granite paving blocks, sound brick or asphalt
paving blocks may be reused.
58.17.1. Where sewer lines are carried through cinders, shall be used for
backfilling against the pipe and only clay or earth, free from cinders,
may be used for backfilling around the pipe, thoroughly tamped, and to
58.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.17
1:435
58.18. Maintenance of surfaces.
58.19. Permits.
58.20. Backfill for structures.
58.21. Embankment.
58.22. Seeding and Sodding.
a thickness of not less than nine inches all around and above the pipe
for protection from cinders.
58.18.1. Following the completion of the work, the contractor shall maintain
the surface of the unpaved trenches, adjacent curbs, sidewalks, gutters,
shrubbery, fences, sod and other surfaces disturbed, for a period of 12
months thereafter, and shall maintain the repaved areas (if paved by
contractor) and adjacent curbs, gutters and sidewalks for one year. All
material and labor required for the maintenance of the trenches and
adjacent structures shall be supplied by the contractor, and the work
shall be done in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
58.19.1. The contractor shall be responsible for such permits, including cost
thereof, as may be necessary for crossing the state highways or other
highways not under the control of the owner. Repaving of such
highways shall be performed in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the regulations of that governmental authority.
58.20.1. Backfill shall follow the provisions outlined above, except that all
backfill up to the final grade shall be thoroughly compacted by
mechanical tampers or adequately weighted rollers.
58.21.1. Embankment around structures shall be constructed to the lines
and grades as shown upon the plans. This embankment shall be
composed of material from the excavation, and shall be put down in
layers not exceeding four inches in thickness, and shall be thoroughly
rolled with a suitable roller or other means taken to compact it and bind
it in thoroughly with the layer below. Embankments shall be finished off
with the topsoil excavated from the site. Topsoil shall have a thickness
on the berms, embankment and slopes of not less than six inches.
58.22.1. Surfaces to be seeded shall be carefully leveled or graded,
prepared and raked, and then seeded with a mixture of seed consisting
of 20% Kentucky bluegrass, 15% red top, 10% English rye grass, 15%
chewing fescue, 30% seaside bent, and 10% white clover (for lawns
around buildings, the clover shall be replaced with that amount of
Kentucky bluegrass). The surface shall then be covered with 3/4 inch of
peat moss evenly spread. All sloped surfaces shall then be covered with
muslin or cheesecloth in a continuous surface properly anchored in
place. The contractor shall keep surface adequately watered until grass
has obtained a uniform length of two inches. Maintenance of lawns
58.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.22
1:436
58.23. Standard strength clay sewer pipe and fittings.
58.24. Extra strength clay sewer pipe and fittings.
58.25. Laying sewer pipe.
shall be given by the contractor until the acceptance of the construction
by the owner.
58.22.2. Sod shall be furnished and planted over those areas requiring
sodding. Before lifting, the grass should be cut to a length of
approximately 1 1/2 inches, and the sod then cut in squares and lifted
out, taking care to include the major portion of the roots and topsoil,
but not less than two inches. The surface on which the sod is to be
planted shall be covered with topsoil to a depth of not less than three
inches, raked level, and not less than 200 pounds of commercial
fertilizer per acre shall be raked in. The surface shall then be wetted
and the sod laid, care being taken to butt the joints closely and the
surface tamped to expel the air between the sod and topsoil. Any voids
shall be filled with topsoil and seeded. The sod shall be kept watered
until a union has been made between sod and earth. The lawn shall be
cared for until acceptance by the owner, and any sod that becomes
burned out or dies shall be replaced.
58.23.1. Standard strength vitrified clay sewer pipe and fittings shall
conform to the ASTM Specifications, Serial Designation C 13-50T and
any subsequent revisions, generally known to the trade as doublestrength
vitrified terra-cotta sewer pipe. Special attention is called to
that portion of the specifications dealing with inspection and rejection.
Pipe fittings shall be of a standard manufacture and shall be first grade,
salt glazed, vitrified clay sewer pipe with shell vitrified throughout and
perfectly burned without cracks, blisters, pimples or other
imperfections. The socket and spigot ends must be cut off at right
angles with the axis of the pipe. All pipe shall be well and smoothly
glazed over both inner and outer surfaces, except the insides of the
sockets and the outsides of the spigots for a distance equal to the depth
of the socket. The interior of the socket and the outside of the spigot
shall be scored with not less than three scorings. The length of pipe
shall not be less than two feet for sizes six inches and under, and three
for sizes eight inches and larger.
58.24.1. In locations where heavy loads occur on clay sewer pipe, the pipe
shall be extra-strength clay sewer pipe, generally known to the trade as
triple-strength vitrified terra-cotta sewer pipe, and shall conform to the
ASTM Specifications, Serial Designation C 200-53T and any subsequent
revisions. In all other respects, the pipe shall conform to that outlined in
the preceding paragraph.
58.25.1. Before sewer pipe is placed in position in the trench the bottom and
sides of the trench shall be carefully prepared and, if necessary, bracing
58.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.25
1:437
and sheeting installed as provided under 58.10, Excavation for sewers.
A mason's line shall then be tightly stretched across the tops of grade
boards accurately set above ground level, parallel to, and directly
above, the axis of the pipe to be installed, this line to be supported
at intervals not exceeding 50 feet. The exact line and grade for each
section of pipe shall be determined by plumbing and measuring down
from this line to the invert of the pipe being placed. Each pipe shall be
accurately placed to the exact line and grade called for on the plans.
58.25.2. Each piece of pipe and special fitting shall be carefully inspected
before it is placed, and no defective pipe shall be laid in the trench. Pipe
laying shall proceed up-grade starting at the lower end of the grade and
with the bells uphill. All pipe shall be laid in the presence of an
inspector representing the owner or engineer. Trench bottoms found to
be unsuitable for foundations after pipe laying operations have started
shall be corrected and brought to exact line and grade with compacted
earth where necessary. When so directed by the Engineer, gravel,
crushed stone, slag or concrete cradle shall be installed where
necessary to provide a satisfactory bearing surface.
58.25.3. Bell-holes shall be of sufficient size to allow ample room for
properly making the pipe joints. Bell holes shall be cut out not more
than 10 joints ahead of pipe laying. The bottom of the trench between
bell holes shall be carefully graded so that the pipe barrel will rest on a
solid foundation for its entire length. Each joint shall be laid so that it
will form a close concentric joint with adjoining pipe, and so as to avoid
sudden offsets or inequalities in the flow line. If pipes are out of round
but within the tolerances allowed by the ASTM Specifications, they
shall be rotated to provide smooth and even inverts one with another.
58.25.4. When so authorized by the Engineer, and when asphaltic jointing
compound is used, alternate joints may be poured before the 2 sections
are lowered into the trench. In such cases, the joint must be allowed to
set and the bottom of the trench carefully graded, so that the joints so
made will not be placed in strain or broken by unequal bearing after the
pipes are placed in position in the trench.
58.25.5. Joints shall be prepared in the manner hereinafter specified. As the
work progresses, the interior of all pipe in place shall be thoroughly
cleaned. On small pipe a swab or drag shall be kept in the pipe line and
pulled forward past each joint immediately after it has been made. After
each line of pipe has been laid, it shall be carefully inspected, and all
earth, trash, rags and other foreign matter removed from the interior.
58.25.6. After the joints have been completed, they shall be inspected,
tested and accepted by the Engineer before they are covered. The pipes
shall meet test requirements for watertightness and any leaks or
defects discovered at any time after completion of the work shall be
immediately repaired. Any pipe which has been disturbed after the joint
was made shall be taken up, the joint cleaned and remade and the pipe
relaid at the contractor's expense. All pipe in place shall be carefully
58.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.25
1:438
58.26. Cradle for sewer pipe.
58.27. Vitrified clay pipe joints.
protected from damage until the backfilling operations have been
completed.
58.25.7.Water shall not be allowed to run or stand in the trench while pipe
laying is in progress or before the joints are completely set or before the
trench has been backfilled. The contractor shall not open up at any time
more trench than his available pumping facilities are able to dewater.
58.25.8. Backfilling of trenches may be started immediately after the pipe in
place has been inspected, tested and approved by the Engineer.
Backfilling shall be performed in the manner hereinbefore specified
under backfilling.
58.26.1. Where ground conditions require, or where by order of the
Engineer, the plans or the detail specifications, cradle shall be installed
under sewer pipe. One of three types shall be furnished as follows:
1. Clay cradle or sand cradle. Where sewer pipes are in trenches with
a cover over the crown of less than six feet and will not be
subjected to heavy traffic strains, no cradle will be required, and,
where rock or unsuitable foundation is encountered, a cradle of
mechanically tamped clay or sand placed in three-inch layers to a
depth from six inches below the bottom of the pipe up to or beyond
the lower point of the pipe shall be installed. A bed shall then be cut
out as described under 49.25, Laying sewer pipe.
2. Gravel or crushed stone cradle. When sewer pipes are laid in
trenches with a cover of more than six feet or where subjected to
medium traffic loads or rock is encountered, a gravel or crushed
stone cradle shall be installed, when called for on the plans or in
the detail specifications. The gravel, crushed stone or crushed slag
shall meet the specifications for concrete aggregate, small for
pipes up to twelve-inch diameters, medium for pipes twelve-inch to
twenty-four-inch diameter, and larger for pipes over twenty-fourinch
diameter. Cradle shall be carried to 1/3 the height of the pipe
for trenches less than 12 feet deep, and to three inches above
center line for trenches over 12 feet deep. The cradle material shall
be adequately and compactly tamped in place, using mechanical
tampers if necessary, taking care not to heave, misalign, crack or
otherwise injure the pipe and joints.
3. Concrete cradle. Where sewer pipes are laid under conditions
exceeding those outline in Paragraph 2 preceding, or required by
the plans, detail specifications or by order of the Engineer, one to
two to four (1:2:4) concrete shall be substituted for the gravel.
58.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.27
1:439
58.27.1. The following types of joints, as well as other types which may be
approved in writing by the Engineer shall be accept able on vitrified
clay sewer pipe. The joint used, however, regardless of type, shall be
the kind especially suited for use with the type of pipe involved and in
the location used, and as will guarantee leakage below the amounts
hereinafter set forth under58.28, Testing sewers.
58.27.2. Before any joints are made on the ground, the contractor shall
demonstrate to the Engineer, by pouring at least one sample joint, that
the methods which he employees conform to the following
specifications and will provide a watertight joint, and further that the
workmen who are intended for use on this phase of work are thoroughly
familiar and experienced with the type of joint proposed.
58.27.3. Cement grout joints.
1. Under the bell of the pipe last laid, a suitable form of unbleached
muslin shall be placed of such a length as to at least encase the
lower 2/3 of the pipe. The spigot end of the pipe shall be inserted
into the bell to its full depth, and a gasket of jute or oakum, twisted
and thick enough to even up the inverts shall be caulked into the
joint for the full circumference of the pipe and to within 1 1/2
inches of the face of the bell for 18 inches and smaller pipe, and
2 1/4 inches for larger pipe. The ends of the muslin shall be brought
up around the pipe and secured with ties on each piece of pipe. The
annular space then shall be filled with cement grout just thin
enough to be forced through a hose, and around and tightly into the
joint using a grout pump. The muslin form shall remain in place,
and before the grout has set, the upper portion of the joint is then
to be formed of cement mortar, well caulked into place.
2. The cement grout and cement mortar used shall have the
composition by weight as follows:
a. Three parts clean sharp sand;
b. Two parts portland cement;
c. One part Master Builders Company Embeco or equal*.
To this shall be added just enough water to make a workable
mix.
(*Product of equal manufacturer may be used according to that
manufacturer's specifications and the Engineer's approval.)
3. Weston's gasket and form will be acceptable as an alternate to the
above specified method, using joints made in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications with cement grout and mortar as
above specified.
58.27.4. Cement mortar joints. A gasket of jute or oakum shall be rolled
sufficiently thick to bring the invert of the spigot end of the pipe being
58.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.27
1:440
laid smooth and even with the invert of the bell end of the pipe
previously laid. This gasket shall be dipped and thoroughly soaked in a
cement grout com posed of neat portland cement and water. The gasket
shall then be laid in the bell for the lower third of the circumference
of the joint and covered with mortar from base to bell to end of bell.
The spigot of the pipe shall then be inserted and carefully driven home,
after which a small amount of mortar shall be inserted in the annular
space around the entire circumference of the pipe. The ends of the
gasket shall then be wrapped around the pipe and solidly rammed
into the joint with a caulking tool, providing clearance from end of
bell to gasket, as above specified for cement grout joints. The mortar
previously placed shall be driven ahead of the gasket. The joint shall
then be filled with portland cement mortar as outlined in the preceding
paragraph. This mortar must be placed by hand, and care must be
taken to completely fill the joint entirely around the pipe by pushing
the mortar in by hand, using a rubber glove with fingers, and a wooden
caulking tool. The joint shall be beveled off at an angle of 45° with the
outside of the pipe and shall be protected by a strip of muslin placed
completely around the joint and tied in place.
58.27.5. Hot poured asphaltic compound joints.
1. If hot poured asphaltic compound pipe joints are used, the inside of
the bells and the outside of the spigot ends of all bell and spigot
sewer pipe and fittings shall be painted with a primer
recommended and/or sup plied by the manufacturer of the jointing
material used. This painting shall be done at least four hours before
the pipe is laid, or as recommended by the manufacturer. The pipe
and fittings shall be clean and dry before painting. Pipe joints shall
be made with a compound having a bituminous base, such as Joint
Seal No. 313, as manufactured by the H.H. Robertson Company,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, G-K compound or Atlas JC-60 compound
as manufactured by the Atlas Mineral Products Company,
Mertztown, Pennsylvania, or approved equal. This compound shall
be heated in a suitable heater to a temperature specified by the
manufacturer so that it can be poured rapidly and smoothly. Before
pouring, the joints shall be clean and dry, and a gasket of dry
unoiled hemp or jute shall be caulked into the annular space. After
the gasket is properly caulked, a suitable asbestos runner shall be
placed around the joint and mudded, and the compound shall be
poured in such a manner that it will run around the pipe and
completely fill the annular space. When permitted by the Engineer,
two pipes may be joined on the bank, care being taken to preserve
the proper alignment of the pipe both on the bank and while being
lowered into the trench. Whether jointed on the bank or in the
trench, primer and joint compound shall be used on every joint.
2. If die-cast sewer pipe joints are used, they shall be similar and
equal to the Slipseal Sewer Joint as made with dies and materials
furnished by the Universal Sewer Pipe Corporation, Cleveland,
58.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.27
1:441
Ohio, Die Cast Sewer Joint as made by American Vitrified Products
Company, Cleveland, Ohio, Atlas Slipjoint Compound as made by
the Atlas Mineral Products Company, Mertztown, Pennsylvania,
or approved equal. Sewer pipe shall be primed and cast with
Slipseal or equal approved die-cast tapered-type joint, which shall
be made by fitting the spigot and socket of the pipe with collars
of Slipseal bituminous compound. Compound shall have a melting
point of 240° - 270° F., and a penetration of 4-7 at 77° F. A lining
or ring of this jointing material shall be die-cast into the socket
of the pipe. The spigot shall be fitted with a collar of the same
material, die-cast around the end of the pipe, and of a size such
that when shoved firmly into the socket portion of the pipe, a
tight fit between the socket and the spigot end of the pipe will
be made. All pipe must be dry and clean when lining and collar
cast, and a compound must be poured at a heat high enough to
procure proper adhesion to the pipe. When laying these pipes,
the lining and collar shall be painted with Slipseal solvent, which
shall cause their surfaces to become plastic or tacky, and when
the pipes are shoved firmly together, the joint material shall unite,
and incidental to the diffusion of the solvent, congeal and become
one homogeneous body. The foregoing is a brief description of the
method of making this type of joint, however, during construction
the manufacturer's directions shall be followed in all respects.
58.27.6. Asphaltic compound cold troweled joints. If asphaltic compound
cold-troweled joints are used, they shall be made with a cold, mastic,
asphaltic compound such as DeWitt's No. 10, as manufactured by
DeWitt Products Corporation, Detroit, Michigan, Kalkite, as
manufactured by the Presstite Engineering Company, St. Louis,
Missouri, or approved equal. In using this type of joint the
manufacturer's directions shall be followed in all respects.
58.27.7. Rubber joints.
1. Rubber joints of Hexseal type, as manufactured by the Universal
Concrete Pipe Company, Columbus, Ohio, Tylox, as manufactured
by Hamilton Kent Manufacturing Company, Kent, Ohio, and
Universal Sewer Pipe Corporation, Cleveland, Ohio, or equal, shall
be permitted, provided the bells and spigots or the tongue and
groove of the pipe are especially prepared for the use of these types
of joints. The joints shall be installed in strict accordance with the
directions and requirements of the manufacturer. The rubber
gasket shall be of special section such as to fully and completely
close the space between the bell and spigot or the tongue and
groove. It shall be circular in construction and of the proper
diameter for the service required. The gasket shall be adequately
lubricated with special cement for this purpose, and pipe joints
shall be adequately and thoroughly driven home or seated. The
rubber used in the gaskets shall be natural or synthetic type and so
compounded to give a long, enduring life and service and shall be
58.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.27
1:442
58.28. Testing sewers.
such as not to disintegrate in the presence of air, liquids or gases to
which it may be subjected in the service in which it is to be placed.
2. Rubber joints of the rubber tube type filled with grout under
pressure after installation in the bell of the pipe, as developed by
the Caly Sewer Pipe Association, Inc., Columbus, Ohio, shall be
permitted on vitrified clay sewer pipe installations. The joints shall
be installed in strict accordance with the directions and
requirements of the manufacturer. If this type of joint is used, two
lengths of pipe may be jointed outside the trench with hot poured
asphaltic compound as previous specified, resulting in a sewer line
constructed with alternate joints of the hot poured asphaltic
compound type and alternate joints of the rubber tube type.
58.27.8. Plastic joints. Premoulded joints of the plastic type shall be similar
to those manufactured by the American Vitrified Products Company, or
equal. The joints shall be premoulded in the bell and on the spigot with
a satisfactory type of plastic material using machined dies of the proper
size and arrangement to produce a tight joint when the pipes are forced
together in the trench. The plastic material employed for the joints shall
be compounded to give a long life in the service in which it is to be used.
The directions of the manufacturer shall be strictly followed in the
making of the joints and assembling in the trench.
58.27.9. Special requirements for joints.
1. The contractor may select the type of joint he desires for use with
sewer and drain pipe, and shall be required to deliver to the owner
tight sewers adequately meeting the tests for tightness hereinafter
outlined. The Engineer shall not be held responsible for the
adequacy of any of the joints described in the foregoing para
graphs. The responsibility shall rest with the contractor and the
manufacturer of the joint selected, since the care, method of
making and the diligence and ability of the persons employed in
performing this work are the prime requisites for producing
watertight joints.
2. Certain fundamentals however must be observed in joint
construction as follows:
a. Pipe must be clean.
b. No water, sand, silt, earth or other foreign substance shall be
permitted to contaminate the joint, material or space to be
occupied by the jointing material.
c. Adequate alignment and bedding of the pipe shall be provided
before the joint is made.
d. Pipe must not be moved in the slightest after the joint is made.
58.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.28
1:443
58.29. Inspection of sewer pipe, fittings and joint materials.
58.30. Manholes.
58.28.1. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania requires that the leakage of
sewers shall not exceed the following test requirements which includes
all appurtenant construction. The contractor shall certify in
quadruplicate previous to the payment of the final estimate that he has
tested all sewers and they have less leakage than set forth below, so
that the Engineer may transmit the same to the proper authorities if
requested. Sewers and drains shall not exceed an infiltration of 10,000
gallons of groundwater per mile of sewer per 24 hours, regardless of
pipe joint type that may be used. Conformance with this requirement
shall be verified by performance of exfiltration tests to be made,
certified to, and paid for by the contractor and conducted as follows:
58.28.2. After replacement of broken or cracked pipe, repair of defective
joints and vitrification of the sewer installation to true line and grade
that also shows a full circle of light from manhole to manhole, and after
cleaning and conditioning the sewer free from deposits, joint drippings
or extrusions, or from foreign matter of any kind, each section of sewer
between manholes, or for longer distances of allowed, before
backfilling, shall be maintained completely full of water for a period of
not less than 30 minutes to allow for absorption of water by the sewer.
By use of preinstalled riser sections of pipes at manholes if necessary,
or by plumber's plugs and riser, a column of water shall then be
maintained at least four feet above the uppermost top section of sewer
under test for sewers with grades of 1% or less, and to one inch above
the crown of the upper end of the sewer for grades between 1% and 5%,
and as the Engineer directs for greater grades; and the rate of leakage,
for a period of not less than 30 minutes thereafter, accordingly
determined, must not exceed that proportion for the length of sewer
under test to 10,000 gallons per mile of sewer per 24 hours.
58.28.3. In case the water table in the trench, at time of test, is above the
highest invert of the sewer section under test, the column of water
above specified shall be accordingly increased.
58.29.1. Where there is less than 2,000 feet of all sizes and kinds of sewer
pipe under one contract, certified inspection reports of the
manufacturer shall be accepted which show the materials to conform to
the specifications.
58.29.2. Field inspection for shape, cracks, blisters, absence of vitrification,
uniformity, density and hammer test shall be made.
58.29.3. For quantities over 2,000 feet, the tests shall be conducted by an
independent commercial testing laboratory and three copies of their
acceptance test reports shall be furnished the Engineer.
58.28 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.30
1:444
58.31. Materials for manholes.
58.30.1. Manholes shall be constructed of the types, sizes, shapes and
dimensions shown on the plans, and shall be constructed of brick or
concrete as called for thereunder.
58.30.2. Brick manholes, where required, shall be constructed with the
inside diameter of the barrel to the dimension noted on the plans
corbeling to a round top opening for standard frame and cover or a
watertight frame and cover. The walls of the barrel of the manhole shall
be eight inches thick where the vertical height of the manhole barrel is
15 feet or less. Where the vertical height of the manhole barrel is more
than 15 feet, the barrel wall shall be 12 inches thick from a point 15 feet
below the top of the manhole to the bottom of the barrel. The inside wall
surface shall be plastered with not less than 1/2 inch thickness of
mortar from the invert to a height of two above the top of the sewer, and
the outside wall surface shall be similarly plastered to the full height
and made watertight. If manholes so plastered show leakage, and/or
sewers constructed in conjunction with the manholes fail to meet the
leakage test specified under 58.28, Testing sewers, the contractor will
be required to plaster the entire inside wall surface to the full height,
and make the manhole watertight both as to infiltration and exfiltration.
Inside surfaces so plastered shall represent a smooth, uniform
appearance, and shall be smoothed with a burlap bag, if necessary. The
height or depth of the manhole will vary with the location, but shall
except where otherwise shown on the plans, be such as will place the
top of the frame at the finished grade of the pavement or slightly above
ground surface and the invert at the designated elevations, as detailed
on the plans.
58.30.3. Concrete manholes, where required, shall be in accordance with
the details shown on the plans. They shall be equipped with standard
cast-iron manhole frames and covers, ladder bars and other
appurtenances in accordance with the details.
58.31.1. Brick used in manhole construction shall be medium hard or better
quality, grade NA Specifications, Serial Designation C 32-50 and any
subsequent revisions for sewer brick.
58.31.2. One to two to four (1:2:4) concrete shall be used throughout for
concrete manholes. All steel reinforcement called for on the plans or
detail specifications shall be furnished and installed. One to two to four
(1:2:4) concrete shall be used for brick manhole bottoms.
58.31.3. Manhole frames and covers of both the standard and water tight
types and other castings (except malleable casting, cast-iron pipe, castiron
pipe wall castings, valves, valve appurtenances, etc.) shall be made
of cast iron conforming to the minimum requirements of Federal
Specifications WW-1-652 or to Class 30 of the ASTM Specifications,
Serial Designation A 48-48 and any subsequent revisions for Gray Iron
Castings. All castings shall be made accurately to the required
58.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.31
1:445
58.32. Drop manholes.
58.33. Manhole Inverts.
58.34. Construction manholes.
dimensions, and shall be sound, smooth, clean and free from blisters
and other defects. Defective castings which have been plugged or
otherwise treated to remedy defects shall be rejected. Contact surfaces
of frames and covers shall be machined or surface ground so that
covers rest securely in the frames with no rocking or rattling under
traffic, and with covers on contact with frame flanges for the entire
perimeter of the contact surfaces. Each casting shall have its actual
weight in pounds stenciled or painted thereon with white paint by the
manufacturer thereof.
58.31.4. Ladder bars or manhole steps shall be genuine wrought-iron, hot
galvanized after forming, or cast-iron of the shape and dimensions
shown on the plans. They shall be installed in all manholes. Spacing
shall be 12 inches unless otherwise noted. Where shown on the plans,
structural ladders shall be provided from top to bottom.
58.32.1. Where the difference in the invert elevations of two or more sewers
intersecting in one manhole is more than two feet, a drop manhole shall
be constructed in the manner shown on the drawings. They shall be
similar in construction to the standard manhole, except that a drop
connection of pipe and fittings of proper size and material shall be
constructed outside the man hole and supported by one to two to two
(1:2: 2) concrete as indicated on the drawings.
58.33.1. Manhole inverts shall be constructed of one to two to four (1:2:4)
concrete or built-up brick with one inch minimum thick coating of
cement mortar, and have the same cross-section as the invert of the
sewers which they connect. The manhole invert shall be carefully
formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in
sections. Changes in direction of flow through the sewer shall be made
to true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will
permit.
58.34.1. Excavation for manholes shall be in accordance with the applicable
Provisions of excavation and backfill as heretofore described.
58.34.2. Manhole foundations shall be protected from damage by water and/
or other causes. No concrete or brick masonry is to be placed until the
trench has been freed from water and/or mud, and the trench shall be
maintained in a reasonably dry condition during progress of
construction on structures.
58.34.3. After the foundation has been prepared and has been approved by
the Engineer, the bottom shall be carefully constructed to the required
line and grade. After the bottom has been allowed to set for a period of
58.31 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.34
1:446
not less than 24 hours, the manhole shall be constructed thereon, care
being exercised to construct the walls plumb and to true circle, and
to form the incoming and outgoing sewer pipes into the walls at the
required elevations.
58.34.4. Mortar shall be composed of three part sand, one part modified
portland cement, and 1/4 part of well-seasoned lime putty, all
accurately measured by volume. Cement and sand shall be mixed
thoroughly in a tight box or by machine, after which the water and lime
putty shall be added gradually with the mixing, continuing until the
mixture has attained the proper consistency for use in brick masonry.
Mortar shall be prepared only in such quantities as needed for
immediate use. Mortar which has been mixed for more than 30 minutes,
which has been retempered or which has set shall not be used in the
work.
58.34.5. Brick shall be laid radially, with vertical joints at the inside face of
manhole not more than 1/4 inch in thickness, and with horizontal joints
not exceeding 3/8 inch in thickness. Joints shall be broken in successive
courses, and all inside joints shall be trowelstruck struck flush joints to
provide a clean, smooth wall face. Each brick shall be wetted
thoroughly by immersion in water immediately prior to placement, and
shall be laid separately in a full and close joint of mortar on its bed, ends
and side in one operation by shoving the bricks into the mortar. Bolts
shall be provided in manhole tops for securing frames.
58.34.6. Whenever the work is discontinued for any purpose, the unfinished
brick masonry shall be raked back in courses, and all mortar removed
from exposed surfaces. When the work is resumed the exposed surfaces
shall be cleaned and thoroughly wetted before any new work is added.
58.34.7. The wall surfaces of brick manholes shall be plastered with cement
mortar not less than 1/2 inch in thickness as herein before specified and
as shown on the plans. Fresh brickwork shall be carefully protected
from damage by any cause or from movement by freezing. Any work
which, in the opinion of the Engineer, has been damage by any cause,
either prior to or sub-sequent to backfilling, shall be removed and
properly rebuilt. Plastered surfaces shall be dampcured.
58.34.8. The wrought-iron or cast-iron ladder bars or manhole steps shall be
inserted into the wall of the manhole at the proper elevations as the
work progresses, and shall be securely embedded in the masonry.
58.34.9. After the masonry work has been completed and topped out, the
cast-iron frame for the cover shall be carefully set at the required
elevation and properly bolted into place and bonded to the masonry
with cement grout. Where manholes are constructed n paved areas, the
top surface of the frame and cover shall be tilted so as to conform to the
exact slope, crown or grade of the existing pavement adjacent thereto.
58.34.10. After the masonry work has been allowed to set for a period of not
less than 24 hours, the outside forms, if any, shall be removed and the
58.34 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.34
1:447
58.35. Tunneling and casings.
manhole backfilled and tamped in the manner provided under
excavation and backfill heretofore described. The invert shall be
constructed in the manner hereinbefore described, and all loose or
waste material removed from the interior of the manhole. The manhole
cover shall then be placed and the surface of the vicinity of the work
cleaned off and left in a neat and orderly condition.
58.34.11. After backfilling has been completed, the excavated area, if
located in a street, alley or sidewalk, shall be provided with a temporary
surface in the manner stipulated under 58.13, Procedure where
settlement is important.
58.35.1. Where sewers are to be constructed beneath paved highways,
railroad rights-of-way or at other locations, the contractor may use one
of the following methods outlined below, providing it meets the
regulations established and required by said owner, and the work is
done in conformance with the requirements of said Authority and the
Engineer.
1. The contractor may use the tunneling method, using sheeting
properly braced, or tunnel liners which he may remove or leave in
place as required. The space, however, between the permanent
sewer or water pipe and the tunnel walls shall be completely filled,
using crushed stone of a size meeting the requirements for medium
grading of concrete aggregates.
2. The contractor may shove or jack reinforced concrete pipe under
the rights-of-way. The pipe used shall be extra strength, tongued
and grooved, reinforced concrete pipe, equal to that known as
railroad culvert pipe, type 2.
3. The contractor may employ the boring method as developed by the
Young Engine Company, Canton, Ohio, or equal, using a mechanical
boring machine. For this method, the contractor shall use genuine
wrought-iron plate, Armco iron or copper-bearing-steel casing or
pipe, having wall thickness of not less than 3/8 inch for twelve-inch
diameter, or larger, and 5/16 inch for less than twelve-inch
diameter. The permanent line shall be installed inside this iron
casing.
4. Where metal pipe is specified for the permanent line, without the
use of a casing, it shall be genuine wrought-iron Armco iron or
copper-bearing-steel casing or pipe, having a wall thickness of not
less than 3/8 inch for twelve-inch diameter, or larger, and 5/16 inch
for less than 12 inches in diameter. This type of line may be
installed using the Young Engine Company, or equal, boring
machine; or the line may be shoved or jacked in place and the
excavated material removed by hand or other approved means.
58.34 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.35
1:448
58.36. Repaving over trenches.
58.37. Service Connections and service sewers.
58.38. Status of Developers' sewers.
58.35.2. All lines installed by any of the above methods shall be maintained
on line and grade.
58.35.3. The method of installation and kind of material proposed shall
receive the approval of the Engineer.
58.36.1. Where it is necessary to remove paving in order to install sanitary
sewers, services or service connections, the paving shall be cut
squarely and evenly one foot on each side wider than the trench width.
The trench shall be excavated, and after installation of the sewer line
the backfill shall be thoroughly compacted into place. The paving shall
then be restored, of the type similar to that existing, and in a manner
required by the authority having jurisdiction over the road or street.
Where concrete paving is cut, reinforcing steel or mesh shall be
installed to adequately tie the replaced paving together. Where
macadam is cut, the underlying layers of paving, either telford, slag or
other type base, shall be adequately restored and compacted into place
and then finished with surface coat of tarbound macadam similar to or
better than the existing road surface. All work shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the authorities having jurisdiction.
58.37.1. Service connections shall be provided at all users' properties when
the sewers are installed, and shall consist of a wye branch having runs
of same size or diameter as the main sewer, with a six-inch or eight-inch
branch connection as may be required for the property served. This wye
branch shall be installed such that the branch is above the horizontal,
so that the service sewer will have slope into the main sewer. In type,
wye branch shall be a bend of the proper degree radius installed to
bring the service sewer at a normal to the main sewer, and from this
bend the service sewer, mainly six-inch diameter, but not less, shall be
laid to the curbline or approximately 15 feet from the center line of the
roadway or to the base of the right-of-way in which the main sewer may
be installed. From this point the sewer shall be installed by the property
owner using registered pipe layers or plumbers. All joints shall be
temporarily plugged by having a terra-cotta plug cemented in, using
asphalt or cement joint compound in such a manner as to make a tight
closure but to permit removal without breaking the bell of the pipe for
the extension of the service sewer. In certain cases where risers are
necessary, the wye branch and bends may be tipped up to a maximum of
45° with the horizontal to avoid long, deep excavations. The service
sewers, in no case shall have less than four feet of cover under the
traveled surface of the roadway.
58.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.38
1:449
58.38.1. All sanitary sewers and building sewers and other house and other
building plumbing arrangements and connections installed,
constructed and laid by developers and other private parties shall be
installed, constructed and laid in conformance and in accordance with
the provisions not only of this ordinance, but also according to the
provisions of the Municipal Building Code, Ordinance No. 2-1-5054, and
all its amendments, the Building Sewer Ordinance No. 11-13-56E55, and
all other regulations and requirements of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
58.38.2. However, until such time as the general sanitary sewer system now
being constructed and laid by the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park has become available to each developer,
and his privately constructed sewer has been accepted by the Authority,
the developer and other private persons shall be entirely responsible
for the construction, laying and maintenance of his said privately
constructed and laid sanitary sewer, and such developer and such
private person shall alone be responsible for the proper disposal of
sewage from such privately laid sewers.
58.38.3. If, from inspection by the consulting engineers of the Authority, or
by certificate of registered engineer approved by consulting engineers
of the Authority, the sanitary sewers or sanitary sewer systems
installed, constructed and laid by a developer or other private person
have complied in all respects with this ordinance and all the other
ordinances and regulations of the Municipality of Bethel Park, then
when the general sanitary sewer system being now constructed and
laid by the Authority for the Municipality of Bethel Park becomes
available for the taking of sewage from the privately installed sanitary
sewer or sanitary sewer system of a developer or other private person,
then the Authority will accept and take over the said privately installed,
constructed and laid sanitary sewer. Upon completion of construction
and laying of sanitary sewers by any persons, firms, property owners or
developers, inspection and approval must be made by the Engineers for
the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park, and upon
approval by the said Engineers of the Municipal Authority of the
Municipality of Bethel Park and before or at the time the said sanitary
sewers so constructed and laid are joined and connected with the trunk
line sewers of the Municipality of Bethel Park, the said sewers shall
become the property of the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, and a bill of sale, grant or other instrument for the
conveyance of title in such form as may be required by the said
Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall be signed,
executed and delivered by the said person, property owner or developer
to the Municipal Authority of the Municipality of Bethel Park. The
conveyance shall recite the right of transfer to the Municipality of
Bethel Park when and if desired by the Authority.
54.Editor's Note: Superseded by current Building Code.
55.Editor's Note: Incorporated elsewhere in Municipal Code.
58.38 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.38
1:450
58.39. Use of public sewers.56
58.38.4. As semipublic sewers, the privately installed, constructed and laid
sewers of developers and other private persons, when installed,
constructed and laid in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance
and other ordinances and regulations of the Municipality of Bethel
Park, shall be entitled to the protection of this ordinance in its
provisions regulating the use of sewers.
58.39.1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
58.39.2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the municipality. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
municipality to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
58.39.3. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer.
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
2. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weights, of fat, oil or grease.
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
6. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works.
7. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of sewage treatment plant.
56.Editor's Note: Superseded by Ord. No. 11-11-12 incorporated elsewhere in Municipal
Code.
58.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.39
1:451
8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
9. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
58.39.4. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand and any other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Inspector, and shall be located as to readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
58.39.5. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
58.39.6. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts
per million by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances
having the characteristics described in 58.39.3, or having the average
daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the
watershed, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Inspector.
Where necessary in the opinion of the Inspector, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or
reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in 58.39.3, or control the quantities and
rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and
any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
Municipality of Bethel Park or their designated authority and of the
Sanitary Water Board of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals
are obtained in writing.
58.39.7. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
58.39.8. When required by the Inspector, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
58.39 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.39
1:452
58.40. Protection from damage.
58.41. Powers and authority of inspectors.
58.42. Violations and penalties.
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Municipality of
Bethel Park or their designated agent. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
58.39.9. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in 58.39.3 and 58.39.6
shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage", and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided for in 58.39.8, or upon suitable samples taken
at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
58.40.1. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage
works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
58.41.1. The Inspector and duly authorized employees of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, as well as the Authority, when designated, bearing the
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance.
58.42.1. Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be served by the Municipality of Bethel Park with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
58.42.2. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in 49-43A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
58.42.3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
become liable to the Municipality of Bethel Park for any expense, loss or
58.39 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.42
1:453
58.43. Conflicting ordinances repealed; severability.
58.44. When effective.
damage occasioned the Municipality of Bethel Park by reason of such
violation.
58.43.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
58.43.2. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
58.44.1. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and recording, as provided by law.
58.42 BETHEL PARK CODE 58.44
1:454
Chapter 59
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
58.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS 58.44
1:455

ARTICLE I
Official General Plan of Streets
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-12-63B]
59.1. Adoption.
59.2. Purpose.
59.3. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
59.1.1. The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park formally adopts a
general plan of streets of the Municipality, said plan prepared by
Lorenzi, Dodds and Gunnill, being Drawing No. 1007, last revised
December 26, 1961, as the official general plan of streets for the
Municipality of Bethel Park. In addition, Council desires to supplement
the plan of Lorenzi, Dodds and Gunnill by adopting the general plan of
streets in the area of Washington Road and Fort Couch Road, as shown
on the drawing prepared by D. B. Bierworth & Associates, which
drawing was made pursuant to a resolution of the Planning Commission
of the Municipality of Bethel Park at its meeting held May 10, 1962.
59.2.1. The drawing prepared by D. B. Bierworth & Associates pursuant to
the resolution of the Planning Commission of May 10, 1962, outlines the
broad concept of major roads in the Washington Road-Fort Couch Road
area. Council is cognizant that the land usage and ultimate
development, topography, utilities and other physical limits in the area
may require minor dimensional variances from the plan of D. B.
Bierworth & Associates, as approved by the Planning Commission.
Council, however, desires to adopt the over-all plan in order to prohibit
the connection of circular roads or peripheral roads around the
proposed shopping center in the Washington Road-Fort Couch Road
area to the end that there shall be no roads constructed which will
connect Wellsview Road, Iroquois Road or other existing or future roads
in the residential areas of Brookside Farms and Fort Couch Village to
the proposed shopping center, the purpose thereby being to restrict the
flow of through traffic between Fort Couch Road and Route 19 and to
prevent the imposition of commercial traffic from the shopping center
area upon existing residential roads and areas.
59.3.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
59.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.3
1:457

ARTICLE II
Manholes
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1-21-59A]
59.4. Changing elevation: permit required; application.
59.5. Fee, issuance.
59.6. Restoration of surface.
59.7. Bond.
59.4.1. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to alter and grade any
property in such a way as to affect the elevation of any manhole located
in a publicly dedicated easement of the Municipality Bethel Park, or
affect any such manhole in any respect, shall prior to such action make
application to the Municipal Council in writing for a permit to perform
the work which may affect the elevation of any such manhole or affect
any such manhole in any other manner. The said written application
shall indicate there on the name of the street, highway or road and the
place at which the digging or opening will take place, or the location
and type of work about to be performed, which may so affect any such
manhole.
59.5.1. Upon payment of a fee of $5 by the applicant said permit to the
applicant, which permit shall indicate thereon the name of the street,
highway or road and the place at which the digging or opening will take
place, or the location and type of work about to be performed, which
may so affect any such manhole.
59.6.1. Any person, firm or corporation receiving a permit for the
Municipality of Bethel Park, or affect any such manhole in any other
way, shall take proper precautions for the proper elevation and
construction of any such manhole so that the manhole is raised or
lowered to accord with the altered grade, all at the expense of the
person, firm or corporation doing the work. Such person, firm or
corporation shall restore the surface of any publicly dedicated
easement to a condition substantially the same as it was before the
surface was disturbed in order to change the elevation of, or otherwise
alter, any manhole located therein.
59.7.1. Any person, firm or corporation, prior to the issuance of any permit
provided for in this ordinance, shall deposit with the Municipal
Secretary a bond in the proper form, approved by the Municipal
Solicitor, in a sum of not less than $1,000, conditioned for the faithful
compliance with the terms of this ordinance; in lieu of the said bond,
said person, firm or corporation may, on approval of the Municipal
Secretary, deposit cash in the amount of $100 as security for the
compliance with the terms of this ordinance.
59.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.8
1:459
59.8. Failure to comply; cost of work done by Municipality.
59.9. Violations and penalties.
59.10. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
59.8.1. Should any person, firm or corporation, after having altered the
surface of any property so as to interfere with the elevation or
otherwise affect any manhole located in a publicly dedicated easement
of said Municipality, fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of
this ordinance or the instructions or directions of the Municipal Council
or Municipal Engineer pertaining to the said work, the proper
Municipality officials shall proceed to have the street, road or easement
placed in proper condition at the cost of the person, firm or corporation
to whom the permit was issued, said cost to be deducted from the cash
deposited aforesaid; or, in the event of a bond, the cost is to be billed to
the person, firm or corporation. Under failure to pay, the Solicitor shall
be authorized and directed to proceed on the bond for the collection of
any amount due.
59.9.1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof before Mayor
or any Justice of the Peace of the Municipality of Bethel Park, may be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100, and the
costs of prosecution. Upon each subsequent conviction, any person,
firm or corporation shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100,
and costs of prosecution and in default of payment of such fine and
costs, any person or persons or the executive officers of such firm or
corporation shall be confined in the Allegheny County Jail for period of
not more than 30 days.
59.10.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with this
ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this
ordinance.
59.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.10
1:460
ARTICLE III
Excavations
[Adopted 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 12-11-17B57]
59.11. Specific repealer.
59.12. Definitions.
59.13. Permit required.
59.11.1. Ordinance No. 3-9-81A be and the same is hereby repealed in its
entirety.
59.12.1. For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley, or right-of-way, paved or
unpaved, customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel
over the street.
FRANCHISED ORGANIZATION — An organization providing a service
under the authority of a franchise granted by the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
PERSON — Any natural person, municipal authority, corporation,
partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship, firm, association and
any other entity of whatever type.
PUBLIC EASEMENT — An established or dedicated easement or rightof-
way in which a public utility or the public generally shall have the
right of usage.
PUBLIC STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, right-of-way,
lane, alley, court or walkway used or intended for use by vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, which has been dedicated to or accepted for public
purposes by the Municipality of Bethel Park; provided, however, that
this term shall not include streets, road, highways, walkways or rightsof-
way owned, maintained or under the control of other governmental
agencies, or any privately owned streets.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as
a street, alley or crosswalk, or for any other public or private purpose.
59.13.1. No opening, cutting, excavating, digging, trenching, grading,
boring, crossing, installation or disturbance of any kind shall be allowed
upon, in, under, or across any portion of a municipal road or any
municipal road right-of-way without a road occupancy permit granted
by the Municipality for each separate undertaking. A permit shall not be
immediately required for emergencies, provided the applicant adheres
57.Editor’s Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. III, Excavations, adopted 3-9-1981 by
Ord. No. 3-9-81A, as amended.
59.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.13
1:461
59.14. Application for permit.
59.15. Decision on permit.
to the requirements of Section 59.24H. Permit applications are not
required for accessing utility facilities through a manhole.
59.14.1. The application for a permit shall be on a form provided by the
Municipality and submitted to the Municipality in triplicate. The
Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall be responsible for
review and administration of the permit. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee for processing the application in accordance with
the Municipal Schedule of Fees adopted from time to time by the
Municipal Council for street occupancy permits and restoration charge.
In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of a sketch showing
the location of the intended work, width of the traveled roadway
(cartway), right-of-way lines, an address, and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting road or other nearby landmark, so as to ascertain
the location of the work. The applicant shall also submit a Traffic
Control Plan detailing all proposed lane and full road closures, times of
closures, length of closures, and work zone traffic control measures.
59.14.2. The public utility, franchised organization or owner of the facility to
be installed, repaired or replaced shall make such application, and such
applicant shall be solely responsible for compliance with the terms and
conditions of this article. Contractors or subcontractors shall not be
permitted to make application for a permit required by this article. The
Municipal Manager, or his/her delegate, may attach such conditions to
the permit as he/she may deem necessary to minimize inconvenience
and hazards to the public. Failure to comply with any such conditions
shall be cause for revocation of such permit and shall constitute a
violation of this article.
59.14.3. Applicants shall be responsible for all costs and expenses incident
to or arising from the permitted work, including the prescribed fees for
the same, the cost of making and maintaining temporary restoration of
the disturbed areas and making permanent restoration.
59.14.4. A permit issued under the terms of this article shall expire and be of
no further force or effect if the work authorized by the permit shall not
be commenced within 30 days of the date of issuance; and, further, such
authorized work shall be completed and restored within 60 days of the
start of such work. Exceptions to these provisions may be granted by
the issuing authority when unusual circumstances can be
demonstrated.
59.15.1. The permit application shall be approved or denied within 30
calendar days of submission of a complete application to the
Municipality. If the application and required documents do not conform
to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, rules, and
regulations, the Director of Engineering or his/her designee shall either
59.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.15
1:462
59.16. General regulations.
59.17. PA One Call.
59.18. Maintenance of traffic.
59.19. Detours.
issue a correction notice listing the deficiencies that must be corrected,
or deny the application in writing, stating the reasons. If the Director
of Engineering or his/her designee is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the aforesaid requirements, the Director of Engineering or
his/her designee shall issue a permit.
59.16.1. No permit shall be issued for any cut or opening in a public street
exceeding 300 feet. Exceptions to this provision may be granted by the
issuing authority in cases involving projects of unusual magnitude or
complexity. No cut more than 100 feet in length shall be opened without
the express prior consent of the Director of Engineering or his/her
designee.
59.16.2. The permit holder shall submit preconstruction video of the area of
disturbance to the Municipality prior to any disturbance.
59.16.3. Any unusual surplus of excavated materials shall be removed by the
permit holder within 24 hours. Disposal of this material at another site
located within the Municipality must be approved by the Director of
Engineering or his/her designee.
59.16.4. The permit holder must coordinate his activities with the Bethel
Park Police Department, and the Police Department shall be authorized
to regulate the time and sequence of the opening of public streets to
minimize hazards and inconvenience to the public.
59.17.1. At least three working days prior to the proposed start of work, the
applicant or his representative shall contact the PA One Call system at
1-800-242-1776, report the proposed work, and obtain a serial number,
and provide such serial number to the Municipality. No work shall begin
until such date and time as authorized by PA One Call.
59.18.1. At least one lane of traffic shall be maintained at all times, unless
approved by the Municipality in writing. The permit holder shall comply
with the provisions of PennDOT Publication 213, "Work Zone Traffic
Control."
59.19.1. Under certain circumstances, the Municipality may allow a road to
be closed and traffic to be detoured. No road shall be closed without
giving the Municipality at least 72 hours' prior notice, to allow time to
notify 911, police, fire departments, emergency services and the school
district. No road shall be closed without the applicant submitting a
detour plan to the Municipality with the permit application and having
59.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.19
1:463
59.20. Erosion control.
59.21. OSHA requirements.
59.22. Notification.
59.23. Backfill.
it approved by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee and
the Bethel Park Police Department. No road shall be closed without
proper detour signs, as approved by the Municipality and the Bethel
Park Police Department, having been provided and installed by the
applicant. All detour signs shall be maintained for the entire work
period.
59.20.1. All proper erosion control measures shall be taken to ensure
compliance with applicable laws. If necessary, the applicant shall obtain
erosion and sedimentation control plan approval from the County
Conservation District prior to starting work. Unless specifically
authorized by the permit, applicants shall not alter the existing
drainage pattern or the existing flow of drainage water. In addition,
applicants are not permitted to direct, divert or otherwise drain surface
waters onto any property without the consent, permission or other
authorization from the property owners. Applicants are responsible for
any damage caused to public or private property as a result of the work
undertaken by the permit.
59.20.2. Applicants shall limit debris and materials stored within the rightof-
way. All items stored on the roadway shall be contained to ensure no
materials enter the storm sewer system.
59.21.1. The applicant shall comply with all OSHA safety requirements and
procedures, including without limitation all enclosed space
requirements. All excavation or trenching shall comply with the most
recent federal, state and local regulations regarding safety at a
construction site.
59.22.1. The applicant shall notify the Municipality 24 hours in advance of
starting work and upon completion of temporary restoration and
permanent restoration for a field inspection of the work.
59.22.2. In the event of a lane closure, the contractor shall notify adjacent
property owners at least 48 hours in advance utilizing a door hangtag
that outlines important information related to the closure, including the
area impacted, the expected begin and end date for the closure, and a
contact number for the responsible contractor. In the event of a full
road closure, a minimum two-week notice is required. For emergency
work, the contractor should provide notification as soon as possible to
the impacted property owners.
59.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.23
1:464
59.24. Overnight requirements.
59.24A. Cleanup.
59.24B. Installation.
59.24C. Temporary restoration.
59.23.1. All backfill within the municipal right-of-way shall be installed per
the street opening permit detail.58
59.24.1. If the work cannot be completed in one workday, proper barricades,
flashing lights, steel plates or other methods shall be used to secure the
site and insure the safety of travelers on the roads in the Municipality
until the next workday. The applicant shall comply with the provisions
of PennDOT Publication 213, "Work Zone Traffic Control." The Director
of Public Works, Engineering or his/her designee must approve all
barricades or plating proposed.
59.24A.1. The work area shall be swept clean, cleaned of debris and
otherwise policed at the end of each workday and at the end of the
project. Mud shall not be tracked onto the streets at any time. All mud
shall be cleaned up within one hour of verbal or written notice from the
Municipality or its agents.
59.24A.2. No materials shall be washed into the inlets or storm sewer
system during the cleanup process.
59.24B.1. Conduits and pipes shall be installed with a minimum of 18 inches
of cover. In no case shall conduits or pipes be allowed to be placed
within six inches of the bottom of the roadway, which includes all
courses of screenings, base stone, binder and bituminous or concrete
wearing surface. Separation shall be obtained by at least six inches of
screenings, to allow paving to be milled in the future without damage to
utilities.
59.24C.1. The last two inches of the excavation shall be backfilled with
compacted cold patch or binder asphalt material to prevent dust and
stone chip nuisances. All excavations shall be temporarily restored
prior to allowing traffic on them. All settlement shall be brought back to
grade within 24 hours of verbal or written notice from the Municipality
or its agents. The temporary restoration shall remain in place for a
minimum of two months to allow for final settlement to occur through
the actions of rain and traffic, but in no case shall it remain in place
more than four months. If cold patch/binder is utilized through the
winter months, the applicant is responsible to maintain the material
until permanent restoration is complete.
58.Editor's Note: Street opening detail drawings are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
59.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.24D
1:465
59.24D. Permanent restoration.
59.24E. Additional restoration.
59.24D.1. All permanent restoration shall be complete in accordance with
the street opening restoration plans and details.59
59.24E.1. All disturbed portions of a street, including all appurtenances and
structures, such as but not limited to guardrail or drain pipes, shall be
restored to a condition equal to or better that that which existed before
the start of any work authorized by the permit.
59.24E.2. Any lawn area disturbed as part of the work shall be restored to
the condition that existed prior to the start of work. At a minimum, the
following standards shall be met:
1. A minimum of four inches of screened topsoil shall be placed at all
locations of lawn restoration.
2. Disturbed areas shall be permanently stabilized with a quality seed
mixture and straw mulch, or mushroom manure. The seed mixture
used shall match the existing grass type.
3. Erosion control blanket shall be placed on all slopes that are 3:1 or
greater.
4. All wheel ruts or other construction damage created by the
applicant shall be restored to a condition equal to or better that
that which existed before the start of any work authorized by the
permit.
59.24E.3. Any planted or landscaped area which is disturbed by work,
injured or destroyed (shrubs, grass, trees, or plants) shall be replaced
with ones of the same size, color, species, conditions, caliper and
quality.
59.24E.4. Any sidewalk, driveway or other privately owned maintained
facility or object damaged, destroyed or removed shall be restored to
the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering or his/her designee.
59.24E.5. Any municipal sign damaged or lost or destroyed by the permit
holder shall be replaced by the Municipality and the cost thereof shall
be assessed against the permit holder or recovered by the Municipality
as otherwise allowed by law.
59.24E.6. If, during the course of construction, any municipally owned or
maintained sewer, underdrain, manhole, catch basin, curb, guiderail or
other facility or appurtenance is damaged, destroyed or disturbed, such
condition shall be reported immediately to the Director of Engineering
59.Editor's Note: Street opening detail drawings are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
59.24D BETHEL PARK CODE 59.24E
1:466
59.24F. Elimination of hazardous situations.
59.24G. Guarantee.
59.24H. Security deposit and/or bonding.
or his/her designee, who shall then prescribe, direct, supervise and
inspect the necessary corrective action.
59.24F.1. If, in a circumstance resulting from construction activities, a
condition should arise requiring immediate correction action to
eliminate a hazardous situation, and it is impractical or impossible to
notify the permit holder of such occurrence, municipal forces shall
perform such corrective measures as are necessary to eliminate the
hazardous situation. The cost of such activities shall be borne by the
permit holder and recovered by the Municipality, who shall recover
such costs as allowed by law.
59.24G.1. All work shall be guaranteed for a period of two years from the
date of final inspection and certification by the Director of Engineering
or his/her designee that the work has been completed in accordance
with the permit. The cost associated with the required repairs or
maintenance shall be paid for by the applicant.
59.24G.2. When written notice requiring repair or maintenance is given by
the Municipality to the applicant for making a cut or opening and such
party shall fail or neglect to make such repair or perform such
maintenance within 14 days of such notice, such neglect or failure shall
constitute a violation of the provisions of this article, and each day
thereafter in which such condition continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
59.24H.1. Except for public utility corporations operating under a franchise
covering an area in whole or in part within the Municipality, all projects
shall deposit with the Municipality financial security in an amount equal
to 110% of the cost of completion of the work required to comply with
this chapter, estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion. The form, amount and administration of the financial
security shall be in accordance with Section 509 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10509. The financial security
shall be held by the Municipality until the end of a two-year guarantee
period and shall be used by the Municipality as liquidated damages in
case of default or nonperformance by the applicant.
59.24H.2. Public utility corporations operating under a franchise covering
an area in whole or in part within the Municipality shall have on file
with the Municipality a bond in the amount of $5,000 or as may be
established by resolution of the Council with a surety that is licensed to
transact such business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which
bond shall be renewed annually, covering the cost of all inspections
made by the Director of Engineering or his/her designee pertaining to
59.24E GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.24H
1:467
59.24I. Insurance.
59.24J. Emergencies.
all openings or excavations made or to be made in a calendar year
or shall furnish a bond in the amount determined by the Director of
Engineering or his designee covering the aforesaid costs pertaining
to proposed openings or excavations set out in the application. The
aforesaid bonds shall have either corporate surety or other surety
approved by the Municipal Solicitor and shall be conditioned to
indemnify the Municipality in the event of any loss, liability or damage
that may result or accrue from or be due to the making, existence or
manner of guarding or constructing any opening or excavation during
the term of said bond.
59.24I.1. As part of the permit application, the applicant shall provide the
Municipality with insurance certificates for the following polices of
insurance in full force and effect with an insurance company(ies)
admitted by the Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner to do business
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and rated not less than A in Best
Insurance Key Rating Guide:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including property damage
liability and personal injury liability of not less than $1,000,000 for
each occurrence and a $2,000,000 minimum aggregate amount.
2. Automobile bodily injury liability insurance of not less than
$500,000 each person; $500,000 each occurrence.
3. Statutory workers' compensation and employer's liability
insurance.
59.24I.2. All policies of commercial general liability insurance required
hereunder shall name the Municipality, its supervisors, engineer and
employees as additional insureds. Specifically, commercial general
liability insurance policy shall name the Municipality, its officers,
agents, supervisors, elected officials and employees as an additional
insured under ISO endorsement CG 20 26 07 04 or non-ISO equivalent.
Any policy or policies of insurance shall be primary and noncontributory
to insurance coverage maintained by the Municipality. Certificates of
insurance shall state that coverage shall not be canceled by either party
except after 30 days' prior written notice by United States certified
mail, return receipt requested, has been given to the Municipality. In
addition, the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Municipality and shall assume the defense and all costs of lawsuits and
awards.
59.24J.1. In the case of emergencies threatening property or lives, the
applicant may proceed with the work after notifying the Bethel Park
Police Department, Director of Engineering or his/her designee and
911. The applicant shall still be responsible for applying and obtaining
59.24H BETHEL PARK CODE 59.24J
1:468
59.24K. Equipment damage to streets or sidewalks.
59.24L. Other regulations.
59.24M. Violations and penalties.
59.24N. Severability.
the permit and satisfying all requirements. The application shall be
made within 24 hours of the verbal or written notice to the Bethel Park
Police Department, Director of Engineering or his/her designee and
911. Information communicated shall include: 1) the date and time the
emergency work is started; 2) the location of the emergency work site;
and 3) a description of the emergency work.
59.24K.1. All equipment shall have rubber wheels or runners and shall have
rubber, wood, or similar protective pads between the outriggers and the
surface unless otherwise authorized by the permit. Where other than
rubber-equipped machinery is authorized, pavement, sidewalks and
shoulders shall be protected by the use of matting wood, or other
suitable protective material having a thickness of four inches (unless
the permit indicates that the applicant plans to repave the full width of
the roadway). Should damages occur, pavement, shoulders and
sidewalks shall be restored to their formal condition at the applicant's
expense.
59.24L.1. In addition to the requirements of this article, all work is subject
to all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and
regulations.
59.24M.1. Any person or utility which shall violate or permit the violation of
the provisions of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
criminal enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $1,000
per day nor less than $25 per day, together with court costs and
reasonable attorney fees, and may be incarcerated for a period not
exceeding 90 days. Such fines, costs, attorney fees and incarceration,
after being reduced to a final, unappealed judgment, shall be enforced
by the Municipality pursuant to the applicable rules of criminal
procedure. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.
59.24N.1. If any provision, paragraph, word or section of this article is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.
59.24J GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.24N
1:469

ARTICLE IV
Openings in State Highways
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-1-50]
59.25. Granting of permits.
59.26. Fees authorized.
59.27. Violations and penalties.
59.28. Disposition of fines and restoration charges.
59.29. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
59.25.1. From and after the passage of this ordinance, the Department of
Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be, and the said
Department hereby is, given exclusive authority to grant all permits for
the opening or tearing up of any part of the improved surface of those
certain municipal streets or parts thereof which are continuations of
state highway routes in the Municipality, and for the maintenance of
which the Department of Highway is by law responsible.
59.26.1. Fees for the granting of such permits may be charged by the
Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
according to the standard schedule of fees which may from time to time
be adopted.
59.27.1. Any person, firm or corporation opening or tearing up the improved
surface of any of the aforesaid streets, or causing or allowing the same
to be done for him, them or it, without having first obtained a permit
from the Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, shall, upon summary conviction before a magistrate, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and, in addition thereto,
the costs of prosecution and the surface restoration costs, and in
default thereof, such person or persons or the executive officer of such
corporation shall undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
59.28.1. All fines and restoration charges collected for the violation of this
ordinance shall be paid into the state treasury as provided by law.
59.29.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
59.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.29
1:471

ARTICLE V
Street Names and House Numbers
[Adopted by Ord. No. 10-14-57B]
59.30. Official house numbering map adopted.
59.31. Official Postal Zone Directory adopted.
59.32. Street name changes.
59.30.1. The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park hereby adopts the
house numbering map prepared by Lorenzi, Dodds and Gunnill as of
January 2,1957, revised October 14,1957, being Project No. 1007, as
the official house numbering map of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.31.1. Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park hereby adopts the
Municipality of Bethel Park, directory which directory is hereto
attached and made a part of this ordinance.
59.32.1. The official house numbering map hereby adopted changes the
names of 44 separate streets in the Municipality.
Former Name Changed to
Applegate Avenue South Applegate Avenue
Bethel Road Bethel Church Road
Boyer Street Boyerview Street
Brightwood Avenue Lightwood Avenue
Center Avenue Centerview Avenue
Cherry Lane Cherryview Lane
Cherry Street Jordan Drive
Churchill Road Brookside Boulevard
Conestoga Drive In part to South Conestoga
Drive
Criss Street Criss Road
Cypress Street Mahogany Street
Douglass Road Greenwald Road
Fairview Lane Fairview Drive
Franklin Alley Franklin Drive
Franklin Drive Robert Drive
Graeser Road Donati Road
Grazier Street Vickless Street
Hamrock Court Hamrock Drive
Highland Road Hillard Drive
59.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.32
1:473
Former Name Changed to
Hillside Drive Ridgeway Drive
Iroquois Road Iroquois Road
Lemon Tree Drive Old Village Lane [Added
by Ord. No. 9-12-88B]
Library Avenue McPherson Avenue
Library Street Murray Avenue
Long Avenue Longcrest Avenue
Margaretta Street in Hamilton Terrace
Plan No. #2
Marge Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 6-13-94A]
Marge Street Hamilton Terrace Plan No.
#3
Marge Drive [Added by
Ord. No. 6-13-94A]
McMurray Road Churchill Road
North Hiland Road North Highland Road
Orchard Lane McKnight Drive
Orchard Street Boyerview Street
Park Street Lark Street
Pennsylvania Avenue North Pennsylvania Avenue
Philip Avenue Murray Avenue
Pine Street Pinette Street
Sante Fe Drive In part to West Sante Fe
Drive
Sarah Street California Avenue
Scenic Court Scenic Drive
Spring Way Spring Street
Taylor Drive Sarah Street
Valley Road O'Niell Drive
Walnut Lane Laurel Lane
Walnut Road Sterling Drive
Walther Lane Walker Lane
59.32.2. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
eliminate the change of Lightwood Avenue and Library Avenue, as
hereinafter described to North Light-Library Avenue. Said avenues are
described by center line description, to wit: Beginning at a point, said
point being the center line intersection of Library Avenue, a forty-foot
street, and Highland Avenue, a fifty-foot street; thence along and
through the following recorded and unrecorded plans: Summit Park
Lane So. Plan of Lots, recorded in Plan Book Vol. 22, Page 58, Driftwood
Estates Plan No. 6, unrecorded; Driftwood Estates Plan No. 5, recorded
in Plan book Vol. 71, Pages 149 and 150, Driftwood Estates Plan No. 4,
59.32 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.32
1:474
recorded in Plan Book Vol. 68, Page 45; and Driftwood Estates Plan
No. 2, recorded in Plan Book Vol. 67, Pages 12 and 13; the following
courses and distances: in a northerly direction by a curve to the right
having a radius of 1469.19 feet, an arc distance of 331.60 feet to a
point; thence 29°06'46" east a distance of 307.59 feet to a point; thence
north 29°41'40" west a distance of 5.85 feet to a point; thence north
29°06'46" east a distance of 239.27 feet to a point; thence by a curve
to the left having a radius of 125.00 feet, and are distance of 111.26
feet to a point; thence north 21°53'14" west a distance of 92.09 feet to
a point; thence by a curve to the right having a radius of 150.00 feet,
an arc distance of 133.52 feet to a point; thence north 29°06'46" east a
distance of 317.04 feet to a point; thence by a curve to the left having a
radius of 379.31 feet, an arc distance of 143.25 feet to a point; thence
by a curve to the left having a radius of 500.00 feet, an arc distance
of 395.37 to a point; thence north 37°49'55" west a distance of 157.57
feet to a point; thence by a curve to the left having a radius of 500.00
feet, an arc distance of 203.61 feet to a point; thence north 61°09'50"
west a distance of 63.31 feet to a point; thence by a curve to the right
having a radius of 215.00 feet, an arc distance of 131.34 feet to a point;
thence north 26°09'50" west a distance of 55.00 feet to a point, said
point being the terminus of the center line of Lightwood Avenue and
being located on the center line of Bethel Church Road. [Added by
Ord. No. 12-9-63C]
59.32.3. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Center Avenue in Forest Park Plan No. 7 to
Centerman Avenue. [Added by Ord. No. 1-11-65B]
59.32.4. Ordinance No. 10-14-57-B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Melissa Drive to Lawrence Drive in the Colonial
Park Estates Plan No. 2. [Added by Ord. No. 4-10-67D]
59.32.5. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be amended, naming South Survey
Woods Road to be the official name of the street in the Surrey Woods
Plan No. 3. [Added by Ord. No. 6-10-68A]
59.32.6. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Surrey Woods Drive South to Regency Place in the
Surrey Woods Plan. [Added by Ord. No. 10-14-68D]
59.32.7. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Grandview Drive to Glen Ora Drive, a the point
where Grandview Drive intersects with Delfield Road, as recorded in
Plan Book Volume 80, Pages 192-194, extending in an easterly direction
for approximately 246 feet to the line between Vista Glen No. 6 and
Vista Glen No. 11. [Added by Ord. No. 8-11-69A]
59.32.8. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Mayfair Drive to Paxton Drive, at the intersection of
Library Road and State Highway Traffic Route 88. [Added to Ord. No.
10-11-71B]
59.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.32
1:475
59.33. Official map.
59.34. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
59.32.9. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Partridge Run Drive to Grouse Run Drive in the
Boxer Heights Subdivisions. [Added by Ord. No. 4-8-74A]
59.32.10. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Daleview Drive in the Vista Glen Manor Plan No. 12
to Glen Brook Drive from Glen Hill Drive to its terminus at the westerly
line of the plan a distance of 660.13 lineal feet, more or less. [Added to
Ord. No. 4-8-74A]
59.32.11. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Sun Lane to Dr. David C. McNary Place, in the
Mitchell Manor Plan to Lots, as recorded in Plan Book Volume 48, Page
90. [Added by Ord. No. 7-14-75C]
59.32.12. Ordinance No. 10-14-57B be and the same is hereby amended to
change the name of Rywood Drive to Fruitwood Drive in the Dashwood
Estates No. 4 Plan of Lots, as recorded in Plan Book Volume 83, pages
186 and 187; and the Dashwood Estates No. 9 Plan of Lots, as recorded
in Plan Book Volume 96, pages 183 through 185. [Added by Ord. No.
9-11-78A]
59.33.1. The house numbering map prepared to Vogeler, Ramsey and Co.
and Gunnill, being Project No. 1007, is hereby adopted as the official
house numbering map of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.34.1. Any ordinance of part of any ordinance which may conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed insofar
as the same may conflict with this ordinance.
59.32 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.34
1:476
ARTICLE VI
Obstructions of Public Sewers, Drains, Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted by Ord. No. 138-7-54]
59.35. Prohibition.
59.36. Separate offenses.
59.37. Violations and penalties.
59.38. Conflicting ordinances repealed.
59.35.1. From and after the adoption of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation to interfere with or create or permit
any obstruction to the convenient use of any public sewer, curb, gutter,
culvert, watercourse or drain in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.36.1. Any person who fails to remove any such obstruction after notice by
the Engineer of the Municipality of Bethel Park to remove the same
shale be guilty of a separate violation for each day such obstruction is
permitted to remain.
59.37.1. Any person found guilty by any Justice of the Peace or by the Mayor
of the Municipality of Bethel Park of violating the provisions of this
ordinance shall be fined the sum of $100 or in default of payment,
thereof shall be required to undergo imprisonment in the Allegheny
County Jail for a period of 30 days, for each violation.
59.38.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the terms of
this ordinance is hereby repealed.
59.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.38
1:477

ARTICLE VII
Tampering with Public Property
[Adopted by Ord. No. 8-19-57D]
59.39. Prohibited acts.
59.40. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. 8-11-80F]
59.39.1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either
directly or indirectly or by his or its agents, to do, aid or abet any of the
following described regulations or restrictions intended to promote the
general safety, comfort and convenience of the Municipality of Bethel
Park:
1. To injure, remove or destroy any property owned by the
Municipality.
2. To injure, remove or destroy any public street, road, high way, lane
or alley in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
3. To damage, remove, molest, upset, change the position of, mar or
destroy any notices, barriers, red lanterns or other warning devices
placed along or upon any public road, high way, street, lane or alley,
whether the said highway or road way be improved or is being
repaired or is under construction.
4. To damage, remove, molest, upset, or destroy any sign or notice,
whether temporary or permanent, to the public, which sign or
notice is hung, placed, fixed, painted or otherwise secured at any
place within the Municipality for the purpose of safeguarding the
public in matters of traffic, health, hazard or other danger.
5. To walk upon or drive with any wagon, automobile, truck,
motorcycle or any vehicle whatsoever on any public high way, road,
street, lane or alley in the Municipality of Bethel Park which is in
process of being repaired, improved, or being constructed,
whereby the roadway or roadbed or surface to said road may be
damaged, marred or destroyed.
59.40.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions shall
be subject to pay all costs incurred in repairing said damages, plus a
fine of not less than $50 and not to exceed $30000 and, in default of
payment of the fine imposed and costs, may be sentenced and
committed to Allegheny County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
59.39 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.40
1:479

ARTICLE VIII
Protection of Streets
[Adopted by Ord. No. 72-12-51]
59.41. Depositing substances on streets.
59.42. Pipes required for gutters and ditches.
59.43. Violations and penalties.
59.44. Repealer.
59.41.1. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to throw, to cast or to leave in this
Municipality any rubbish, trash, dirt, mud or foreign substances
whatsoever.
59.41.2. Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to throw, to cast or to leave any
rubbish, trash or anything whatsoever in any gutter or ditch on or at the
side of the highways and streets of this Municipality or to permit or to
allow any rubbish, trash, dirt, mud or anything whatsoever to be cast or
to be thrown or to be left in any gutter or ditch constructed or
maintained on or at the side of the highways and streets of this
Municipality.
59.42.1. No entrance, right-of-way or crossing over any gutter or ditch
constructed or maintained on or alongside of and in connection with
any street or highway of this Municipality shall be permitted unless a
pipe shall be installed, by the abutting owner of the property, which
shall be at least 12 inches in diameter, and more if the Municipality
Engineer or Street Commissioner of the Municipality so require.
59.43.1. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this ordinance
shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine not to exceed $100
and in default of payment of the same shall be confined to the county
jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
59.44.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed.
59.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.44
1:481

ARTICLE IX
Installation of Sidewalks
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2-11-74B]
59.45. Determination of necessity. [Amended by Ord. No.
11-15-76C]
59.46. Authority of Council to require installation; definitions.
59.47. Allocation of costs.
59.48. Construction specifications.
59.45.1. In considering all future subdivisions, land development plans or
site plan applications, the Planning Commission shall require the
applicant or developer to provide sidewalks when the Commission, in
its discretion, determines that sidewalks are necessary to properly
assure the safety of the property owners in the proposed plan and the
residents of the Municipality. Upon submission of the proposed
subdivision, land development plan or site plan to the Municipal
Council, the Council shall render a final decision as to the necessity of
sidewalks in any given situation.
59.46.1. The Municipal Council may, in its discretion, require the
installation of sidewalks along any municipal or other public right-ofway
in the Municipality when Council, in its discretion, determines that
sidewalks are necessary to assure the safer movement of pedestrians in
the Municipality.
59.46.2. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Added by Ord. No. 5-5-80A]
59.46.3. SIDEWALK — A pedestrian walkway and, for the purposes of this
ordinance, includes supporting walls, retaining walls, railings, grass
area between sidewalk and curb and any other structures or
appurtenances necessary, desirable or incidental to the installation and
safe use of a sidewalk.
59.47.1. The cost of the initial installation of sidewalks shall be allocated as
follows:
1. When required as part of a subdivision or site plan, the cost of
installation shall be the responsibility of the developer.
2. When authorized by the Municipal Council in areas where no
subdivision or site plan approval is involved, the cost shall be borne
by the Municipality.
59.48.1. The sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, and the
specifications as to size and material shall be in accordance with
standards promulgated by the Municipal Engineer. The location and
59.45 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.48
1:483
59.49. Responsibility for repairs.
59.50. Responsibility for maintenance.
59.51. Motor vehicles and bicycles; removal of dangerous objects.
59.52. Violations and civil penalties.
size of the sidewalks as well as the material utilized in its construction
shall be subject to the Municipal Engineer's approval.
59.49.1. After the initial installation of any sidewalk, all repairs and
replacement shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner.
59.50.1. Sidewalks constructed pursuant to this ordinance shall be for the
use of pedestrians only. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
legal resident of the property abutting on the sidewalk to clean the
sidewalk of snow, ice and other debris which might endanger
pedestrians. The sidewalk shall be cleared within 24 hours after the
accumulation of snow, ice or debris has occurred or as otherwise
required in the premises. It shall be unlawful to shovel snow, ice or
other debris into the paved portion of any street or highway in the
Municipality.
59.50.2. In any case where the owner and/or legal resident of the property
abutting on the sidewalk shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
provision of Section 6 hereof, the Manager or his designee may proceed
immediately by forced account work or by contract, as deemed most
expedient in the Manager's sole discretion, to clear the snow and/or ice
from the sidewalk of such owner and/or legal resident. [Added by Ord.
No. 7-11-83C]
59.50.3. Upon completion of snow and/or ice removal, the Manager shall
certify the cost thereof and shall authorize the Solicitor to collect the
expenses thereof with 10% added thereto, from the owners and/or legal
resident as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine
imposed pursuant to Section 8 hereof and said owner and/or legal
resident shall be jointly and severally liable for all loss and expenses.
[Added by Ord. No. 7-11-83C]
59.51.1. Sidewalks are intended for the use of pedestrians only. The riding
of two-wheeled bicycles shall be prohibited on any sidewalk in the
Municipality. Two-wheeled bicycles may be wheeled on the sidewalks,
provided the operator walks alongside the bicycle and has it under
control at all times.
59.51.2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or legal resident of the
property abutting on the sidewalk to remove from the sidewalk, prior to
darkness, any toys, items or other material which might endanger a
pedestrian.
59.48 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.52
1:484
59.53. Installations as precedent to granting of development
applications and building permits; additional remedies.
59.54. Repealer.
59.52.1. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation or other legal entity
who or which shall violate or fail or neglect or refuse to comply with any
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine by a District
Justice of not more than $300 and court costs, provided that each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice to an offender
shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense and provided
further that any penalty and costs hereunder shall be in addition to and
not in substitution for any costs and expenses imposed by Section 11 of
this ordinance. No civil penalty assessed under this section shall
subject a violator to imprisonment. All fines shall be collected in the
same manner as civil judgments. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-11-83C]
59.53.1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance and in addition to
the penalties provided herein, the Planning Commission and/or
Municipal Council may require the installation of sidewalks as a
condition precedent to granting an application for development or
issuing a building permit; and the Planning Commission and/or
Municipal Council may, in addition to the remedies provided herein,
invoke any other remedy authorized under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 1968, July 31 (53 P.S. 10101, Article I,
Section 101), as amended, or as authorized by any other appropriate
state or local ordinance which might have application in the premises.
59.54.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent
of such conflict.
59.52 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.54
1:485

ARTICLE X
Open Spaces in Street Rights-of-Way
[Adopted by Ord. No. 11-11-74A]
59.55. Definitions.
59.56. Areas designated as open spaces.
59.57. Regulations governing open spaces.
59.58. Exceptions.
59.59. Violations and penalties.
59.55.1. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
59.55.2.OPEN SPACE — An area in which nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision, to prevent a safety hazard or to impede the full utilization of the
right-of-way. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-14-92B]
59.55.3. TRAFFIC — In this case shall refer to vehicular as well as
pedestrian.
59.56.1. All municipal street rights-of-way within the confines of the
Municipality of Bethel Park are hereby designated as open spaces.
59.57.1. No structures, other than on-grade paving; no device, contrivance,
fixture or appliance; no obstruction or vegetation which impedes vision,
nor grass in excess of eight inches in height shall occupy any municipal
right-of-way. [Amended by Ord. No. 12-14-92B; by Ord. No.
10-3-94C]
59.58.1. Exceptions to the regulations promulgated in this ordinance
topographical conditions of the land, complete compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance is impractical.
59.58.2. All requests for an exception as outlined in this section shall be
submitted in writing to the Municipal Manager and shall include such
information as will clearly delineate the problem.
59.58.3. The regulations contained in this article shall not apply to:
1. Mail boxes used only for the purpose of mail delivered by the
United States Postal Service; and
2. Any device, contrivance, fixture, or appliance which is used or is
intended to be used as a receptacle, container, or repository for
newspapers, pamphlets, or printed matter. [Added by Ord. No.
12-14-92B; by Ord. No. 10-3-94C]
59.55 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.59
1:487
59.60. Conflict with other requirements.
59.61. Severability.
59.62. Repealer.
59.59.1. Any person, group, association or corporation that shall violate any
of the provisions of this ordinance by the failure, omission or refusal to
comply with same shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $100 plus costs, or in default thereof, may be
committed to the Allegheny County Jail or Workhouse for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
59.60.1. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or the
higher standard shall govern.
59.61.1. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate and distinct independent division and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
59.62.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
59.59 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.62
1:488
ARTICLE XI
Procedures Relating to Streets and Easements
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-12-78A]
59.63. Definitions.
59.63.1. The following words and terms, as used in this article, shall be
construed as follows:
59.63.2. COUNCIL — The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.63.3. IMPROVING A STREET — Any work upon any street or portion
thereof done or proposed to be done in order to open the same if such
street shall not previously have been opened or, if previously opened, to
make the same more usable or more suitable for use by the traveling
public or safer for such use, including but not limited to grading,
paving, curbing and macadamizing.
59.63.4. LAYING OUT — The plotting of an unopened street or portion
thereof on the Municipal Plan or on the plan of a real estate
development, including the plotting of an unopened street in any case
where any of the lines of the same are proposed to be revised or in any
case where the same was never previously laid out, although such
street may have been opened and used.
59.63.5. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.63.6.OPENED STREETS — All streets within Bethel Park used as public
passageways.
59.63.7. OPENING A STREET — The construction and grading of a street or
portion thereof and the act of physically taking possession of an area of
laid-out street for the purposes of making the same usable to the
traveling public.
59.63.8.PERSON — A natural person, association, firm, corporation or
political subdivision.
59.63.9. PERSONAL NOTICE — Notice upon the owner of a premises by
personal service upon such owner or by certified mail to such owner at
his last known address or, where service shall not have been
successfully made by either of the two methods first mentioned herein,
then by posting such notice at or upon such premises.
59.63.10.PORTION THEREOF — A portion either of the width or the length
of a street and therefore, opening a portion of a street may mean
extending or widening a street, and vacating a portion of a street may
mean closing or narrowing a street.
59.63.11. STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley or public
way, either for or intended for public use, including the cartway,
59.63 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.63
1:489
59.64. Right to take over streets.
59.65. Privately constructed streets.
59.66. Streets adjoining streets of other municipalities.
59.67. Right of entry by Council.
sidewalk, gutter and/or the right-of-way area. "Streets" shall be of two
classes, opened and unopened.
59.63.12.UNOPENED STREETS — All streets within Bethel Park not used,
accepted or maintained, but placed on the Municipal Plan for future or
prospective use or placed on the plan of a real estate project or referred
to in individual deeds.
59.64.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park shall have the right at any time to
take over, by laying our and/or opening the same:
1. Any street as it appears upon the Municipal Plan.
2. Any street or portion thereof which Bethel Park shall deter mine to
acquire by the exercise of its rights under the power of eminent
domain by following the procedures set forth in the law governing
eminent domain.
3. Any street to which the public shall have acquired rights by
constant use over a period exceeding 21 years.
4. Any street or portion thereof, laid out or constructed by any person,
which Bethel Park shall see fit to take over or accept as provided in
this article.
59.65.1. Bethel Park shall not acquire any right in or responsibility for any
street privately constructed until dedication of such street shall have
been presented to and accepted by Bethel Park and until such
dedication shall have been recorded in the county office for the
recording of deeds.
59.66.1. No action shall be taken under this article that would result in the
change of location or grade or the vacation of any street or portion
thereof that connects with a street of another municipality or township,
without the approval of the court of common pleas of the county in
which such municipality or township is located, unless such
municipality or township shall first file with the Municipal Secretary its
approval of such proposed action.
59.67.1. The Municipal Council, its agents and employees may enter upon
any land or property and maintain marks and monuments, so far as that
Council may deem necessary, in carrying out its powers and duties
under this article.
59.63 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.68
1:490
59.68. Provisions to be exclusive.
59.69. Laying out of streets without opening same.
59.70. Failure to open street; petition.
59.71. Authority of Municipality to open streets.
59.72. Petition to open streets.
59.73. Opening of street; action for damages.
59.68.1. The provisions in this article as applicable to the dedication,
vacated by Bethel Park except under such provisions.
59.69.1. The laying out of a street without opening the same shall create no
right to public use of such street. However, all streets laid out in a plan
of real estate development shall retain public ownership and may be
opened by the Municipality at any time in accordance with this article.
59.70.1. At any time after any street or portion thereof shall have remained
laid out but not opened, any owner or owners of 50% of the front feet of
the land over which such street or portion thereof was laid out may
petition the Municipal Council to remove such street from the plan of
streets, and to cancel the laying out thereof. The Council shall
thereupon, following at least 15 days' notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in Bethel Park and at least 15 days' personal notice to the
owners of all real estate abutting upon the land over which such street
or portion thereof from the Municipal Plan and cancel the laying out
thereof. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Council, either
granting or denying such petition, may appeal therefrom, within 30
days from the date of such decision, to court.
59.71.1. Bethel Park shall have authority by ordinance to open any street or
portion thereof previously laid out or, simultaneously, to lay out and
open any street or portion thereof. Any street or portion thereof so
opened shall be a public street of the Municipality.
59.72.1. Any owner or owners of 50% of the front feet of the real estate
abutting upon any area as a street or portion thereof.
59.73.1. Upon the effective date of an ordinance enacted by authority of
Section 59-76 or 59-77 hereof, Bethel Park shall have the authority to
enter upon and take possession of the street or portion thereof opened
by such ordinance if no structures are upon such street. If any structure
shall have been located upon such street or portion thereof so opened
prior to the laying out of such street or prior to the simultaneous laying
out and opening thereof, such street shall not be opened until the owner
of such structure shall have been given 60 days' personal notice to
vacate the same.
59.68 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.73
1:491
59.74. Acceptance of streets by Municipality.
59.75. Approval required for construction, dedication or opening of
street; penalties.
59.73.2. If any of the parties cannot agree upon damages sustained by
reason of the opening of any street or portion thereof, such damages
shall be assessed by a jury of view under the provisions of the law
governing eminent domain. The Council is not required to file any bond
or security for the exercise of the right granted by this section. All
parties whose ground is taken in the opening of a street or portion
thereof shall have three years from and after the effective date of the
ordinance opening such street or portion thereof in which to bring an
action for damages resulting therefrom. In case of the assessment of
damages for the opening of any street or portion thereof, the award of
damages, if any, shall include all damages resulting from the grade at
which such street or portion thereof is to be opened. The plan attached
to the report of the viewers awarding the damages shall have therein a
profile plan showing the existing grade as well as the grade to which
such street or portion thereof is to be opened.
59.74.1. The Municipality may by ordinance accept any opened street not
previously dedicated to or laid out by the Municipality. The effect of
such acceptance shall be the same as that of opening such street. No
street shall be accepted unless such street connects with at least one
other previously opened street or state highway.
59.75.1. No person shall construct, dedicate or open to travel any street, or
any drainage facilities in connection therewith, for public use or travel
or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon in
Bethel Park without first submitting suitable plans thereof to the
Council for its approval. Such plans shall be prepared in accordance
with all the applicable ordinances, including but not limited to the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Bethel Park and this
article.
59.75.2. If any street or any drainage facilities in connection therewith shall
be opened, constructed or dedicated for public use or travel except in
strict accordance with plans approved by the Council, neither the
Council nor any other public authorities shall have any responsibility of
any kind with respect to any such street or drainage facilities,
notwithstanding any use of the same by the public.
59.75.3. Any person who shall construct, open or dedicate any street or any
drainage facilities in connection therewith for public use or travel in
Bethel Park without having first complied with the provisions of this
article or of any applicable municipal ordinance shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 or suffer imprisonment not exceeding
two years, or both, in the discretion of the court. Nothing herein
59.73 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.75
1:492
59.76. Authority of Municipality to vacate streets.
59.77. Petition for vacating street. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-12-12B]
59.78. Effect of street vacation.
59.79. Cost of street improvements; damages.
contained shall be construed to apply to the Department of
Transportation of the commonwealth.
59.76.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park may by ordinance vacate or close
any street or portion thereof previously opened or laid out except where
the street or portion thereof provides the sole means of access to any lot
or tract of land. Ordinances prepared pursuant to this section shall be
in accordance with Article II of the Home Rule Charter of Bethel Park.
Prior to the adoption of such ordinance, the Council shall hold at least
one public hearing following at least 15 days' notice in a newspaper of
general circulation and following at least 15 days' personal notice to all
property owners abutting the street or portion thereof to be vacated.
59.77.1. Any person or persons constituting at least 50% of the frontage of
real estate abutting upon any street or portion thereof may petition the
Council to vacate such street or portion thereof. Such petition shall
include a legal description and survey of said street or portion thereof
and an application fee. All petitions to vacate streets must be forwarded
to the Municipal Planning Commission for its review and
recommendation. The Planning Commission shall have 30 days in which
to report its findings and make its recommendations to the Council. The
Council shall, within 90 days, hold a public hearing on such petition,
following at least 15 days' personal notice to all owners of abutting real
estate on said street or portion thereof and following at least 15 days'
notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Bethel Park.
Following such hearing, the Council shall either by motion deny such
petition or by ordinance vacate such street or portion thereof. The fee
shall be set in accordance with a schedule of fees, charges, or expenses
as determined by Municipal Council.
59.78.1. When a street or portion thereof shall have been vacated, all public
right in or to such street or portion thereof shall cease, but such
vacation shall not affect the private rights acquired by any of the
owners of abutting property.
59.79.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park may improve streets or parts
thereof or a particular width or additional widths thereof, with or
without the assistance or contribution of the United States of America,
the state, the county or a corporation occupying the thoroughfare, and
may assess and collect the whole cost thereof or the whole cost not thus
aided or contributed or any part thereof from the owners of real estate
59.75 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.79
1:493
59.80. Notice of assessment; collection.
59.81. Agreements to improve boundary streets.
abutting on the improvement by an equal assessment on the frontfoot
basis, including the expenses of the necessary drainage. The Council
may make equitable adjustments for corner lots or lots of irregular
shape where an assessment for full frontage might be unjust.
59.79.2. In all cases where the whole width of the highway is being paved
without state or county aid and more than 2/3 of the total cost is
proposed to be assessed on abutters, the Municipality shall, for this
purpose, be considered as owner of nonassessable property, of street
intersections and of the deducted frontage on equitable adjustment. At
the discretion of the Council, the total cost of the improvement or a
lesser amount, if desirable, may be assessed on the assessable
properties abutting without any deduction for nonassessable property
or street intersections or for the equitable adjustments aforesaid.
59.79.3. If, in connection with such proceedings, any street or sidewalk is
graded or changed in grade so that private property is damaged
thereby and the damages have not been released or agreed upon, then
the damages shall be awarded as provided in the law governing
eminent domain. The owner of all real estate abutting upon any such
improvement shall be assessable for the cost thereof, whether such
property owner be a natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation, including but not limited to any nonprofit corporation or
association and any public utility corporation or political subdivision,
but not including the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States of America.
59.80.1. The Municipal Manager shall cause 30 days' personal notice of the
assessment to be given to each party assessed.
59.80.2. If any assessment shall remain unpaid at the expiration of the
notice, it shall be the duty of the Municipal Solicitor to collect same,
with interest from the time of completion to the improvement, by action
of assumpsit or by a lien to be filed and collected in the same manner as
municipal claims. When an owner has two or more lots against which
there is an assessment for the same improvement, all of such lots may
be embraced in one claim.
59.81.1. Agreements with adjoining municipalities. Bethel Park may enter
into agreement with any municipality and/or township for improving
streets which may be boundaries between such municipality or
township and may provide in such contract that the damages, costs and
expenses of such improvements shall be divided between such
municipality and/or township in the proportion agreed upon. Bethel
Park may assess its share of such costs against the owners of property
abutting upon its side of such improvement, in the manner provided in
this article.
59.79 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.81
1:494
59.82. Improvement of streets outside limits.
59.83. Use of abutting lands for street improvements.
59.81.2. Agreements with adjoining municipalities. Bethel Park may enter
into agreement with any municipality and/or township for improving
streets which may be boundaries between such municipality or
townships and county. Whenever the center line of any street
constitutes the dividing line between Bethel Park and a township
located in Allegheny County, the Municipality may enter into a contract
with the Commissioners of the county and the Commissioners or
Supervisors of the township, as the case may be, to improve such street.
Such improvement shall be constructed and subsequent repairs shall be
made under the supervision of Bethel Park and in compliance with the
plans to be agreed upon, in writing, between Bethel Park and the
Commissioners of the county and the Commissioners or Supervisors of
the township. One-half of the cost of such repairs shall be borne by
Bethel Park. Bethel Park may assess its share of such costs against the
owners of property abutting on its side of such improvement in the
manner provided in this article.
59.81.3. Streets not located entirely within Municipality. Whenever any
street, more than 1/2 the width of which is within the limits of Bethel
Park, shall divide Bethel Park from any other municipality or township,
such street may be improved by Bethel Park in the same manner as if
such street were entirely located within the limits of Bethel Park. The
property abutting on the side of such street which is located outside the
limits of Bethel Park shall, for a depth of 150 feet plus 1/2 the width of
said street from its center line, be assessed for any and all municipal
improvements to or on said street in the same manner as if it were
entirely located within the limits of Bethel Park.
59.81.4. Assessment of property opposite boundary. Wherever any street
entirely within the limits of Bethel Park shall divide it from any other
municipality or township located in the same county, the property on
the side of the street opposite the line of the Municipality shall, for a
depth of 150 feet, be assessed for municipal improvements on such
streets on which such property shall abut, in the manner provided by
this article for assessments by the front-foot rule, and such
improvements may be made, assessed and collected in accordance with
the provisions of this article for assessments for the front-foot rule.
59.82.1. Bethel Park may, singly or jointly with any municipality, borough,
city, township and/or county, appropriate and expend moneys for the
improvement of streets outside the limits of Bethel Park for the purpose
of connecting improved streets with state highways. No such street
shall be improved which shall be more than one mile in length, except
as specifically approved by a majority vote of all members of the
Council.
59.81 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.83
1:495
59.84. Acquisition of property for unobstructed view.
59.85. Authority to vacate easements.
59.86. Petition to vacate easements. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 11-12-12B]
59.83.1. In the improvement of any street or portion thereof, Bethel Park
may use as much of the land abutting on same for the construction of
embankments, slopes, fills and culverts as may be necessary and proper
for the completion of the improvement, and the assessment of damages,
costs and expenses resulting thereby shall be regarded as other
assessments of damages, costs and expenses caused by the
improvement of streets and shall be assessed and paid as is provided by
the law governing eminent domain.
59.84.1. Bethel Park may, single or jointly with a municipality, borough, city,
county, or township, acquire by purchase or by the right of eminent
domain a free and unobstructed view down and across such lands
located at or near the intersection of any two streets or highways or a
street or highway and a railroad or railway or at a curve in any street or
highway as may be necessary to assure a free and unobstructed view in
all directions at such crossings and to so prevent the use of such lands
for any purpose or in any manner which may interfere with or obstruct
the view of persons traveling upon any such street or highway.
59.84.2. The proceedings for the condemnation of such view over and across
such lands and for the assessment of damages for property taken,
injured or destroyed, or of the portion thereof agreed to be paid by
Bethel Park if the taking is jointly with another municipality, borough,
city, county or township, shall be taken in the manner provided in the
law governing eminent domain.
59.84.3. Upon the purchase or condemnation of a view, the owner of such
lands may make every such use thereof as will not interfere with a free
and unobstructed view at the dangerous crossing or curve.
59.85.1. The Council shall have authority, in accordance with the provisions
hereof, to vacate any easement for sanitary sewers, storm sewers or
other purpose, which easement has been dedicated to public use,
accepted by the Municipality and is situate in a recorded plan of
subdivision or land development.
59.86.1. Any person or persons owning real property which is burdened by
such an easement as described in Section 59.85 hereof may petition the
Council to vacate such easement or a portion thereof. Such petition
shall include proof of ownership of the burdened real property, a legal
description and survey of the subject easement and an application fee.
Petitions to vacate easements shall be filed with the Municipal
Manager, who shall refer them to the Municipal Engineer for review
and recommendation. The fee shall be set in accordance with a
59.83 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.86
1:496
59.87. Petitions not filed by all affected owners.
59.88. Notice of vacation.
59.89. Effect of vacation.
59.90. Repealer.
59.91. Severability.
schedule of fees, charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal
Council.
59.86.2. The Municipal Engineer shall have 30 days in which to report his
recommendation to the Council. The Council, within 60 days of receipt
of the Municipal Engineer's recommendation, can either by motion
deny such petition or by resolution vacate such easement. The Council's
failure to act within 60 days shall be deemed a denial of the petition.
59.87.1. Where a petition to vacate an easement pursuant to Section 59.85
hereof is filed by owners of less than all the real property burdened by
such easement, the Municipal Manager, upon receipt of such a petition,
shall post the affected area with a notice of the petition's filing. Within
10 days of such posting, any owner of property burdened by the subject
easement may request a public hearing. Upon such a request or on its
own motion and prior to action on the petition, the Council shall hold at
least one public hearing following at least 15 days' personal notice to all
owners of property burdened by the easement or portion thereof to be
vacated.
59.87.2. The Council, within 60 days of the close of the public hearing, can
either by motion deny such petition or by resolution vacate such
easement The Council's failure to act within 60 days shall be deemed a
denial of the petition.
59.88.1. After enactment of a resolution to vacate an easement, the
Municipal Manager shall post the affected property with a notice of the
vacation, such notice to remain in place for five days.
59.89.1. When an easement or a portion thereof shall have been vacated, all
public right in or to such easement or portion thereof shall cease.
59.90.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this article be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
59.91.1. Should any section, sentence, clause, phrase or any part of this
article for any reason be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, said section, sentence, clause,
phrase or part of this article shall be considered severed herefrom, and
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder hereof.
59.86 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.92
1:497
59.92. Snow removal on unaccepted streets. [Added 11-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 11-10-1986A]
59.92.1. The Municipality or its forces will perform no snow removal
operation on a street being constructed pursuant to the requirements of
Ordinance No. 7-18-72A until such street has been formally accepted by
the Municipality pursuant to the terms of the subdivision development
agreement.
59.92 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.92
1:498
ARTICLE XII
Curb Cut Permits
[Added by Ord. No. 8-10-1987C]
59.93. Permit required.
59.94. Standards for Issuance.
59.95. Violations and Penalties.
59.93.1. No person, firm or corporation shall open a curb or establish an
access to any Municipal street without first obtaining a permit from the
Municipality. The Municipal Manager may incorporate the curb cut
permit requirement into the building permit, artisan permit, or into the
site plan approval.
59.94.1. No curb cut permits shall be issued unless the standards for access
set forth in Zoning Ordinance are met, which standards are
incorporated herein by reference.
59.95.1. The provisions of Article III, 59.20, 59.21 and 59.22 are
incorporated into this article as if fully set forth below and any
reference to a cut or opening shall for the purpose of this article be
deemed to refer to access covered under this article.
59.93 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.95
1:499

ARTICLE XIII
Tractor Vehicles
59.96. Definitions.60
59.97. Permit required.
59.98. Application.
59.96.1. For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
59.96.2. VEHICLES — For the purpose of this ordinance shall mean any
motor vehicle, the wheels of which, or the traction thereof, is equipped
with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges, or any other protuberance.
59.96.3. SECRETARY — Is the Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.96.4. MUNICIPAL — Is any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation of any kind.
59.96.5. MUNICIPAL — Is the Municipality of Bethel Park.
59.96.6. ENGINEER — Is the official engineer appointed by the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
59.97.1. No person shall move any vehicle while the wheels of which, or the
traction thereof, is equipped with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges, or any
other protuberance, over, along or across any highways, streets or
alleys in the Municipality without first obtaining a permit from the
Municipal Secretary.
59.98.1. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application for such permit with the Municipal Secretary.
1. "Form", the application shall be made in writing upon forms
provided by the Municipal Secretary, and said application shall be
filed in the office of the Municipal Secretary.
2. "Contents", the application shall set forth:
a. A description of the vehicle proposed to be operated, giving the
make of the vehicle, the size of the vehicle and the condition of
the wheels or traction thereof, as well as the type of wheels and
traction.
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance was formerly included in chapter on Vehicle and Traffic, but
was removed upon adoption of Code.
59.96 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.98
1:501
59.99. Bond in lieu of deposit.
59.100. Duties of Municipal Engineer.
b. The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which
the vehicle is proposed to be moved.
c. The time when said vehicle is proposed to be operated,
showing the date and hours.
d. The statement as to whether the vehicle will merely traverse
the highways, streets and alleys of the Municipality or whether
the applicant proposes to actually operate the vehicles on the
said highways, streets and alleys in the performance of the
vehicles usual function.
e. The number of vehicles proposed to be operated.
f. Any additional information which the Municipal Secretary shall
find necessary to make a fair determination of whether a
permit should be issued.
3. "Fee". The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the
amount of $5 for each vehicle. Said fee shall be deposited by the
Municipal Secretary to the general account of the Municipality of
Bethel Park.
4. "General Deposit". The application hereunder shall be
accompanied by a cash deposit in a sum to be determined by the
Municipal Engineer as an indemnity for any damage which the
Municipality may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any
highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant, or other property of
the Municipality, which may be caused by or be incidental to the
operation of a vehicle when the wheels of which or the traction
thereof are equipped with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges or any other
protuberance.
59.99.1. Any person filing an application hereunder may, in lieu of the cash
deposit required above, file with the Secretary of the Municipality, a
bond, approved as to form by the Municipal Solicitor, executed by a
bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in amount determined by the Municipal
Engineer, conditioned upon the issuance that this and other applicable
ordinance and laws shall be complied with. Such bonds shall run to the
Municipality for the use and benefit of the Municipality and shall be
conditioned on the payment of any damage to public property from any
act in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the
permit applied for is granted.
59.100.1. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect the highways, streets and
alleys proposed to be use by the applicant and shall fix the cash deposit
on the bond in amount sufficient to restore the paved surface of the
59.98 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.100
1:502
59.101. Duties of permittee.
59.102. Appeal Procedure.
59.103. Penalties.
59.104. Severability.
Municipal highway, street or alley to its normal condition if the said
paved surface should be damaged, injured or destroyed by reason of
the operation of a vehicle, the wheels of which or the traction thereof
are equipped with cleats, blocks, studs, flanges or other protuberances.
59.101.1. Permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions ad with all applicable laws and ordinances. The permittee
may use the permit granted for the specific term provided for in the
application. The permit shall be non-assignable and in the event of an
assignment of the same the permit shall become immediately void.
1. The permittee may operate the vehicles only upon the highways,
streets and alleys designated for such use in the written permit.
2. The permittee shall notify the Municipal Secretary in writing of any
change in the route proposed or the time proposed in the
application.
3. The permittee shall notify the Municipal Secretary in writing of any
all damage done to property of the Municipality of Bethel Park
within 24 hours after the injury or damage has occurred.
59.102.1. Any person aggrieved by the provisions stated above shall have
the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice of the denial and Council shall act upon the said appeal at
or before the next regular meeting of Council following the filing of the
appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of Council shall have the
right to appeal to the courts of the Commonwealth as provided by law.
59.103.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof before the magistrate, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine in an amount not exceeding $100, together with the costs of
prosecution and in default of the payment thereof undergo
imprisonment for a period of 30 days. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
59.104.1. If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
59.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.104
1:503
59.105. Exclusion.
59.106. Repealer.
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
59.105.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to privately owned
passenger vehicles, vehicles used for mass transportation, or
commercial vehicles operated upon the road and streets of the
Municipality of Bethel Park which said vehicles shall have attached to
the periphery of its wheels, snow chains for emergency use on snow or
ice.
59.106.1. That any ordinance or parts of ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance, be and the same are hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
59.104 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.106
1:504
ARTICLE XIV
Encroachment Permits
[Added 3-13-1989 by Ord. 3-13-89B]
59.107. Permit required. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
11-12-12B]
59.108. Encroachment permit standards.
59.109. Encroachment agreements authorized.
59.107.1. No person, partnership, corporation, association or entity of any
kind whatsoever owning an interest in real property subject to an
easement, including, without limitation, rights-of-way and roads owned
in fee, in favor of any of the following: the Municipality, the Municipal
Authority, or any other authority created by the Municipality pursuant
to state law, shall construct, allow to be constructed by others, or allow
to remain any structure, as the term is defined in the Zoning Ordinance
hereof, on, under or upon such easement without first obtaining an
encroachment permit from the Municipal Manager.
59.108.1. The Municipal Manager may issue an encroachment permit at his
sole, reasonable discretion if he determines that the following criteria
have been met:
1. Submission of plans and specifications showing the nature of the
encroachment, the structure and its exact location;
2. A report from the Municipal Engineer or the appropriate authority
engineer that the structure and the construction thereof will not
adversely effect the operation or maintenance of the municipal
facility in the easement or hinder or prohibit future use of the
easement by the Municipality or the appropriate municipal
authority;
3. Written consent of the appropriate authority, if any;
4. A report from the Zoning Official that the structure will meet all the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance hereof; and
5. The recording of an encroachment agreement by and between the
Municipality and the subservient property fee owner or owner of
the encroachment where there is no subservient property in the
Allegheny County Recorder's office.
59.109.1. The Municipal Manager may enter into an encroachment
agreement with an owner of fee-simple interest in real property, or such
owner's agent or tenant with suitable power to bind said owner,
establishing the terms and conditions for encroaching upon a municipal
or authority easement. Said agreement shall be in recordable form and
shall include, but not be limited to, provisions providing for:
59.107 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.109
1:505
59.110. Permit fees and agreement costs. [Amended 11-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 11-12-12B]
59.111. Review by Council.
59.112. Injunctive relief.
1. An indemnity of the Municipality and the appropriate municipal
authority, if any;
2. An agreement for the permittee to maintain the easement in and
around the encroachment area and the Municipal or authority
facility therein while the encroachment exists;
3. An agreement to remove the encroachment upon notice by the
Municipality to the permittee; and
4. Such other provisions as the Municipal Solicitor deems necessary
to protect the Municipality's or appropriate authority's interests in
the easement area.
59.109.2. The Municipal Council may, by resolution, authorize the Municipal
Manager to waive one or more of the above conditions where it
determines such provisions are not necessary to protect the
Municipality's easement interest.
59.110.1. There shall be an application fee established for the issuance of
the permit. The fee shall be set in accordance with a schedule of fees,
charges, or expenses as determined by Municipal Council. This fee may
be changed by the Municipal Council from time to time by resolution. In
addition to the permit fee, the applicant shall reimburse the
Municipality for the costs of the Municipal Solicitor's time for preparing
and recording the agreement. The Municipal Manager shall estimate
the cost, and the same shall be paid at the time of application. Any
balance due shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of the
permit. Any excess shall be promptly refunded to the applicant after
issuance of the permit.
59.111.1. The Municipal Manager shall inform the Municipal Council of his
intent to execute an encroachment agreement at least 10 days prior to
its execution.
59.112.1. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to waive any rights or
remedies available to the Municipality or any authority in regard to
enforcement of its easements interest. The Municipality may proceed in
law or equity to enforce its rights.
59.109 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.112
1:506
ARTICLE XV
Municipal Building Parking Lots
[Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98C]
59.113. Reserved and restricted usage of certain spaces.
59.113.1. Parking Lot A. In Parking Lot A there shall be two parking spaces
reserved for handicapped motorists and one parking space reserved for
the Municipal Engineer. These spaces shall be designated as "reserved"
or "restricted" for such purposes by appropriate signage.
59.113.2. Parking Lot B. In Parking Lot B use of parking spaces shall be
restricted as follows:
1. Nine parking spaces shall be reserved between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 11:00 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays for members of the
Council and designated by signs. One parking space shall be
reserved and designated for the Mayor.
2. Two parking spaces shall be reserved for municipal staff or agents
or employees of the Municipality. These spaces shall be designated
for such use by appropriate signage.
3. One parking space shall be reserved for the exclusive use of the
District Justice of Magisterial District 05-2-20 and shall be
designated by appropriate signage.
4. Two parking spaces shall be reserved for the exclusive use of
Bethel Park Police vehicles and shall be designated by appropriate
signs.
5. Two parking spaces shall be reserved for the exclusive use of
handicapped motorists and shall be designated by appropriate
signs.
59.113.3. Parking spaces situated at the rear of the Municipal Building.
Parking spaces at the rear of the Municipal Building are not open or
available for parking by the public at large. Such parking spaces shall
be reserved for the sole and exclusive use of municipal officers, agents
or employees as follows:
1. Nine spaces shall be reserved for exclusive use by municipal police
patrol cars and shall be designated by two signs.
2. Three spaces shall be reserved for the exclusive use of the
Municipal Building Inspector and staff of the Building Inspector,
and shall be designated by appropriate signs.
3. One space shall be reserved for exclusive use by agents or
employees of the Municipal Public Works Department and shall be
designated by an appropriate sign.
59.113 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.113
1:507
59.114. Violations and fines for unauthorized use of reserved
parking.
59.115. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
59.116. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective 30 days from adoption.
4. One space shall be reserved for the exclusive use of the Municipal
Engineer or staff of the Engineer and designated by appropriate
signs.
5. Parking in the area under the canopy shall include one space,
designated by a sign, reserved for parking by the Municipal
Manager only. One space shall be reserved for and designated by a
sign for police parking only.
59.114.1. Violations. After the effective date of this ordinance, any person
parking in a space reserved and designated for the use of municipal
officials, officers, agents and employees or in the space reserved for the
District Justice of Magisterial District 05-2-20 shall be in violation of
this ordinance, which violation shall be punishable as set forth in
Section 2.2 of this ordinance.
59.114.2. Fines for illegal and unauthorized use of reserved municipal
parking. Any person who parks in any parking space reserved under
Section 59.113 of this ordinance or designated by appropriate signage
as being reserved for the use of a particular municipal official, officer,
agent or employee or class of municipal officials, officers, agents or
employees or any person who parks in the parking space reserved for
the District Justice of Magisterial District 05-2-20 shall be subject to a
fine of $10 payable within 10 days of the date such fine is levied or a
citation issued. Any person who parks any vehicle in any space or area
in a municipal parking lot herein described where parking is prohibited
either by signage or painted yellow curbing shall also be subject to a
fine of $10 payable within 10 days of the date such fine is levied or a
citation issued. If the fine is not paid within 10 days of the date of the
citation, such violation shall be considered a violation of § 3353 of the
State Vehicle Code.61
59.114.3. Fines for illegal and unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved
for handicapped. Any person who parks in a space designated for
handicapped individuals who is not authorized to do so shall be subject
to penalties outlined by the State Vehicle Code.62
61.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353.
62.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
59.113 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.117
1:508
59.117. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
section, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance, but
they shall stand notwithstanding such other invalid section, clause, phrase
or sentence.
59.117 GENERAL PROVISIONS 59.117
1:509
Chapter 60
SUBDIVISIONS
59.117 BETHEL PARK CODE 59.117
1:510
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
60.1. Short title and effective date.
60.2. Purposes.
60.3. Interpretation.
60.1.1. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Municipality
of Bethel Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.2.1. This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., Act.
247 of 1968, as amended) and the Municipality of Bethel Park Long
Range Development Plan for the following purposes:
1. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human
habitation.
2. To assist orderly, efficient, integrated, and harmonious
development of the Municipality.
3. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other
proposes streets, parts, or other features of the Municipality.
4. To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light, and
air and for the proper distribution of population.
5. To ensure coordination of subdivision and land development plans
with Municipality, intermunicipal, county, and commonwealth
improvement plans.
6. To prevent or eliminate damage to the environment and biosphere,
and to encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between man
and his environment, consistent with the mandates of the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and Article I, Section 27 (the
Environmental Amendment), of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
7. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land
development plans by providing uniform procedures and
standards.
8. To protect the social and economic stability of the Municipality and
conserve the value of land and buildings in the Municipality.
9. To create conditions favorable to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
60.3.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum
requirements to meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions
of this ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any statute,
60.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.3
1:511
60.4. Severability.
60.5. Authority.
60.6. Jurisdiction.
other ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of this ordinance shall
prevail. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulation impose greater restrictions than those of this ordinance, the
provision of such statute, ordinance, or regulation shall prevail.
60.4.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable, and if any of its
provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions
of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this
ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal,
or invalid provision not been included herein.
60.5.1. From and after the effective date hereof, the Municipal Council shall
have the authority to regulate all new subdivision and land development
within the Municipality according to this ordinance. Applications for
subdivision and land development submitted prior to the effective date
of this ordinance shall be processed under the provisions of Ordinance
No. 7-18-72A. The new provisions of this ordinance may be applied to
such applications upon request of the applicant.
60.6.1. The Municipal Council shall have the jurisdiction of subdivision and
land development within the municipal limits. In order to aid the
Municipal Council in its consideration of subdivisions and land
developments, the Municipal Council hereby decrees that the Planning
Commission of Bethel Park shall serve the following functions:
1. All plans, upon submission to the duly authorized representative of
the Municipality shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
review.
2. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the
Municipal Council concerning approval, disapproval, modification,
and/or conditions for approval of minor subdivisions and minor land
developments and shall approve, disapprove, and conditionally
approve minor subdivisions and minor land developments.
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
3. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the
Municipal Council concerning the interpretation of the granting of
modifications to provisions and standards of this ordinance.
60.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.6
1:512
ARTICLE II
Definitions
60.7. Definitions.
60.7.1. As used in this ordinance, words in the singular include the plural,
and those in the plural include the singular. Words in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the masculine gender include
the feminine and neuter. The word "person" includes corporation,
unincorporated association, and partnership, as well as an individual.
The word "structure" includes the meaning of "building," and each shall
be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
60.7.2. Unless otherwise defined, all definitions in the Bethel Park Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, and the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by reference.
60.7.3. The following words, as used in this ordinance, shall have the
meanings indicated below:
60.7.4. ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activities and natural processes
at a rate greater than would occur from natural processes alone.
60.7.5. ACT 247 or MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
of July 31, 1968, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
60.7.6. ALLEY — See "service street."
60.7.7.BLOCK — A tract of land bounded entirely by streets; by streets and
a watercourse; by streets and a railroad; by streets and the corporate
boundaries of the Municipality; by streets and public land or other park
or recreation area; or any combination of the above.
60.7.8.CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel over the
street.
60.7.9. CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
60.7.10. (Reserved)63
60.7.11. COUNCIL — The Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
60.7.12. DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed to retard surface
water runoff for a period of time sufficient to cause the deposition of
sediment and to reduce the velocity and volume of surface flows leaving
a site, thus preventing further erosion.
63.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “condominium” was repealed 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 8-13-18A.
60.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.7
1:513
60.7.13.DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — The subdivision improvement
agreement as set forth in Article X of this ordinance.
60.7.14. DRIVEWAY (LANE) — A private means of vehicle access from a
public or private street to a single lot; provided, however, that two
contiguous lots may share a common driveway where the applicable
requirements of this ordinance and the Municipal Zoning Ordinance are
complied with on each lot.
60.7.15. EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Activity resulting in the movement of
earth or stripping of vegetative cover from the earth.
60.7.16.EASEMENT — A permanent right granted for limited use of private
land, normally for a public purposes. The owner of the property shall
have the right to make any other use of the land which is not
inconsistent with the rights of the grantee (e.g.: utility, drainage, and
public access easements).
60.7.17.EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — A legal agreement between a
property owner and an appropriate conservation organization or
governmental entity, through which the property owner establishes
certain use restrictions over all or portion(s) of the property for
conservation purposes.
60.7.18. (Reserved)64
60.7.19.GUARANTEE, MAINTENANCE — Any security which may be
required of a developer by the Municipality after final acceptance by
the Municipality of improvements installed by the developer. Such
security shall include only those financial instruments authorized by the
MPC.
60.7.20.GUARANTEE, PERFORMANCE — Any security which may be
required of a developer by the Municipality in lieu of a requirement that
certain improvements be made before the Municipality approves the
developer's subdivision plan or land development plan. Such security
shall include only those financial instruments authorized by the MPC.
60.7.21. (Reserved)65
60.7.22. IMPROVEMENTS — Buildings, for public or quasi-public use,
streets, curbs, gutters, street right-of-way line, storm drainage lines,
stormwater management structures, walkways, recreational facilities,
open space improvements, shade trees, buffer or screen plantings, and
all other additions to the tract that are required by ordinance or
necessary to result in a complete subdivision or land development in
the fullest sense of the term.
64.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “flooplain area,” as amended, was repealed
8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 8-13-18A.
65.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “impervious surface” was repealed 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 8-13-18A.
60.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.7
1:514
60.7.23. IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Improvements, including but not
limited to those contained in the definition of "improvements," that are
intended for dedication to the Municipality, either in fee or by
easement.
60.7.24.LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion, including clearing, grading, filling,
plowing, or any other earthmoving, as defined.
60.7.25. LANE, ACCELERATION OR DECELERATION — A lane of a cartway
intended for use by vehicles entering, leaving, or crossing a lane of
forward travel without interrupting the flow of traffic.
60.7.26. LOT AREA — The acreage contained within the property lines of a
lot as defined in the deed, excluding street and other transportation
rights-of-way. Acreage shall be determined from an actual site survey
rather than from a deed description.
60.7.27. LOT, FLAG — A lot which has a street frontage of less than 20% of
the width of the lot at its widest part when measured on a line parallel
to the street. Such lots are prohibited.
60.7.28. LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having
frontage on an arterial or collector street and a local street, with
vehicular access solely from the latter.
60.7.29.MONUMENT — A permanent survey reference point as prescribed
by the Municipal Engineer.
60.7.30. MUNICIPALITY — Municipality of Bethel Park.
60.7.31.MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any land development involving:
[Amended 3-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F; 4-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B; 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03B]
1. Construction of not more than one new multifamily, commercial or
industrial building or an addition which is not a conditional use and
where the gross floor area is less than 2,000 square feet and when
the proposed development abuts a residentially zoned property and
is not located in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zoned property;
or
2. Any addition to a new multifamily, commercial or industrial
building which is not a conditional use and where the gross floor
area of the addition is greater than 2,000 square feet and less than
8,000 square feet; or
3. Any addition to a new multifamily, commercial or industrial
building which is not a conditional use under 2,000 square feet in
size when the proposed development abuts a residentially zoned
property.
60.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.7
1:515
60.7.32.MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or resubdivision of land
which involves adjustment of common property lines whereby 1) no
additional lots are created; 2) no provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Municipality of Bethel Park are violated; 3) no public improvements
excepting sidewalks are required; 4) not more than three lots are
involved in the subdivision; and 5) no land development, as defined by
the MPC,66 is involved. [Amended 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 8-8-89F]
60.7.33.MAJOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any land development involving:
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F; 4-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B; 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03B]
1. Any development that is a conditional use; or
2. Construction of one or more new multifamily, commercial or
industrial building where the gross floor area is greater than 2,000
square feet; or
3. Any addition to a new multifamily, commercial or industrial
building where the gross floor area of the addition is greater than
8,000 square feet.
60.7.34.MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not deemed a minor
subdivision.
60.7.35. OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Municipal Council
pursuant to Article IV, Act 247 (as enacted),67 showing streets,
highways, parks and drainage, both existing and proposed.
60.7.36. PLAT (or PLAN):
1. AS-BUILT — A corrected final plan, showing dimensions and
locations of all streets and other improvements as actually
constructed.
2. FINAL — An exact and complete site design and layout plan and
improvements construction plan prepared by a registered surveyor
and showing all details specified in this ordinance, to be recorded
upon approval.
3. PRELIMINARY — A site design and layout plan and improvements
construction plan prepared by a registered engineer, in less detail
than a final plan, but showing all details specified in this ordinance,
and prepared for consideration prior to submission of a final plan.
4. RECORDED — A final plan, with accompanying documents as
required by this ordinance, which has been recorded by the
applicant in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Allegheny
County.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
60.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.7
1:516
5. SKETCH — A plan submitted, at the applicant's option, for review
and discussion prior to application for preliminary plan approval,
including whatever information the applicant deems useful; for
example, a graphic plan, not necessarily to scale, showing
approximate tract boundaries and a general layout of lots,
buildings and streets.
60.7.37. PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning
Commission of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
60.7.38. RESUBDIVISION — A change in map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout on such map or
area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any
map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations
controlling subdivisions.
60.7.39. RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir, formed from soil or other
material, which is designed to detain temporarily a certain amount of
stormwater from a catchment area and which also may be designed to
permanently retain additional stormwater runoff from the catchment
area. Retention basins also may receive fresh water from year-round
streams. Unlike detention basins, retention basins always contain water
and thus may be considered man-made lakes or ponds.
60.7.40. RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated
as a street, alley or crosswalk or for any other public or private purpose.
60.7.41. SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by water.
60.7.42.SEWAGE FACILITIES —
1. INDIVIDUAL SYSTEM — The disposal of sewage by use of
cesspools, septic tanks or other safe and healthful means approved
by the Allegheny County Health Department and generally within
the confines of the lot on which the use is located.
2. COMMUNITY SYSTEM — A sanitary sewage system, privately built
and operated, in which sewage is carried from individual
dischargers by a system of pipes to one or more common treatment
and disposal facilities. Treatment and disposal may occur either onsite
or off-site and shall be approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources.
3. PUBLIC SYSTEM — A system for the treatment and disposal of
sewage in which sewage is conveyed by a system of pipes to an offsite,
publicly operated treatment facility and disposed of through
means approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
60.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.7
1:517
60.7.43. SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the
driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when
the view is obstructed by traffic.
1. OBJECT SIGHT DISTANCE — Shall be measured from a point 4.5
feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5 feet
above the center line of the road surface.
2. VEHICLE SIGHT DISTANCE — Shall be measured from one point
4.5 feet above the center line of a road surface to another point 4.5
feet above the center line of a road surface.
60.7.44. SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffused or reflected)
received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for conversion into
thermal, chemical or electrical energy.
60.7.45. SPECIMEN TREE — A unique, rare or otherwise specifically
selected plant or tree which most typically represents a whole class or
group, specifically in shape, form, historical importance or any other
characteristic which may be designated as such by the Municipality.
60.7.46.STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during
and subsequent to rain or snowfall.
60.7.47. STREET — A right-of-way as defined by Article XI, Section 50, of
the Bethel Park Code intended for general public use to provide means
of approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word "street" includes
the words "road," "highway," "thoroughfare" and "way."
1. ARTERIAL or MAJOR — A street serving a large volume of
comparatively high-speed and long distance traffic, including all
facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
2. COLLECTOR — A street designed and located to provide means to
drain traffic off local streets and to provide access for through
traffic between residential neighborhoods and districts within the
Municipality to major streets and/or a street used for access to
nonresidential properties, i.e., commercial, industrial, professional,
etc.
3. CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A local street intersecting another street
at one end and terminating at the other end by a permanent
vehicular turnaround.
4. LOCAL STREET — A street intended to serve and provide access to
the properties abutting thereon and not connecting with other
streets in such a manner as to encourage through traffic.
5. PRIVATE STREET — A local street, serving only abutting lots, that
is not offered or required to be offered for dedication.
60.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.7
1:518
6. SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing
secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more
properties.
60.7.48. STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the
roadway used by vehicular traffic.
60.7.49. SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a
unit (or agent authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision or
development of land.
60.7.50. SUBDIVISION OFFICER — That official of the Municipality (who
may, but need not, also be the Municipal Engineer and/or the Zoning
Officer) designated by the Municipal Manager to administer the
provisions of this chapter. For purpose of this chapter, said Subdivision
Officer shall be considered the Planning Department Director as
defined in the Municipalities Planning Code.68 [Amended 4-13-1998
by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
60.7.50.1.SUB-MINOR LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any land development
involving: [Added 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03B]
1. Construction of not more than one new multifamily, commercial or
industrial building or an addition which is less than 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area and is not a conditional use and the
proposed development does not abut a residentially zoned
property; or
2. Any addition of an accessory building, except accessory storage
buildings, where the gross floor area is less than 2,000 square feet
and is not a conditional use and the proposed development does not
abut a residentially zoned property.
60.7.51.SURVEYOR — A registered surveyor licensed in Pennsylvania.
60.7.52.WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river,
brook, creek or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade.
60.7.53.WATER SUPPLY —
1. INDIVIDUAL SYSTEM — A safe, healthful and adequate supply of
water to a single user from a private well located on the land of the
user.
2. CENTRAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system for supplying
water from a common source or sources to all dwellings and other
buildings within a development. The water supply source may be
located on-site and/or off-site. A central system can be further
described as either of the following:
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
60.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.7
1:519
a. PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which is owned
by a municipality, a public company or a private company
which serves more than a single community or subdivision and
may be interconnected with other water supply systems.
b. COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system which is
owned by a municipality, a public company or a private
company and which serves a single community or subdivision
and is not interconnected with any other water supply system.
60.7.54.WOODLAND — Generally, a land area characterized by a more or
less dense and extensive tree cover. More particularly, a plant
community predominantly of healthy trees and other woody vegetation,
well-stocked and growing more or less closely together.
60.7 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.7
1:520
ARTICLE III
Regulations Establishment
60.8. Regulations establishment.
60.8.1. No lot, tract or parcel of land shall be subdivided and no land may be
developed, and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or
concomitant facility may be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated
for public use or travel, or for the use of occupants of buildings abutting
or to abut on them, except in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance and other applicable municipal ordinances.
60.8.2. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to build, alter or repair
any building on land in a subdivision or land development may be issued
and no buildings may be erected in a subdivision or land development
until a final subdivision or land development plan has been approved
and recorded, in accordance with this ordinance and, where required,
improvements have been completed or their completion has been
assured by a performance guaranty consistent with the terms of Article
V of Act 247 and this ordinance.
60.8.3. The scope of this ordinance shall include all matters over which, by
law, the municipality is authorized to exercise control by enactment and
enforcement of this ordinance, including, but not limited to:
1. All improvements within any tract undergoing subdivision or land
development;
2. The improvement of public facilities, adjacent to any tract
undergoing subdivision or land development, including streets and
drainage facilities which border upon any such tract; and
3. The installation or enhancement of off-site improvements needed to
adequately serve the subdivision or land development, provided
that the extent of required off-site improvements shall be
reasonable in relation to the size and scope of the proposed
subdivision or land development.
60.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.8
1:521

ARTICLE IV
Procedures
60.9. Authority. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F; 4-13-1998
by Ord. No. 4-13-98B; 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03B]
60.10. Steps in approval process of a major subdivision.
60.9.1. Final authority for approval or denial of approval for all preliminary
and final major subdivision and major land development plans shall be
vested in the Municipal Council. However, prior to action by the
Municipal Council, all such plans shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation; provided, however, that
the failure to make such referral and/or the failure of the Planning
Commission to review and/or make a recommendation with respect to
any such plan shall not affect the validity of any action taken by the
Board or Municipal Council with respect to any such plan.
60.9.2. Final authority for approval or denial of minor land developments
shall be vested in the Planning Commission.
60.9.3. Final authority for approval or denial of sub-minor land
developments and minor subdivisions shall be vested in the Subdivision
Officer.
60.10.1. An application for subdivision is normally, but not necessarily,
required to involve three steps:
1. Step 1: Preapplication conference.
a. Prior to submission of an application for approval of a major
subdivision or land development, the applicant may attend a
preapplication conference with the Municipal Engineer,
Building Inspector and Director of Community Development.
The applicant may bring a sketch plan showing the location of
the subdivision, all existing structures, wooded areas,
significant physical features, available utilities and the
proposed pattern of lots, drainage and sewer facilities. The
preapplication conference will discuss formal application
procedures and give suggestions to the applicant on how to
comply with the Subdivision Ordinance.
b. The applicant may, but need not, request further review of the
sketch plan before official submission.
c. Nothing herein contained, nor the failure of any parties to
proceed or act in accordance with this step, shall be deemed to
be a decision with respect to any subdivision or land
development plan or to vest any rights in the applicant.
2. Step 2: Preliminary application review and approval.
60.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.10
1:523
a. Fifteen copies of a preliminary plat of any land proposed for
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the rules and
regulations herein prescribed, shall be submitted by the
developer to the Subdivision Officer within one month prior to
the Planning Commission meeting. The Subdivision Officer
shall note the date of receipt of the application, fees and
escrow deposit. The application shall not be deemed to be
submitted until a complete application, which shall include,
without limitations, the required fees, have all been submitted.
The Subdivision Officer shall make a preliminary review of the
application. If the Subdivision Officer determines that the
application is defective on its face, he shall notify the applicant.
The applicant may then submit the application as is, revise the
application for the purpose of correcting defects or withdraw
the application. Any request by the applicant for tabling action
on an application or for a withdrawal of an application must be
in writing. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
b. Upon submission of a complete application, which shall
include, without limitations, all required fees, the Subdivision
Officer shall accept the application, plans and other required
materials as filed and shall transmit the requisite number of
copies of the plans and other required materials to the
Planning Commission, the Municipal Engineer and the
Municipal Building Inspector.
c. The Commission and Municipal Engineer shall review the
preliminary plat at its next regular meeting and, within 45 days
thereafter, shall return one copy to the owner, with its
proposed recommendation to the Council, with
recommendations for revision. In case of a recommendation of
disapproval, recommendations by the Commission and
Municipal Engineer shall be submitted in writing to the owner,
with a copy to the Municipality for record.
d. The applicant shall then submit to the Subdivision Officer 15
copies of a preliminary plat (based upon the Planning
Commission's recommended revisions). The preliminary plat
will then be approved, approved with conditions or denied by
the Municipal Council within the time limit as prescribed by
Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code.69
3. Final approval process.
a. Fifteen copies of the final plat prepared in accordance with the
rules and regulations herein prescribed shall be submitted to
the Subdivision Officer, either at the same time as the
preliminary plat or after approval of the preliminary plat. In
either situation, the Council will approve, approve with
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
60.10 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.10
1:524
60.11. Steps in approval process of minor subdivisions. [Amended
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
60.12. Steps in approval of land developments.
conditions or deny the final plat within the time limit
prescribed by Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.70 [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.11.1. Three copies of a final plat of any land proposed for a minor
subdivision, drawn in accordance with the rules and regulations herein
prescribed, shall be submitted by the developer to the Subdivision
Officer. The Subdivision Officer shall note the date of receipt of the
application, fees and escrow deposit. The application shall not be
deemed to be submitted until a complete application, which shall
include, without limitations, the required fees, has all been submitted.
The Subdivision Officer shall make a preliminary review of the
application. If the Subdivision Officer determines that the application is
defective on its face, he shall notify the applicant. The applicant may
then submit the application as is, revise the application for the purpose
of correcting defects or withdraw the application. Any request by the
applicant to withdraw must be in writing.
60.11.2. The Subdivision Officer shall then approve, approve with conditions
or deny the minor subdivision within the time limitations prescribed by
Section 508 of the Municipalities Planning Code.71 No further approvals
are required for a minor subdivision.
60.12.1. An application for a land development is normally, but not
necessarily required, to involve three steps:
1. Step 1: Preapplication conference.
a. Prior to submission of an application for approval of a minor
land development, the applicant may attend a preapplication
conference with the Municipal Engineer, Building Inspector
and Director of Community Development. The applicant may
bring a sketch plan showing the proposed improvements. The
preapplication conference will discuss formal application
procedures and give suggestions to the applicant on how to
comply with the land use regulations.
b. The applicant may, but not need to, request further review of
the sketch plan before official submission.
c. Nothing herein contained, nor the failure of any parties to
proceed or act in accordance with this step, shall be deemed to
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
60.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.12
1:525
be a decision with respect to any land development or to vest
any rights in the applicant.
2. Step 2: Preliminary application review and approval.
a. Fifteen copies of a preliminary plat of any land proposed for a
major or minor land development, drawn in accordance with
the rules and regulations herein prescribed, shall be submitted
by the developer to the Subdivision Officer within one month
prior to the Planning Commission meeting. The Subdivision
Officer shall note the date of receipt of the application and
fees. The application shall not be deemed to be submitted until
a complete application, which shall include, without
limitations, the required fees, has been submitted. The
Subdivision Officer shall make a preliminary review of the
application. If the Subdivision Officer determines that the
application is defective on its face, he shall notify the applicant.
The applicant may then submit the application as is, revise the
application for the purpose of correcting defects or withdraw
the application. Any request by the applicant for tabling action
on an application or for a withdrawal of an application must be
in writing. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
b. Upon submission of a complete application, which shall
include, without limitations, all required fees, the Subdivision
Officer shall accept the application, plans and other required
information as filed and shall transmit the requisite number of
copies of the plans and other required materials to the
Planning Commission, the Municipal Engineer and the
Building Inspector.
c. In the case of a minor land development, the Commission and
Municipal Engineer shall review the preliminary plat at its next
regular meeting and approve, approve with conditions or deny
the application within the time limits prescribed by the MPC.72
The decision of the Commission shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at
his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
d. In the case of a major land development, the Commission and
Municipal Engineer shall review the preliminary plat at its next
regular meeting and recommend to Council to approve,
approve with conditions or deny the application. The Applicant
shall then submit to the Subdivision Officer 15 additional
copies of a preliminary plan. The Council shall review the
preliminary plat and approve, approve with conditions or deny
the application within the time limits prescribed by the MPC.
The decision of the Council shall be in writing and shall be
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
60.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.12
1:526
60.13. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof
Prerequisite to Final Plat Approval.
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at
his last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
e. Upon receiving preliminary approval and before the issuance
of building permits, the applicant shall enter into a
development agreement in accordance with Section 51-12 of
this ordinance. Simultaneously with the execution of such
agreement, security shall be posted with the Municipality to
guarantee the installation of all public and private
improvements required as part of the land development
approval. [Added 5-13-1991 by Ord. 5-13-91C]
3. Step 3: Final Approval Process.
a. Upon completion of construction of the proposed land
development, the applicant shall submit 15 copies of as-built
final plans prepared in accordance with the rules and
regulations herein prescribed. The Planning Commission shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plat for
minor land developments and Council shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the final plan for the major land
developments within the time limit prescribed by Section 508
of the Municipalities Planning Code.
60.13.1. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plat have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, or improved as may be required by the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance and any walkways, curbs, gutters,
streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm drains and other improvements as may be required by the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance have been installed in
accordance with this ordinance.
60.13.2. In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a
condition for the final approval of a plat, the Developer shall execute a
development agreement in a form prescribed by Council (see Article IX)
and deposit with the municipality financial security in a form acceptable
to municipality in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of any
improvements or common amenities including, but not limited to,
roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and other related
drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements, or
buffer or screen plantings which may be required. Without limitation as
to other types of financial security which the municipality may approve,
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of
credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions
shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of this
60.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.13
1:527
section. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company
or federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
60.13.3. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required on
or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.13.4. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer, annually the municipality may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
municipality may require the developer to post additional security in
order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any
additional security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with
this subsection. The amount of financial security required shall be
based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of the required
improvements, submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by
a professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such
cost. The municipality, upon the recommendation of the municipal
engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If
the applicant or developer and the municipality are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by the municipality and the
applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer
shall be presumed fair and reasonable, and shall be the final estimate.
In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of
said engineer shall be paid equally by the municipality and the
applicant or developer. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.13.5. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may, at the
Municipality's sole discretion, be increased by an additional 10% for
each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of
financial security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of
completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the
expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above bidding
procedure. Failure to increase the financial security in any single year
60.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.13
1:528
shall not be deemed a waiver of the Municipality's rights in any
subsequent year. In the case where development is projected over a
period of years, the Council may authorize submission of final plats
by section or stages of development subject to such requirements
or guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
60.13.6. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the council to release
or authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Council, and the Council shall have 45 days from
receipt of such request within which to allow the municipal engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Council that such portion of the work upon the
improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved
plat. Upon such certification the Council shall authorize release by the
bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by
the municipal engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Council fails to act within said fortyfive
day period, the Council shall be deemed to have approved the
release of funds as requested.
60.13.7. The Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated
cost of the aforesaid improvements. Where the Council accepts
dedication of all or some of the required improvements following
completion, the Council may require the posting of financial security to
secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the
functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18
months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this section
with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of the
financial security shall be 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
60.13.8. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility
or municipal authority separate and distinct from the Municipality,
financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof
shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling
public utility or municipal authority and shall not be included within the
financial security as otherwise required by this section.
60.13.9. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Municipality shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the erection
60.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.13
1:529
60.14. Recording of final plan.
60.15. Commencement of development. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 5-8-89F]
or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or
land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual completion of the
improvements depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said
financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any
building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following:
the improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing
public roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise
permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all other
improvements as depicted upon the approved plat either upon the lot
or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
60.14.1. Upon the approval of a final plat the developer shall, within 90 days
of such final approval, record such plat in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Allegheny County.
60.14.2. Failure of recording a final plat within the prescribed time
limitations will require the applicant to request updating approval of
the Municipal Council.
60.14.3. No permanent certificate of use, occupancy and compliance under
the Municipal Zoning Ordinance shall be issued for any proposed land
development or subdivision until the final plat is recorded and two
copies and one reproducible Mylar copy of the final plan as recorded by
the Recorder of Deeds are submitted to the Municipality and all
required fees are paid.
60.15.1. No construction or land disturbance activities (not including soil or
percolation testing, well drilling, or similar engineering or surveying
activities) shall be commenced until the applicant submits to the
Municipal Engineer two paper copies, one reproducible Mylar copy and
a digital file of the plat as recorded by the Recorder of Deeds. The
digital file is to be in a format that is acceptable to the Municipality.
[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 12-11-06B]
60.15.2. No application for a building permit under the Municipal Zoning
Ordinance shall be submitted and no building permit under the
Municipal Zoning Ordinance shall be issued for any building in any
subdivision and no work shall be done on any building in any
subdivision until the final plans for the said subdivision have been
approved and recorded as provided for, the development agreement has
been fully executed, and until the terms of this ordinance have been
satisfied. Further, where final subdivision approval has been
conditioned upon the submission and approval of individual lot grading
plans for some or all of the lots, no building permit shall be issued for
60.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.15
1:530
60.16. Time limitation of plans. [Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
11-12-12F]
60.17. Plan amendments. [Amended 5-8-1987 by Ord. No. 5-8-87E;
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12F]
construction on any such lot until this condition has been complied
with.
60.15.3. No application for a building permit under the Municipal Zoning
Ordinance shall be submitted and no building permit under the
Municipal Zoning Ordinance shall be issued for any building in any land
development and no work shall be done on any building in any land
development until the preliminary plans for the said land development
have been approved as provided for, the development agreement has
been fully executed and until the terms of this ordinance have been
satisfied.
60.15.4. No water system or sewer system, including extensions to existing
or proposed systems or new systems employing sewage treatment
plants, shall be constructed prior to the issuance of appropriate permits
from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources or from
federal or local agencies, as required.
60.16.1. The continuing validity of any approval of plans in accordance with
this article shall be subject to those limitations established by the
Municipalities Planning Code. In the event the developer or applicant
fails to record any plans or documents in the time period prescribed by
the Municipal Code and/or the MPC, Municipal Council, at its judgment,
may reapprove the plan in accordance with the previous approval for
recording purposes. There is to be no charge to the applicant or
developer for the initial reapproval of said plan or document. Should
the developer or applicant fail for a second time to record the
reapproved plan within the prescribed time period, then any
subsequent request for reapproval is to be accompanied with a fee of
$125, payable to the Municipality.
60.17.1. Major modifications of the approved plan, as determined by the
Municipality, shall be resubmitted and reprocessed, including the
submittal of all applicable application fees, in the same manner as the
original plan. All site disturbance activities shall cease pending
approval of modified plans.
60.17.2. Minor modifications of the approved plan, as determined by the
Municipality, shall be submitted for review and approval to the
Subdivision Officer. If the Subdivision Officer, Code Official and
Municipal Engineer determine that the changes are in conformance
with all municipal land use regulations under their respective areas of
responsibilities, then the Subdivision Officer may approve the changes.
The request for the approval of the minor modification to the approved
60.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.17
1:531
plan is to be accompanied with a fee of $125, payable to the
Municipality.
60.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.17
1:532
ARTICLE V
Plan Contents Requirements
60.18. Preliminary plat. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.18.1. The preliminary plat shall provide:
1. The proposed layout of the entire property.
2. The approximate location of property lines, buildings, watercourses
and other existing physical features on or adjacent to the property.
3. The proposed location and width of streets; the size and square foot
area of lots.
4. Contours of the entire plat proposed to be subdivided at five-foot
intervals. Contours shall be based on the United States
Government Sandy Hook Datum.
5. Location and size of all existing storm and sanitary sewers, and a
preliminary layout of additional sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
stormwater handling facilities and necessary extensions thereof to
existing recognized and acceptable installations or facilities.
6. A separate profile of each established and proposed street, road or
other way, showing surface elevations on the center line, on the
property lines with grades along the roadway center line and along
the center line extended a reasonable distance beyond the plat,
shall be submitted with the plat.
7. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded
with the name of the allotter.
8. The names of all adjoining properties and allotments showing the
location of streets in said plats.
9. The scale of the preliminary plat shall not be less than 100 feet
equals one inch.
10. An arrow indicating the direction of North.
11. The plat shall show the location of proposed storm sewers and
catch basins and the capacity of the same.
12. The method of disposal of the discharge from sanitary and storm
sewers proposed to be constructed and the method of disposal of
discharge from sanitary or storm sewers already existing without
the boundaries of said plat which flows over the proposed plan,
which disposition must be lawful. In the case of storm sewers and
stormwater flow, it must be clearly shown where and how such
discharge and/or flow shall be conducted, i.e., whether through
existing storm sewers or existing natural watercourses. In the case
of natural watercourses, it must be shown by acceptable
60.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.18
1:533
60.19. Final plat.
engineering data that the natural watercourse is capable of
accepting and handling such discharge or flow without damage or
inconvenience to properties adjacent to or abutting its course.
13. Location, size and capacity of all drains and culverts as directed by
the Municipal Engineer.
14. Where the proposed subdivision is not totally within the confines of
the municipality or is in proximity of the boundary line, such
boundary line shall be accurately indicated on the plan.
15. A location map identifying the location of the proposed subdivision
or land development.
16. A storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size
of proposed lines and/or detention facilities.
17. The location and elevation of the one-hundred-year floodplain as
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or a
hydraulic/hydrologic study prepared, signed and sealed by an
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14]
18. A conceptual grading plan of the total area within the proposed
subdivision or land development showing existing and proposed
contours.
19. Location of all required permanent monuments.
20. In addition to the above preliminary plan requirements, land
developments shall also include, where applicable, the following:
a. The plan shall be drawn to scale and contain an appropriate
note stating that all pertinent information is copied from a
certified plot plan made from an up-to-date survey that reflects
existing ground conditions of the site.
b. The sale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. The
Municipal Engineer may upon written request of the applicant,
authorize the use of a smaller scale if the required data can be
clearly shown.
60.19.1. The final plat, in addition to the information supplied on the
preliminary plan shall provide:
1. The boundaries of the property, determined by courses and
distances, and the length and bearing of all lot lines; distances to
the nearest 1/100 of a foot, United States standard measure.
2. The boundary of the tract shall be determined by an accurate
survey in the field which must be balanced and closed, shown by
60.18 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.19
1:534
description on the plat and certified to be correct by registered
surveyor.
3. All lots numbered with square foot area of each lot indicated.
4. All parcels and units lettered with square foot area of each parcel
or unit indicated.
5. The lines of all proposed streets and any other portions of the
property intended to be dedicated for public use.
6. The lengths of the radii, arcs, chords, tangents and central angles
for all curved streets or lot lines.
7. The names of all adjoining subdivisions; the lines of all adjoining
property owners; the lines of all adjoining streets with their names
and widths.
8. All required forms such as endorsements, dedications and
certificates.
9. A location map identifying the location of the proposed subdivision
or land development.
10. The location and elevation of the one-hundred-year floodplain limits
as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or a
hydraulic/hydrologic study prepared, signed and sealed by an
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No. 9-8-14]
11. The location of all required permanent monuments and survey pins.
60.19.2. The final plat shall be drawn in accordance with the most recent
revisions of Allegheny County Planning Commission Subdivision
Regulations which is hereby adopted and made a part hereof by
reference.
60.19.3. In addition to the above final plan requirements, land developments
shall also include, where applicable, the following:
1. The locations and size of all buildings and uses.
2. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation features, including
vehicular access onto the site.
3. Height and bulk of all structures.
4. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
5. Landscaping buffer strips where required.
6. Dimensions of all existing and proposed utilities, including sanitary
and storm sewers and including easements.
7. Existing watercourses.
60.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.19
1:535
8. Storage and garbage facilities, if out-of-doors.
9. Location of all applicable minimum yard setbacks.
60.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.19
1:536
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
The following standards shall be complied with in all subdivisions or land
developments in the municipality.
60.20. General.
60.21. Street layout and design.
60.20.1. Extension of facilities. In order to provide service for the
subdivision and land development or to relieve any facilities
overburdened by the development of the subdivision, Council may
require that the developer extend street, sewer or drainage facilities to
intersect, join, meet or be connected with existing street, sewer or
drainage facilities beyond the property being developed. It is the intent
of this section to encourage rational development of land within the
municipality, and to discourage isolated, spotty, or overextended
development which presents burdensome and excessive servicing costs
to the municipality. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
requiring Council to approve such development in the first instance.
60.20.2. Lots. In general, sizes and shapes of lots shall be in conformity with
good planning. No subdivision plan will be approved by the Council
unless all lots whereon buildings are intended to be constructed shall,
in the opinion of the Council, be of such character that they can be used
for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood,
landslide or other hazard.
60.20.3. Electric power service including distribution, service laterals and
streetlighting facilities shall be in accordance with current
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission requirements. All costs for
streetlighting systems as required by municipal standards and
established by the power company servicing the plan, shall be borne by
the developer.
60.21.1. General.
1. All streets, when and wherever possible, shall connect with existing
roads so as to form one street and shall not be less in width than
such existing streets. All streets shall be graded to a minimum
width in accordance with the municipality standards herein
referred to, and all bridges, culverts and storm sewers shall be
constructed for the full width of the right-of-way of such streets or
as specified by the Municipal Engineer.
2. Where lots in a proposed subdivision or land development abut
existing streets whose right-of-way is less than Municipal
standards, there shall be dedicated for public use right-of-way
width required to accommodate any public improvements which
60.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.21
1:537
are part of the subdivision or land development approval.
[Amended 6-13-1994 by Ord. No. 6-13-94B]
3. Where lots abut existing municipal streets, the cartway of which is
not paved or curbed in accordance with municipal specifications,
the landowner or developer may be required to pave and curb such
municipal street for 1/2 of the width of the cartway. Council may
accept other acceptable security in lieu of the actual required
paving and curbing. Council, acting on the advice of the Engineer,
shall decide if such paving and curbing or security thereof shall be
required in these instances.
60.21.2. Right-of-way. [Amended 6-13-1994 by Ord. No. 6-13-94B]
1. No street in a subdivision, plot or replot of land shall have a width
of less than 50 feet.
2. (Reserved) [Repealed 6-13-1994 by Ord. No. 6-13-94B]
3. Cartway width.
a. Single-family subdivisions: 26 feet back to back of curb.
b. Duplexes and townhouses, either:
i. Development not exceeding four buildings and not
requiring any new street for access to the units or lots: 24
feet, or
ii. All other: 30 feet.
c. Streets abutting apartments, commercial or industrial lots: as
determined by a study of trip generator or as determined by
the Municipal Standards.
4. Street paving. All paving and curbing of streets shall be
constructed strictly in accordance with the details as set forth in
the Municipal Standards. At intersections with state or county
roads, details shall conform to state or county requirements,
respectively. All fills shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance
with the Grading Ordinance of Bethel Park and completely
consolidated before any paving is placed thereon. Shoulders of
streets, including driveways, shall not slope more than threefourths
inch per foot above or below the curbs and shall be
adequately drained. Driveways constructed across sidewalk areas
shall conform to shoulder grades.
5. Grades. No grade of less than 1 1/2% nor more than 12% will be
permitted. Leveling areas at all intersections shall be provided. No
change in grade can be at a greater rate than 1% in 10 feet on
residential streets or 1% in 20 feet on through streets as defined by
the Council.
60.21 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.21
1:538
6. Building lines. A minimum building line to meet the zoning
regulations of the district in which the lot is located will be
required on all lots in a subdivision, said building line to be
established from the required minimum right-of-way (or side line)
of all present or proposed streets, roads or ways and, in addition,
shall be so located as to provide 100 feet clear sight distance
measured from center line of each street in the case of corners.
Exceptions to building lines may be granted where slope conditions
warrant. The owner shall illustrate these conditions as a proposed
layout showing the topographical contours of the property. Corner
lots shall, in addition to the above-required building line, provide a
building line parallel to the side street as required by the zoning
regulations.
7. Block dimensions. For residential developments the minimum
length shall be 500 feet and the maximum length, 1,500 feet.
8. Street names. Due care shall be exercised in the selection of street
names to ascertain that there is no duplication in the same post
office service area or in the Pittsburgh Postal Delivery District. A
letter from the local postmaster certifying that the street names
used are not duplications of street names within the same post
office service area or in the Pittsburgh Postal Delivery District shall
be filed by the developer. Street names shall be supplied the
municipality for preparation of street name signs using
municipality standards. A check for $100 per sign shall accompany
the list to cover preparations and installation by municipality
forces.
9. Intersections. All street intersection shall be at right angles, where
topography permits, and shall be connected by radii of at least 25
feet.
10. Lots.
a. Lot lines shall be perpendicular to, parallel to or concentric
with street lines, as the case may be, except where approved
by the Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission because it is desirable or expedient. All lots shall
be such as to meet the zoning regulations of the district in
which the lot is located. Lots on a curve shall have sufficient
width so as to provide a minimum width at the building line to
meet zoning regulations of the district in which it is located. No
lot shall include any part of the public right-of-way to be
dedicated.
b. Flag lots shall not be approved.
11. Dead ends and cul-de-sac.
60.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.21
1:539
a. Dead-end streets terminating in a cul-de-sac with a minimum
right-of-way radius of 50 feet is permitted when it is evident
that either:
i. The surrounding topography would not allow the
connection of the street to any other streets; or
ii. Existing development would prohibit the extension.
12. Where a street terminates at the proposed plan line, wherein there
is indication that said street will be extended with future
development, a turnaround as approved by the Municipal Engineer
shall be provided.
13. Dead-end streets or cul-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length,
unless the Planning Commission after study of the site, deems it
desirable and so recommends.
14. Monuments and survey points for all major subdivisions. No less
than two permanent monuments for each new street shall be set at
such points as may be designated by the Municipal Engineer. The
Municipal Engineer may require additional monuments based upon
topography, length of street and size of plan. In addition, all corners
on the outside perimeter of the plat shall be marked by smooth
steel survey pins one inch in diameter and three feet long
(reinforcing rods are not acceptable.) If monuments have not been
set at the time the final plat is submitted to Council, there shall be
deposited with the Municipal Secretary a certified check or bond in
the amount of $1000 per monument and $250 per pin. The amount
of such check or bond will be returned as soon as the monuments
have been set by the developer in accordance with this article, and
as provided by the Municipal Engineer. If such work has not been
completed within two years after the approval of the final plat, the
Municipal Engineer may cause the monuments to be set, and pay
for the same out of the proceeds of the aforesaid certified check.
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
15. Traffic control signs. Traffic control signs be installed as prescribed
by the Municipal Engineer and Police Department. All costs
associated with these installations shall be borne by the developer.
Appropriate security guaranteeing the installation of same shall be
provided to the municipality at the time of the execution of the
development agreement.
16. Partial subdivisions. The owner or owners of a tract or parcel of
land out of which a partial subdivision is proposed shall submit to
the Commission, along with and in addition to the plat for the
proposed subdivision, a separate plat covering the remainder of
such tract or parcel of land shall set forth the proposed lots,
location of proposed and existing streets and preliminary plan of
drainage, as well as other pertinent information necessary to
60.21 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.21
1:540
60.22. (Reserved)73
60.23. Sewage disposal.
60.24. Street trees.
safeguard the protection of property and to provide for the health,
safety and general welfare of the public and community.
1. Sanitary sewers. All sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance
with the requirements of the Department of Environmental Resources
as to flows, capacities, manholes and supports and cover, but in no case
will a slope of less than 1% be approved. In addition to these
requirements, all service lines and lateral service lines shall be
extended to the property line of the property being served. Required
vents shall be so located that they will not permit the entry of surface or
stormwater into the sanitary sewer. All construction related to sanitary
sewers shall be in conformity with the Municipal Standards.
2. Septic tanks. Where sanitary sewer service is unavailable, septic tanks
for individual homes or buildings may be installed and used until such
time as sanitary sewer service shall become available. Septic tanks
shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the minimum
requirements of the Federal Housing Administration and PA DER, and
must be approved by the Allegheny County Health Department.
3. All storm and sanitary sewer installations, including laterals and house
connections, shall be certified as meeting municipal standards and
good engineering practice by the Building Inspector or Municipal
Engineer. Certification on a daily basis prior to backfill shall be the
minimum requirement for approval and acceptance of installation by
the municipality.
60.24.1. Street trees are required along both sides of all new streets, subject
to the following stipulations:
1. Trees shall be spaced at intervals not more than 50 feet.
2. Trees shall be alternately planted on both sides of the street.
3. Trees planted shall be not less than two inches in diameter when
they measure three feet above the ground.
4. No trees shall be planted within 50 feet of a street intersection.
5. The exact location and planting of trees shall be in accordance with
specifications of the Municipal Engineering Department.
6. All trees shall be in conformance with an approved tree list adopted
by the Planning Commission.
73.Editor’s Note: Former Section 60.22, Drainage, as amended, was repealed 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 8-13-18A.
60.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.24
1:541
60.25. Floodplain requirements. [Amended 9-8-2014 by Ord. No.
9-8-14]
60.26. Municipal standards.
60.24.2. Selection of species for the tree list shall be based upon the
following criteria:
1. Root system is not the type to damage underground utilities.
2. Species is not overly susceptible to disease.
3. Species provides shade to the street at maturity.
4. Species does not have any characteristics that are a general
nuisance or maintenance problem.
5. Species is not overly susceptible to salt damage.
60.25.1. Any subdivision or land development proposed in a floodplain shall
comply with the requirements in the Bethel Park Floodplain
Management Ordinance.74
60.26.1. The Municipal Engineer shall prepare detail plans and
specifications (herein, before and after "Municipal Standards") which
shall specify how any improvements required by this ordinance shall be
constructed. The Municipal Standards shall include, without
limitations, street standards, sewer standards, and street tree
standards. The Municipal Standards in effect on the date of enactment
of this ordinance are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set forth herein. The Municipal Engineer may from time to time revise
all or a portion of the Municipal Standards but the same shall not be
effective until approved by resolution of Council.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Floodplain Management.
60.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.26
1:542
ARTICLE VII
Construction and Acceptance of Improvements
60.27. Construction required.
60.28. Inspections.
60.27.1. The applicant shall construct all streets, together with all other
improvements, including grading, paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, street signs, shade trees, storm
drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, landscaping, traffic control devices,
open space and restricted areas, and erosion and sediment control
measures in conformance with the final plan as approved, and other
applicable state and county regulations.
60.28.1. The construction or installation of all improvements shall at all
times be subject to inspection by representatives of the Municipality at
costs to the developer as prescribed in the Municipal Code. If such
inspection reveals that work is not in accordance with approved plans
and specifications, that construction is not being done in a workmanlike
manner, or that erosion or sediment controls are failing to prevent
accelerated erosion or water-borne sediment from leaving the site of
construction, the said representative is empowered to require
corrections to be made and/or the suspension of subdivision approval,
and to issue a cease and desist order.
60.28.2. The said cease and desist order shall be terminated upon
determination by the Municipality that the said defects or deviations
from plan requirements have been corrected.
60.28.3. No underground pipes, structures, subgrades, or base course shall
be covered until inspected and approved by the Municipality. These
inspections shall be made in accordance with provisions contained
herein and shall occur at the following intervals:
1. Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
installing permanent drainage or other site improvements, or
establishing covers.
2. Upon excavation and completion of subgrade.
3. Upon excavation, installation, and completion of drainage
structures, community sewage systems, or water supply systems.
4. Before placing stone base course, or before initial layer of
screenings.
5. Before binder course.
6. Before wearing course.
7. Final inspection.
60.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.28
1:543
60.29. As-built plans.
60.30. Dedication and acceptance of public improvements.
60.28.4. The developer shall notify the designated representative of the
Municipal Engineer at least 24 hours in advance of completion of any
construction operations requiring an inspection.
60.29.1.Within 30 days after completion and Municipality approval of
subdivision or land development improvements as shown on final plans,
and before municipal acceptance of any portion of such improvements,
if any, the developer shall submit to the Municipal Engineer a corrected
copy of said plans showing actual dimensions and conditions of streets
and all other improvements, certified by a professional engineer to be in
accordance with actual construction. All sanitary lateral sewer stub
ends shall be located in addition to station and length by cross tie
dimensions extending from adjacent manholes.
60.30.1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall notify the Municipality,
in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal
Engineer. The municipal governing body shall direct the Municipal
Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements and to file a
report indicating approval or rejection of said improvements as
prescribed by the MPC. The Municipal Council shall approve or reject
said improvements as prescribed by the MPC. [Amended 5-8-1989 by
Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.30.2. The Council may require that certain subdivision and land
development improvements remain undedicated, with maintenance,
reconstruction, and repair, the responsibility of individual lot owners, a
homeowners' association or similar entity, or an organization capable of
carrying out maintenance responsibilities. In such an event the
applicant shall submit to the Municipality for review and approval by
the Municipal Solicitor, drafts of such legal documents as are necessary
to insure compliance with this subsection. No building permits shall be
issued until such documents are approved and recorded in the
Allegheny County Recorder's office.
60.30.3. The Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
shall determine whether or not any street shown on a plat, completely
within the confines of said plat, shall be a public or private street.
60.30.4. Council may allow certain improvements to be deferred provided
such deferment and the requirement for future installation is placed
upon the final plat as recorded.
60.28 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.30
1:544
ARTICLE VIII
Administration
60.31. Relief from unnecessary hardships.
60.32. Records.
60.33. Fees. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F; 2-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 2-12-96B; 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 6-9-03B; 11-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 11-12-12F]
60.31.1. The Council, upon the request by the landowner or developer
setting forth the justifications therefor and after receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and Municipal Engineer,
may, in its sole discretion, approve deviations from the requirements of
this ordinance relative to building lines, easements and other matters of
minor consideration, provided they are to the best interests of the
Municipality and to the proper and best use of the land. No deviations
from ordinance provisions shall constitute a variance or waiver of any
requirement of the Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance.
60.32.1. The Municipality shall assign a subdivision application number to
all subdivision and land development applications, and all matters
referring to an application shall be filed in accordance with the
subdivision case number. The Municipality shall keep a record of its
findings, decisions, and recommendations relative to all plans filed with
it for review.
60.32.2. All such records shall be public records.
60.33.1. Application fee. All applications for subdivision and land
development approval shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance
with the following schedule:
1. Major subdivision: $350 for the first two lots, plus $25 for each
additional lot.
2. Minor subdivisions: $50 per subdivision.
3. Sub-minor land development: $300.
4. Minor land development: $500.
5. Major land development: $700.
6. Conditional use: $700.
60.33.2. Review fee. Any costs incurred by the Municipality for consultant
fees to review a subdivision or land development application will be
borne by the developer.
60.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.33
1:545
60.34. Preventative remedies, enforcement remedies and penalties.
[Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
60.33.3. Development fee. All approved subdivisions involving development
shall pay a development permit fee in accordance with the following
schedule:
1. All subdivisions: $125 for the first two lots plus $25 for each
additional lot.
60.33.4. Inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be charged to the developer
at a minimum of not less than 1 3/4% of the development costs as
determined in the development agreement, and in such greater
reasonable amount to cover the Municipality's cost of inspections,
including, without limitation, fringe benefits, support and
administration.
60.33.5. Legal fees. Fees of the Municipal Solicitor for preparation of the
development agreement shall be paid by the developer.
60.33.6. All fees shall be credited to the general revenue fund and are not
refundable if said application is withdrawn by the applicant or
disapproved by Council.
60.33.7. The fee schedule for subdivision and land development related
items contained within this section of the Code may be changed from
time to time by a resolution of Council. The fees are to be identified
within the Bethel Park Code, Chapter 34, Fees.
60.33.8. Prior to release of the approved documents for recording, all fees
required to date shall be paid.
60.34.1. The Municipality may institute and maintain appropriate actions by
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises in accordance with the
MPC.
60.34.2. Furthermore, any person, partnership or corporation who or which
has violated the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance may be
prosecuted by the Municipality in accordance with the MPC.
60.33 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.34
1:546
ARTICLE IX
Required Certificates
60.34A. Required certificates.
The appropriate certificates stated below shall be inscribed with black
waterproof India ink or varitype on the linen tracing, exactly as stated,
and shall be properly signed with black waterproof India ink and attested
when the plan is submitted for review or approval by the Allegheny County
Planning Commission.
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That (I or We)
____________________of the Municipality of Bethel Park, of the County of
Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for (myself, ourselves), (my,
our) heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, do hereby adopt this plan
as (my, our) Plan of Lots of (my, our) property, situate in Municipality of
Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and for divers advantages
accruing to (me, us), do hereby dedicate forever, for public use for highway
purposes all slope areas and all drives, roads, streets, lanes, ways and
other public highways shown upon the plan, with the same force and
effect as if the same had been opened through legal proceedings, and in
consideration of the approval of said plan, and any future acceptance of
said public highways by the said Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County
of Allegheny and Municipality of Bethel Park, (I, we) hereby covenant and
agree to and by these presents do release and forever discharge said
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Allegheny and Municipality of
Bethel Park, their successors or assigns from any liability for damages
arising and to arise from any appropriation of said ground for public
highways and the physical grading thereof to any grades that may be
established hereafter at any time. This dedication and release shall be
binding upon (Name of Owner), (my, our) heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns and purchasers of lots in this plan.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, (I, We) hereunto set (my, our) hand and seal this
_____ day of ____________________, 19___.
Attest:
Notary Public
Owner
60.34A GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.34A
1:547
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS; that the (Name of Corporation),
a corporation incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, by virtue of a resolution of the Board of Directors, thereof,
does hereby adopt this plan as its Plan of Lots of its property situate in
Municipality of Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and for divers
advantages accruing to it, does hereby dedicate forever, for public use for
highway purposes, all slope areas and all drives, roads, streets, lanes and
ways and other public highways shown upon the plan, with the same legal
proceedings, and in consideration of the approval of said plan, and any
future acceptance of said public highways by the said Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, County of Allegheny, and Municipality of Bethel Park, (Name
of Corporation) hereby covenants and agrees to and by these presents does
release and forever discharge said Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County
of Allegheny, and Municipality of Bethel Park, their successors or assigns
from any liability for damages arising and to arise from the appropriation
of said ground for public highways and the physical grading thereof to any
grades that may be established hereafter at any time. This dedication and
release shall be binding upon (Name of Corporation), its successors and
assigns and purchasers of lots in this plan.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the said corporation has caused its corporate seal
to be affixed by the hand of its President and same to be attested by its
secretary this _____ day of ____________________, 19___.
Attest: Name of Corporation
Secretary
(Seal)
President
COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA
)
ss:
COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY )
Before me, the subscriber, a Notary Public in and for said Commonwealth
and County, personally appeared the above named (Name of Owner), and
acknowledged the foregoing release and dedication and plan to be (his, her,
their) act and deed and desired the same to be recorded as such.
Sworn to and subscribed before me this day.
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS _____ day of
____________________, 19___.
My Commission Expires the _____ day of ____________________, 19___.
(Seal)
Notary Public
60.34A BETHEL PARK CODE 60.34A
1:548
COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA
)
ss:
COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY )
Before me, the subscriber, a Notary Public in and for said Commonwealth
and County, personally appeared (Name and Title of Officer) of the (Name
of Corporation) who being duly sworn, deposeth and saith that he was
personally present at the execution of the adoption, release and dedication
and saw the common and corporate seal of the said corporation duly
affixed and that the above release and dedication was duly signed and
sealed by and as for the act and deed of the said (Name of Corporation),
for the uses and purposes therein mentioned and that the name of this
deponent subscribed to the said release and dedication as (Title of Officer)
of said corporation. In attestation of the due execution and delivery of said
release and dedication is this deponent's own and proper and respective
handwriting.
Title of Officer
Sworn to and subscribed before me this day.
WITNESS MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS _____ day of
____________________, 19___.
My Commission Expires the _____ day of ____________________, 19___.
(Seal)
Notary Public
I, (or We) (Name of Owner) owners of the title of this property is in the
name of as recorded in Deed Book Volume page, Recorder of Deeds Office.
I (or We) further certify that there is no mortgage, lien or encumbrance
against this property.
Witness
Owner
I, (or We) (Name of Mortgagee) mortgages of the property embraced in
this plan of subdivision, vision, (Name of Plan), do hereby consent to the
recording of said plan in the Recorder's Officer's of Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania and to the dedications and covenants appearing hereon.
Witness
Mortgagee
60.34A GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.34A
1:549
I (or We) (Name of Mortgagee) mortgagee of the property embraced in
this (Name of Plan), do hereby consent to the recording of said plan in
the Recorder of Deeds Office of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and to the
dedications and covenants appearing hereon.
Witness
Mortgagee
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT (I or We) Name of owner/
developer) of the (City, Borough, Municipality) of PA, of the County of
Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for (myself, ourselves), (my,
our) heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, do hereby adopt this
plan as (my, our) (Plan of Lots, Land Development) of (my, our) property,
situated in (City, Borough, Township, Municipality), Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, and for divers advantages accruing to (me, us), do hereby
dedicate forever, for public use for highway purposes all slope areas and
all drives, roads, streets, lanes, ways and other public highways shown
upon the plan, with the same force and effect as if the same had been
through legal proceedings, and in consideration of the approval of said
plan, any future acceptance of said public highways by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, County of Allegheny, and (City, Borough, Township,
Municipality) of PA, (I, We) hereby covenant and agree to and by these
presents do release and forever discharge said Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, County of Allegheny and (City, Borough, Township,
Municipality) of ____________________, their successors or assigns from any
liability for damages arising and to arise from any appropriation of said
ground for public highways and the physical grading thereof to any grades
that may be established. This dedication and release shall be binding
upon (Name) (My, Our) heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and
purchasers of (Lots, Units) in this plan.
(I or We) (Owner/Developer) also hereby agree to record a survey of
final construction of each lot with the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Allegheny County prior to any conveyance of any part thereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, (I, We) hereunto set (My, Our) hand and seal this
_____ day of ____________________, 19___.
ATTEST:
Notary Public Owner/Developer
I, ____________________, a Registered Surveyor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, do hereby certify that this plan correctly represents the lots,
lands, streets and highways as surveyed and plotted by me for the owners
or agents.
(Seal) (Signature of Surveyor)
Date Registration Number
60.34A BETHEL PARK CODE 60.34A
1:550
The Municipal Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park hereby gives
public notice that in approving this plan for recording purposes only, the
Municipality of Bethel Park assumes no obligations, legal or otherwise,
expressed or implied either to accept said streets as Municipal streets or
roads or grade, pave and curb the streets in said plan, or to construct
sewers therein or to install any other such service ordinarily installed in
Municipal streets or roads.
(Seal)
Secretary President
Approved by the Municipal Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park by
Resolution, this _____ day of ____________________, 19___.
(Seal)
Secretary President of Council
Reviewed by the Municipal Planning Commission this _____ day of
____________________, 19___.
(Seal)
Secretary Chairman
Reviewed by the Allegheny County Planning Commission this _____ day of
____________________, 19___.
Director
COMMONWEALTH OF
PENNSYLVANIA
)
ss:
COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY )
Recorded in the Recorder's Office for the recording of deeds, plans, etc., in
said County in Plan Book Volume _____ Page _____.
Given under my hand and seal this _____ day of ____________________, 19___.
(Seal)
Recorder
I, ____________________, a Registered Professional Engineer for the
Municipality of Bethel Park do hereby certify that this subdivision plan
meets all the engineering and design requirements of the Municipality of
Bethel Park Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
Date
Reg. No.
(Seal)
Signature
60.34A GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.34A
1:551
Approval of this Subdivision, or execution of this Linen, is no guarantee by
the Municipality of Bethel Park that any or all sewer connections or taps
necessary for completion of this entire plan will be approved or issued.
The Municipality of Bethel Park of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania agrees
not to issue Building Permits or to permit development on any portion
of this plan until such time as sewage disposal planning is completed
in accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
Note: A Pennsylvania Dept. of Transportation Highway Occupancy Permit
is required pursuant to Section 420 of the "State Highway Law" before
driveway access to a state highway is permitted
An easement for (drainage) (slope) (sanitary sewer) purposes and for the
installation, repair and replacement of utilities over the easement parcels
located in the Municipality of Bethel Park, County of Allegheny and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and designated as" "on the subdivision
plan.
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, the said easements for drainage and/or slopes
and for the installation, repair and replacement of utilities and associated
purposes and for no other use or purpose whatsoever.
And the said Owners, for themselves, their successors and assigns, by
these presents covenant, promise and agree to and with the Municipality of
Bethel Park, its successors and assigns, that neither the Owners nor their
successors or assigns, shall nor will at any time hereafter, ask, demand,
recover or receive of or from the said Municipality, its successors and
assigns any sum or sums of money as and for damages for or by reason
of the implementation of the easements herein conveyed except for any
cost for replacement of existing improvements damage by utilization of the
easement.
60.34A BETHEL PARK CODE 60.34A
1:552
ARTICLE X
Subdivision Development Improvement Agreement
60.35. Agreement.
60.35.1. The developer shall execute the following form before linen is
released for recording:
THIS AGREEMENT, made this _____ day of ____________________, 19___,
(hereinafter "Owner"), AND MUNICIPALITY OF BETHEL PARK, a Home
Rule municipality in the County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania (hereinafter "Municipality").
WITNESSETH THAT:
WHEREAS, Owner owns all of the property described in Exhibit "A"
attached hereto and made a part hereof, said property being the (insert
Plan Name) ____________________ (hereinafter "Plan"); and
WHEREAS, Owner desires, to begin development of Phase _____ of Plan,
said phase defined (insert drawing identification) ____________________
and construction schedule set forth on; and
WHEREAS, Owner desires, upon approval of the Plan, to construct
and to dedicate to public use (hereinafter collectively referred to as
"Improvements") shown on Plan and more fully described in the (insert
construction plan identification) ____________________ prepared by
consisting of ____________________ incorporated herein by reference
(before and hereinafter "Drawings") and to have such Improvements
accepted by the Municipality as a part of the public improvements of
the Municipality; and
WHEREAS, the Owner desires upon approval of the Plan to construct
certain private facilities, including without limitation (insert list of
improvements) ____________________ (hereinafter "Private Facilities");
and
WHEREAS, Owner and Municipality agree as to scope of work and all
development conditions concerning Phase _____ of Plan;
NOW THEREFORE, the parties hereto, intending to be legally bound
hereby, agree as follows:
FIRST: The recitals set forth above are incorporated herein as if fully
set forth below.
SECOND: That Owner shall, within six months after the execution
of this Agreement, enter into a contract with a contractor(s) for the
Facilities, to be completed within six months thereafter, or perform the
work itself in accordance with Drawings and in regard to Improvements
in accordance with plans and specifications adopted by the Council
of the Municipality, and to complete same within one year after the
60.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.35
1:553
execution of such agreement, except for those improvements
specifically deferred pursuant to the terms of Section Tenth below.
THIRD: The entire cost of Improvements and Private Facilities, as
hereinabove set forth, shall be paid to the contractor or contractors by
Owner promptly upon completion of said work; and Owner shall also
pay the cost of supervision and inspection by the Municipal Engineer in
charge thereof.
FOURTH: The Owner covenants and agrees to indemnify and save
harmless the Municipality from any liability whatsoever that shall
accrue to any person or corporation by reason of negligence or
intentional conduct in the performance of the work herein referred to,
or for any reason whatsoever arising from the performance by Owner
of the provisions of this Agreement.
FIFTH: The Municipality, upon completion of all of the following: (i)
completion of the work hereinabove described, (ii) receipt of a
certificate from the Municipal Engineer that the said work has been
done, (iii) receipt of "as-built" drawings, and (iv) official action of
Council by ordinance, shall accept the dedication of Improvements as a
part of the (insert system names) system of the Municipality.
SIXTH: When the Municipality or its duly authorized representatives
approve the Plan as submitted for recording purposes, a reference
on the Plan will be made to this Agreement, the quotation to be in
substance as follows: "Approved for recording only, subject to all
provisions of a contract relating to the installation of Improvements,
executed by and between the Owner and the Municipality of Bethel
Park, a copy of which is on file in the Municipality Office."
SEVENTH: The Owner shall, simultaneously with the execution of this
Agreement, provide to the Municipality security acceptable to the
Municipality in the amount of (insert bond amount), or in an amount
equal to 110% of the cost of the required Improvements and Private
Facilities as established by a bona fide bid or bids from the contractor
or contractors chosen by Owner to complete the Improvements, such
security to be presented at the Municipal Office to guarantee the
installation of the Improvements which will serve this subdivision plan.
If the Owner requires more than one year from the date of posting
of the financial security to complete the required Improvements, the
amount of financial security shall be increased, upon written demand
by Municipality, by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of the financial security, or to
an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
Improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure. The
failure of the Municipality to require increased financial security in any
one-year period shall not be deemed to waive the Municipality's right
to require additional financial security in later years.
60.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.35
1:554
EIGHTH: The Owner has prepared plans for a retention system to hold
no less than (insert capacity) cubic feet of stormwater runoff, said plans
to be submitted to Municipal Engineer for approval. Retention basin
shall be constructed as part of the ____________________ in Phase _____.
NINTH: Owner shall prepare a (insert type of association), (hereinafter
"Declaration"), subject to approval by Municipal Solicitor, to own and
maintain Private Facilities and shall immediately record same in the
Allegheny County Recorder's Office. Owner agrees that no release of
security set forth in Seventh Section above shall be due or made by
Municipality until Solicitor's approval has been obtained.
TENTH: The Owner may defer the installation of the following
improvements under the terms set forth below:
(Improvement name and conditions
ELEVENTH: The Owner shall cause to have all public utilities either
installed or relocated as may be appropriate to the development of this
subdivision, and shall do so at no cost to the Municipality.
TWELFTH: The Owner shall deposit with the Municipality the following
sums:
1) ($_____) in payment of the required inspection fees; 2) ($_____) for
issuance of a Development Permit; 3) ($_____) to guarantee installation
of (#) survey monuments.
THIRTEENTH: The Owner shall furnish four sets of both Drawings and
Improvement and Private Facilities plans to the Municipal Engineer
prior to the commencement of construction and one copy, plus one
Mylar reproducible copy and a digital file of the Plan as recorded. The
digital file is to be in a format that is acceptable to the Municipality. The
Mylar and digital file shall be presented to the Municipal Engineer's
office within 10 days following the recordation of the plan, accompanied
by a check in the amount of $10 payable to the order of the Municipality
in payment for the reproduction and distribution of the required copies.
[Amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 12-11-206B]
FOURTEENTH: Owner, prior to acceptance and as a condition to
acceptance, shall provide to Municipality a maintenance bond or other
financial security acceptable to Municipality equal to 15% of the total
cost of those Improvements to be accepted by Municipality. Said
maintenance bond shall secure the structural integrity and the
functioning of said Improvements for 18 months from the date of
acceptance thereof by Municipality. In addition, at the same time,
Owner shall post financial security of _____ Dollars ($_____) to guarantee
the installation of the following improvements deferred pursuant to
Section Tenth above: list improvements
FIFTEENTH: Without limitation on the duration of the financial security
provided in the Seventh Section above, should Owner apply for and
60.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.35
1:555
receive a Temporary Occupancy Permit pursuant to the provisions of
Ordinance 12-19-66A, the term of the financial security shall expire
no sooner than one year after the date of issuance of the Temporary
Occupancy Permit. In the case of Temporary Occupancy Permits issued
on a lot by lot basis, the term established pursuant to this Fifteenth
Section shall run from the last lot to be developed or the last Temporary
Occupancy Permit applied for, whichever is later.
SIXTEENTH: Owner agrees to pay Municipality within 10 days of
receipt of notice of amount thereof the following sums:
(1) All costs, if any, for the installation or relocation of streetlight poles,
lines, fixtures within the property described in Exhibit "A".
(2) All costs incurred by Municipality in the furnishing of material and
the installation of street identification and traffic control signs required
by development occurring in the Plan, whether these signs, signals, etc.
are within the property described in Phase _____ in Exhibit "A" or are
adjacent to it.
SEVENTEENTH: This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and shall
be binding upon the heirs, successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
EIGHTEENTH: This Agreement covers only Phase _____ of Plan and
nothing herein shall limit Municipality's rights to establish the terms
and conditions of future Subdivision Development Improvement
Agreements covering additional phases.
NINETEENTH: Time is of the essence as to all dates and time periods
for performance and payment of funds called for in this Agreement
TWENTIETH: Owner acknowledges that the _____ water shed may be
subject to a sewer moratorium or ban and that nothing whatsoever
in this Agreement shall be deemed a commitment, promise, allocation
or approval of sewer connection permits for lots within Plan. Owner
agrees to release and to indemnify and hold Municipality harmless
from all claims, actions, causes of action, costs and expenses, including
attorney's fees, arising from the grant or refusal to grant sewer
connection permits for lots within the water shed.
TWENTY-FIRST: Owner acknowledges that the Municipal Code
prohibits garbage pickup and snow removal by the Municipality on any
street in this Plan until such street has been accepted by ordinance of
the Municipality. Owner agrees to inform any purchaser of a lot within
this Plan of these restrictions prior to any sale to such purchaser.
THIS AGREEMENT is made by virtue of a Resolution of Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, passed at its meeting held on the ______ day
of ____________________, 19___.
60.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.35
1:556
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this
Agreement to be duly executed by their respective appropriate officers
and their corporate seals affixed, the day and year first above written.
WITNESS:
ATTEST: MUNICIPALITY OF BETHEL PARK
Secretary
By
President of Council
60.35.2. Owners, for and in consideration of the grant of this subdivision
plan as well as for diverse other considerations affecting the public
welfare which they seek to advance and intending to be legally bound
hereby, have granted and conveyed, and by these presents do grant and
convey unto the Municipality of Bethel Park, its successors and assigns:
60.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 60.35
1:557
Chapter 61
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
60.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 60.35
1:558
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
61.1. Short title.
61.2. Statement of findings.
61.1.1. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bethel Park
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
61.2.1. The governing body of the Municipality finds that:
1. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry
and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
2. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
3. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff
resulting from land development and redevelopment throughout a
watershed can also harm surface water resources by changing the
natural hydrologic patterns; accelerating stream flows (which
increases scour and erosion of streambeds and stream banks,
thereby elevating sedimentation); destroying aquatic habitat; and
elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and loadings such as
sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and pathogens. Groundwater
resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
4. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and supports the base
flow of streams.
5. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
6. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of the waters of the
commonwealth.
7. The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low-impact development
(LID) are intended to address the root cause of water quality
61.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.2
1:559
61.3. Purpose.
impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic
natural processes to:
a. Infiltrate and recharge;
b. Evapotranspire; and/or
c. Harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth.
Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
8. Federal and state regulations require municipalities to implement a
program of stormwater controls. Municipalities are required to
obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate
storm sewer system (MS4) under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
61.3.1. The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare
within the Municipality and its watersheds by minimizing the harms
and maximizing the benefits described in this chapter, through
provisions designed to:
1. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters
of the commonwealth.
2. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems close to their source by regulating activities that cause
these problems.
3. Preserve the natural drainage systems to the maximum extent
possible.
4. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
and groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
5. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
6. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and
prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
7. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a
minimum of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
8. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
9. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best
management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and
implemented.
61.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.3
1:560
61.4. Statutory authority.
61.5. Applicability.
61.6. Repealer.
61.7. Severability.
61.8. Compatibility with other requirements.
61.9. Duty of person engaged in the development of land.
10. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
11. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program
within MS4 permitted urbanized areas to address nonstormwater
discharges into municipal separate storm sewer systems.
12. Coordinate land development in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, County
and Municipal Comprehensive Plans, Watershed Plans, and other
plans of the Municipality and county.
61.4.1. The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,75
and/or the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et
seq., as amended, the Stormwater Management Act.
61.5.1. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are
subject to regulation by this chapter.
61.6.1. Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
61.7.1. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any
section or provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
61.8.1. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance.
61.9.1. Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including
exemptions, any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
61.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.9
1:561
61.10. Other approvals.
61.11. Erroneous permit.
61.12. Waivers.
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such
measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the
rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property and
water quality.
61.10.1. Compliance with this chapter does not preclude the need to obtain
other permits and approvals as may be required by the Municipality,
Allegheny County, the Allegheny County Conservation District, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the federal government or other
agencies. Other permits and approvals may include subdivision and
land development plan, zoning permits, building code permits, an
erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan, National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, water obstruction and
encroachment permit, dam safety permit, submerged lands license
agreement, Sections 401 and 404 of the Clean Water Act76 and others.
The most stringent of all pertinent requirements shall apply.
61.11.1. Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false,
misleading or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void
without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other
authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or
employee of the Municipality purporting to validate such a violation.
61.12.1. If the Municipality determines that any requirement under this
chapter cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the
Municipality may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures
other than those in this chapter. The request for a waiver or
modification shall originate with the landowner, shall be in writing, and
shall accompany the stormwater management site plan submission to
the Municipality. The request shall provide the facts on which the
request is based, the provision(s) of the chapter involved and the
proposed modification.
61.12.2.Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the Municipality (where the proposed area of disturbance
is less than one acre) if enforcement will exact undue hardship because
of unique physical circumstances or pre-existing site conditions
peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not
be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the
intended outcome, and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved.
76.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C.A. §§ 1341 and 1344.
61.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.12
1:562
61.13. Version of regulations and standards.
Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or preexisting
site conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of the Stormwater Management
Ordinance; and there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Stormwater
Management Ordinance. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Hardship cannot have been created by the
landowner or developer. Modification shall not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property. Modification may be considered if an alternative standard or
approach will provide equal or better achievement of the purpose of
the chapter. The Municipality cannot approve waivers or modifications
where the proposed area of disturbance is greater than or equal to one
acre.
61.12.3. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the Municipality unless that action is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
61.12.4. If the total proposed impervious surface is less than 400 square
feet, and there were no previous impervious surface additions created
after May 1, 2017, a stormwater management plan is not required.
61.13.1. Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard shall be
interpreted to refer to the latest or most current version of that
document.
61.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.13
1:563

ARTICLE II
Definitions
61.14. Interpretation; specific definitions.
61.14.1. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
2. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
3. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive. These definitions do not necessarily
reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or
statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
61.14.2. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture,
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the Municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the Municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural."
In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or measures refer to operational
and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or
measures are those that consist of a physical device or practice that
is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices,
from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands to smallscale
underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips,
low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
61.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.14
1:565
swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and
manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in
Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that
has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to
administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return
period."
DESIGNATED PLAN REVIEWER — A qualified professional, as defined
herein, or organization, such as the Allegheny County Conservation
District, that has been designated by the Municipality to be the
reviewer of SWM site plans for the Municipality, and shall be
understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Municipality
within this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the
next rainfall event.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road
maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is
worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and
studies as being a special flood hazard area; also includes areas that
61.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.14
1:566
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended
or replaced from time to time by DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary
of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies
provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management
plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on
the site where it is generated.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies
wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare
soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be
identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less pervious
as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
(or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor
living spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and
any new streets or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas
are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INVASIVE SPECIES — DCNR defines invasive plants as those species
that are not native to the state, grow aggressively, and spread and
displace native vegetation. (See http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/
61.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.14
1:567
public/documents/document/dcnr_010314.pdf for a list of invasive
species.)
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of
the following meanings:
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and
small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use
of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of
rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and
revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate,
filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely
on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses
stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features
located on site.
MUNICIPALITY — Bethel Park, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have historically grown in
Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously
SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the Municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under
Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
a. A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features;
b.
1.
2. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.77
3.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
61.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.14
1:568
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.78
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of
runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed condition's peak
rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — A watershed or portion of a watershed
for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167
stormwater management plan.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be
expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another
way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one
year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs
located adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SMALL PROJECT — Regulated activities that create additional
impervious areas of greater than 400 square feet and less than 1,000
square feet. The impervious area on a specific property will be
measured on a cumulative basis beginning on May 1, 2017.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.79
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land
resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or
man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater
management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and
retention basins; open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the developer or the developer's representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
61.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.14
1:569
accordance with this chapter. "Stormwater management site plan" will
be designated as "SWM site plan" throughout this chapter.
STREAM — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined
bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.80
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — See "stream."
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers,
lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts
thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse, or
other surface water of this commonwealth to a downstream point.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
61.14 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.14
1:570
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
61.15. Scope.
61.16. General requirements.
61.15.1. A stormwater management site plan shall be required for each
subdivision, land development and regulated activity, unless exempted.
The stormwater management site plan shall demonstrate effective
control of stormwater runoff and compliance with the stormwater
management requirements, standards and design criteria of this
chapter. The stormwater management site plan shall be an integral part
of each subdivision and land development plan at the preliminary and
final plan stage. For the purposes of this section of this chapter, the
following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
considered as land development for regulation by this chapter:
1. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (sidewalks,
driveways, parking lots, etc.); and
2. Installation of new impervious surfaces where gravel exists; and
3. Renovation of existing impervious surfaces which currently do not
have a stormwater management facility; and
4. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
and
5. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel;
and
6. Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto; and
7. Alteration of conditions that may increase or alter natural drainage
from the existing site.
61.16.1. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan
is specifically exempted:
1. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
2. No regulated activities shall commence until the Municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
3. The Municipality must be notified of construction operations prior
to commencement so that an inspection can be completed.
61.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.16
1:571
4. After the installation of the facility, the overseeing professional
engineer (design engineer) should submit a letter indicating that
the facility was installed per the approved plan.
61.16.2.SWM site plans approved by the Municipality shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
61.16.3. These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in
regulated activities.
61.16.4. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
SWM BMPs or open channels consistent with this chapter.
61.16.5. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property with permission from the receiving property owner,
the developer must document that adequate downstream conveyance
facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or
otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm
will result from the concentrated discharge, and downstream
easements shall be established to provide drainage paths for
concentrated discharge. Maximum use shall be made of the existing onsite
natural and man-made stormwater management facilities.
61.16.6. A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property
shall be within an existing watercourse or otherwise an easement shall
be required. Pipe outlets shall also be provided with erosion-resistant
material or energy dissipaters to calm the anticipated velocity and
discharge of stormwater.
61.16.7. Discharge points from any facility must be 15 feet from any
property line with adequate BMPs to ensure no channelizing of flows
onto neighboring property.
61.16.8. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. 81Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated.
61.16.9. Impervious areas:
1. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages;
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
61.16 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.16
1:572
2. For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter;
3. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
proposed impervious area on the parcel is subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
4. Any gravel or crushed stone surface existing prior to the issuance
of this chapter is to be assumed as pervious surface.
5. Any areas proposed to be gravel or crushed stone shall be
considered impervious.
6. The anticipated flooded surface area occurring within the site shall
be considered as impervious.
61.16.10. Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not
be created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise
altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s).
Notification shall include a description of the proposed development
and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased,
relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a
minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the
subject property of the SWM site plan; however, if in the judgment of
the designated plan reviewer additional properties might be affected,
additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed
postal receipt, for example) shall be included as part of the SWM plan
submission to the Municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject
to the requirements of this chapter.
61.16.11. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary
to:
1. Protect health, safety, and property.
2. Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
a. Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
b. Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
c. Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
d. Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
e. Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
3. Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual). If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
61.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.16
1:573
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification, acceptable
to the designated plan reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID
and green infrastructure is not practicable.
61.16.12. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site
at strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to
maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting
the other requirements of this chapter. If infiltration is utilized,
appropriate percolation test results must be provided.
61.16.13. Normally dry, open-top storage facilities should completely drain
both the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of
time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm.
61.16.14. The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of
peak rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage
Manual, Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest
version of the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National
Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver
Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 145 can be accessed at:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
61.16.15. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,82 and the Storm
Water Management Act.83
61.16.16. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.
61.16.17. The Municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve
measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law.84
61.16.18. Stormwater management facilities which involve a state highway
shall be subject to the approval of PennDOT.
61.16.19. Stormwater management facilities which involve a county
highway or a county facility shall be subject to the approval of
Allegheny County.
61.16.20. Minimization of impervious surfaces and maximization of
infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc.,
82.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
61.16 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.16
1:574
61.17. Exemptions.
are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or
eliminate the need for detention facilities.
61.16.21. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses other than
permanent streams, drainage easements shall be provided conforming
to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall
prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations
that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of
the easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation
within the easement, shall be required, except as approved by the
appropriate governing authority.
61.16.22. The Pa. Code, Title 25, Chapter 105, rules and regulations apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed, including work in wetlands. Inquiries on
permit requirements or other concerns shall be addressed to the DEP,
Bureau of Waterways Engineering and Wetlands, in Harrisburg.
61.16.23. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit application
process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, through the general
permit process.
61.16.24. Stormwater resulting from regulated activities shall not be
discharged into sinkholes.
61.16.25. To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques
for low-impact development practices described in the BMP Manual.
61.17.1. Regulated activities that result in an increase in the proposed
impervious area less than 400 square feet, if there were no previous
impervious surface additions after May 1, 2017 (regardless if the
existing surface is impervious), are exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.
61.17.2. Proposed impervious area between 400 square feet and 1,000
square feet of earth disturbance must submit an SWM site plan to the
Municipality, which shall consist of the items and related supportive
material needed to determine compliance with Section 61.18, Small
projects.
61.17.3. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
61.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.17
1:575
61.18. Small projects.
61.17.4. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the
SWM site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
61.17.5. Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects which do not
increase or change the impervious area/type and underground
infrastructure projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter,
provided the activities meet the requirements of all other municipal,
state and federal requirements.
61.17.6. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in Section 61.15.
61.17.7. The Municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to
this section at any time for any project that the Municipality believes
may pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
61.17.8. Voluntary green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects
that are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing
development and are not part of new development or redevelopment
are exempt from the stormwater management provisions of this
chapter. This does not exempt such projects from any other municipal,
state, or federal regulation.
61.18.1. Table 1 presents the Municipality's stormwater management
requirements for small projects. For projects that propose additional
impervious area to a parcel, the total proposed impervious area on the
parcel is subject to the requirements of this chapter. Impervious area is
described in Section 61.16.9.
Table 1 - Stormwater Management Requirements
No.
Square Feet of Proposed
Impervious Surface
Stormwater Management
Requirement
1 Less than 400 No requirements if there were
no previous impervious surface
additions after May 1, 2017
2 400 to 1,000 (small project) Capture and detain the first 2
inches of any storm event
3 Greater than 1,000 Comply with requirements of
this chapter
61.18.2. Stormwater management for small projects will consist of
capturing and detaining the first two inches of any storm event. For
small projects, consider the following:
1. Two inches of rain results in the following volumes that need to be
captured and detained:
61.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.18
1:576
400 sq. ft. * 2 in./(12 in./ft.) * 7.48 gal/cu. ft. = 499 gal.,
approximately 500 gallons of detention storage.
1,000 sq. ft. * 2 in./(12 in./ft.) * 7.48 gal/cu. ft. = 1247 gal.,
approximately it 1,250 gallons of detention storage.
2. Therefore, small project detention requirements range from 500
gallons to 1,250 gallons.
61.18.3. Capture and detention can be accomplished by a variety of
methods, including, but not limited to:
1. Rain barrels (could be drained through a soaker hose).
2. Rain gardens.
3. Stone sumps (dry wells) and infiltration trenches filled with clean,
AASHTO No. 3 stone, 40% void space.
4. Other methods as approved by the municipal staff.
5. A combination of methods.
61.18.4. In all cases, the detention method must be designed to drain all
accumulated runoff not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
after the end of the storm event. Appropriate soil percolation conditions
must be available for stone sumps and rain gardens, and demonstrated
by percolation tests.
61.18.5. A maintenance agreement must be signed by the property owner to
ensure the proper, continual inspection and maintenance of the capture
and detention method.
61.18.6. The property owner must submit the following stormwater
management information for review by the Municipality staff:
1. A written description of the proposed project, including the
dimensions of all proposed impervious surfaces.
2. A scale drawing showing existing and proposed features of the
property.
3. A written description of the proposed stormwater management
methods.
4. Dimensioned drawings of the proposed stormwater management
methods and their locations.
5. A list of proposed impervious surfaces and their square footage.
6. Supporting documentation, such as assumptions, calculations, rain
barrel size, stone size, percolation tests, etc.
7. Draft operation and maintenance agreement.
61.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.18
1:577
61.19. Stormwater management performance standards and design
criteria.
61.18.7. Construction of the proposed improvements will not begin prior to
receiving approval of the stormwater management plan from the
Municipality.
61.19.1. Stormwater management planning and stormwater management
facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
following.
61.19.2. General standards.
1. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices.
2. All stormwater runoff flowing over the development site shall be
considered in the design of the stormwater management facilities.
3. Runoff from impervious areas shall be drained to pervious areas of
the development site and the stormwater management control
facilities.
4. Stormwater runoff from a development site shall flow directly into a
natural watercourse, into an existing storm sewer system or onto
adjacent properties in a manner similar to the runoff
characteristics of the predevelopment flow.
5. A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property
shall be within an existing watercourse or storm sewer system and
enclosed within an easement. All discharges must be to stable
areas or conveyances. If the existing waterway or drainage system
is not stable, a design must be proposed that, when implemented,
will ensure a stable conveyance. Downstream easements are
required to be established to provide drainage paths for
concentrated discharge. Design and construction shall preclude
erosion, sedimentation, flooding or similar damage.
6. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation,
the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation
within the easement, shall be required, except within BMP areas
where mowing is not desired. The drainage easement shall
adequately contain the anticipated inundation associated with the
identified 100-year floodplain, or be depicted 50 feet from the top
of the channel bank for undefined floodplain areas.
7. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter
that would be located in or adjacent to waters of the
61.18 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.19
1:578
commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP.
When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it
is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to show that
the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise
approval to work in the area must be obtained from DEP.
8. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter
that would discharge to state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT). Stormwater detention basins, retention
basins, infiltration basins and similar structures shall maintain a
ten-foot isolation from a PennDOT right-of-way.
9. Stormwater facilities that are not located within a street right-ofway
shall be centered within an adequate easement of no less than
20 feet in width. Easements shall follow property lines where
possible and are to be provided with bearing and distance
descriptions that tie to known points and shall close on individual
lots.
10. A variety of methods for stormwater detention and retention are
available for use. These include surface detention, subsurface
detention, use of existing facilities (ponds, etc.) or a combination
thereof. Subsurface detention shall be utilized only where the
subsurface is stable, the area is not prone to sinkholes or
landslides, and all underground pipes are sealed to prevent leaks.
11. Storage of equivalent stormwater runoff for a portion of a property
may be considered in lieu of storage of generated runoff, provided:
a. The site is located so that it is physically impossible to detain
runoff from the proposed facilities or drainage problems exist
upgrade that would impact upon the site or downgrade
properties.
b. The impact of generated runoff discharging off site from the
subdivision or land development is determined by the
Municipal Engineer to be negligible and not detrimental to
adjacent properties.
c. Implementation of equivalent storage shall be determined
applicable and feasible by the Municipal Engineer.
12. Storm sewer pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets, endwalls, end
sections, and other stormwater management facilities shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Design Manual
Part 2, Highway Design, Publication 13, including amendments
thereto, unless specifications are otherwise provided herein.
Structures and their installation within or directly connected to
existing or intended public rights-of-way shall conform to the
61.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.19
1:579
61.20. Retention and detention basins.
current PennDOT Publication 72M and Publication 408, Roadway
Construction Standards.
13. Headwalls and endwalls shall be used where stormwater runoff
enters or leaves the storm sewer horizontally from a natural or
man-made channel. PennDOT Type "DW" headwalls and endwalls
shall be utilized. Reinforced concrete flared end sections are also
acceptable, but galvanized metal or polyethylene flared end
sections are prohibited. All headwalls and endwalls and flared end
sections with pipes of twelve-inch or greater diameter shall be
protected from child entry by placing removable stainless steel
bars (and compatible mounting hardware), spaced four inches
apart, across the opening. Periodic inspection and clearing of
debris from such structures is the responsibility of the owner.
61.20.1. Any stormwater management facility designed to store stormwater
runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment (i.e., detention or
retention basin) shall be designed to provide an emergency spillway to
convey the 100-year post-development peak flow rate tributary to the
basin. The use of inlets and pipes are prohibited for the emergency
spillway. Stormwater runoff from existing natural swales and/or other
existing drainage conveyors shall not be directed towards or
intercepted by the stormwater management facilities. The height of
embankment must be set as to provide a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard
above the maximum pool elevation computed when the entire 100-year
peak flow rate to the structure passes through the spillway. Rain
gardens, with a maximum water depth of 12 inches, shall be exempt
from this requirement; however, conveyance of the 100-year peak
discharge must be shown to be conveyed in a stable condition. The
criteria for design and construction of stormwater management
facilities are not the same criteria that are used in the permitting of
dams under the DEP Dam Safety Program. Depending upon the
physical characteristics of a dam, a dam permit may be required, and
the design will have to meet the provisions of Pa. Code, Title 25,
Chapter 105. Depending on the physical characteristics of a dam, the
design could require that anywhere from a 100-year to a probable
maximum flood (PMF) storm event be considered. Retention and
detention basins shall be designed and constructed according to the
following minimum standards:
1. The maximum water depth to the base of the emergency spillway
shall not exceed six feet in residential areas. Depths up to eight feet
are permitted in nonresidential projects, provided minimum sixfoot-
high fencing is provided around the basin when depths exceed
six feet.
2. The minimum top width of dams shall be five feet for
impoundments draining five acres or less and eight feet minimum
61.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.20
1:580
width for impoundments with drainage areas of or exceeding five
acres.
3. The side slopes of earth fill dams shall not be less than three
horizontal to one vertical on both sides of the embankment.
However, any portion of the inside berm of an unfenced basin above
a proposed water depth of three feet shall have a maximum side
slope of five horizontal to one vertical. All pond areas, including
bottoms of non-water-quality ponds, side slopes and top of berms,
shall be provided with a minimum four inches of topsoil and shall
be mulched and seeded with Formula B in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408. All areas to receive topsoil should be
scarified 12 inches deep before topsoil placement. Protect from
erosion until vegetation is 70% established.
4. All basins shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed of
sound and durable materials. The completed structure and the
foundation of all basins shall be stable under all probable
conditions of operation.
5. A cutoff or key trench of impervious material shall be provided
under all basin berms.
6. All discharge control devices with appurtenances (except discharge
pipes) shall be made of reinforced concrete and stainless or hot dip
galvanized steel. Bolts/fasteners are to be stainless or galvanized
steel. Smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pipe may be used for
discharge piping.
7. Concrete, polyethylene or welded galvanized steel anti-seep collars
compatible with the discharge pipe shall be placed around all basin
discharge pipes to increase the seepage length along the pipe by
15% within the saturated zone of the pipe based on a 4:1 phreatic
line. The connection of the anti-seep collar to the discharge pipe
shall be completely watertight.
8. Basin principal spillway outlet structures shall consist of stainless
steel orifice plates and mounting hardware, galvanized or
reinforced concrete riser and discharge pipe, and welded
structural steel inlet grates with a bituminous coating. Smooth
lined corrugated polyethylene pipe may be used for discharge
piping. Principal spillways with riser pipes where the designed
water depth is deeper than 0.4 times the diameter of the riser shall
have an anti-vortex device to prevent reduced capacity of the riser.
9. All basin intake and discharge structures shall be protected from
frost-related movement by the construction of a concrete footer
with a minimum depth of 36 inches below finished grade level.
10. Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected
by a basin or storm conveyance system shall be two feet above the
100-year water surface elevation.
61.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.20
1:581
11. An emergency spillway shall be provided to safely pass the peak
flow rate of the incoming 100-year storm, with one foot of
freeboard between the maximum pool elevation and the top of the
embankment and in a manner which will not damage the integrity
of the facility and will not create a downstream hazard. The
maximum pool elevation shall be established using the weir
equation through the spillway while ignoring discharge flows from
the principal spillway and storage volume within the basin. Routing
calculations for rate control structures discharging to the ground
surface shall ignore exfiltration or infiltration discharges from the
structure.
12. Where practical, the emergency spillway shall be constructed in
undisturbed ground. An easement for inspection and repair shall be
provided when the conveyance structure crosses property
boundaries. Downstream drainage easements from the emergency
spillway may be required.
13. Except for retention basins, permanent ponds and wetlands, all
basins shall have dewatering features such as low flow channels or
tile fields. Low flow channels shall be provided with reinforced
matting extending two feet beyond the channel. All detention
basins shall include an outlet structure designed to completely
drain the basin within 24 hours following the end of the design
rainfall. However, basins containing groundwater recharge and/or
water quality storage shall include an outlet structure designed to
fully drain the recharge and/or water quality volume in no less than
24 hours or more than 72 hours.
14. Basin discharges to proposed or existing conveyance systems shall
require evidence of adequate capacity in the receiving facility.
15. The minimum slope of any detention basin bottom surface shall be
1% positive grade toward the outlet, along all flow paths except
those basins specifically designed to provide infiltration of
stormwater in conformance with the water quality standards.
16. Detention basin length or basin flow path length shall be at least
two times the basin width to facilitate water treatment and
infiltration.
17. In areas of carbonate geology, retention and detention basins shall:
a. Be placed at least 100 feet from the rim of any sinkhole or
closed depression; and
b. Be placed a minimum of 25 feet from rock outcroppings or
pinnacles; and
c. Not discharge into a sinkhole; and
61.20 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.20
1:582
d. Be designed and located to prevent groundwater
contamination and sinkhole formation, including the use of
impermeable liners (see specifications below) where deemed
necessary to avoid or abate such problems. The construction of
clay liners shall not qualify as an impermeable liner.
e. Be constructed under the supervision of a professional
engineer or professional geologist licensed by the
commonwealth. A professionally sealed as-built construction
report, and plan including relative dates, name(s) of
contractor(s), methods of construction, and verification of
conformance to plan specifications and good engineering
practices shall be provided to the Municipality prior to bond
reduction requests related to the basin(s).
18. The impermeable liner shall be constructed to meet the following
minimum requirements.
a. The minimum liner required is 30 mil high-density polyethene
(HDPE) and must be UV-resistant. Actual individual liner
specifications shall be provided by the manufacturer for each
individual pond.
b. The liner must be placed on a layer of fine-grained soil that has
been rolled with a smooth drum roller in both directions to
produce a smooth level base for the liner. The soil may not
contain sharp angular rock or other debris that could puncture
the liner, and must meet all manufacturers' specifications for a
liner bedding. All vegetation, roots, and grass must be
removed, and any cracks or voids shall be filled.
c. If rock is encountered in the bedding area, this rock must be
excavated to a depth of six inches below the liner and
backfilled with a fine-grained soil. This area should then be
covered with geotextile fabric, extending three feet beyond the
limits of the rock outcrop before placing the pond liner.
d. Installation of the liner may only take place when the ambient
temperature is within the manufacturer's specifications. The
number of field seams shall be minimized by requiring factory
fabrication of large panels. Any field seams performed must be
in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
e. All structures (i.e., headwalls, pipes, outlet structures) which
come in contact with the liner must have a waterproof seal
installed to prevent leaks around the structure. These seals
shall be installed per the manufacturer's recommendations.
f. A minimum of 12 inches of earth cover shall be placed over the
lining. Soil containing sharp jagged rocks, roots, debris, or any
other material that may puncture the liner shall not be used as
cover material.
61.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.20
1:583
61.21. Pipes and conveyance facilities.
g. The liner must be installed to a minimum height of the
100-year floodwater elevation in the facility.
19. Basins shall not be divided by a property line.
20. Vertical pipes, inlets, and other surface water receiving structures
shall be installed with trash racks.
61.21.1. Pipes, curbs, gutters, manholes, inlets, headwalls, endwalls,
streets, and other stormwater conveyance facilities shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the following:
1. Pipe trenching and backfilling shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
Publication 408 and Roadway Construction Drawings, current
edition, unless the manufacturer's specifications and the Municipal
Engineer authorize alternative procedures. All trench backfill
within existing or proposed dedicated street right-of-way areas
shall be 100% crushed aggregate backfill to the subbase elevation
of the street paving. Such crushed aggregate backfill shall be
supplied and placed in accordance with PennDOT specifications,
Publication 408.
2. Pipe sizes and type shall be in accordance with the approved
drawings. Minimum pipe size for drainage facilities to be dedicated
for municipal ownership shall be 15 inches in diameter, and the
type shall be smooth lined high-density polyethylene pipe (HDPEP),
or reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or approved equivalent.
3. Pipes shall be constructed and set to line and grade as shown on
approved drawings. All pipes shall be laid on straight runs between
drainage structures. Minimum pipe slope shall be 1.0%.
4. Pipes shall be provided with a minimum of 12 inches of cover from
the top of pipe barrel to bottom of base course. In unpaved areas,
one foot of cover is required to the finished grade.
5. Hauling shall not be permitted over pipe with less than four feet of
cover.
6. All pipe outlets shall be discharged to natural or man-made
waterways and shall be provided with reinforced concrete
headwalls or pipe end sections. Pipe outlets shall also be provided
with an erosion-resistant material or energy dissipators to calm the
anticipated velocity and discharge of stormwater. All pipe outlet
structures shall be protected from frost-related movement by the
construction of a concrete footer with a minimum depth of 30
inches below finished grade level.
61.20 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.21
1:584
61.22. Inlets and manholes.
7. Underdrains, pavement base drains, or combination storm sewer
and underdrains shall be provided at low points, cut sections,
poorly drained areas and other areas which are required to provide
adequate subsurface drainage to protect the integrity of the street.
8. All storm sewers which cross a street shall be perpendicular to the
street center line or within 30° of perpendicular. Vertical and
horizontal isolation conflicts with other utilities shall be avoided.
Storm sewers within a street shall not cross underneath a curb,
especially at curb radii locations.
9. A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property
shall be within an existing watercourse or otherwise an easement
shall be required. Pipe outlets shall also be provided with erosionresistant
material or energy dissipaters to calm the anticipated
velocity and discharge of stormwater.
10. For contributing watersheds of less than 100 acres, a twenty-fiveyear
design storm shall be the minimum used for all constructed
facilities, including roadside gutters or swale. For contributing
watersheds of 100 acres or more, a 100-year design storm (at least)
or storm as required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Dams and Encroachment
Regulations, whichever is more restrictive, shall be used for all
constructed facilities, such as culverts, piping and major swales or
water courses.
61.22.1. Inlet tops shall be precast concrete top units conforming to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Publication 408, current
edition, and as detailed on the Roadway Construction Standards
RC-45M drawings, providing an eight-inch curb reveal from the gutter
grade point. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch hoods that provide a two-inch
sump condition may be used with approval from the Director of
Engineering. Type "M" inlets shall be used in off-street conditions.
61.22.2. The maximum allowable spread of water shall be 1/2 of a through
travel lane. Design calculations are required to document the capacity
and spacing. Inlets shall be analyzed for collection efficiency, and
bypass flows from upstream structures shall be accounted for in inlet
spacing design.
61.22.3. All inlets over four feet in depth shall be provided with steps for
accessibility. Inlets shall be placed along the curbline, gutter line, or
edge of paving.
61.22.4. All inlets in paved areas shall have vane grates.
61.22.5. Inlets shall be located at tangents on the uphill side of street
intersections.
61.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.22
1:585
61.23. Channels.
61.24. Volume control requirements.
61.22.6. All inlets shall be constructed with concrete flow channels cast in
place in the bottom of each inlet.
61.22.7. Inlets and manholes shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart.
Manholes or inlets are required at all points of horizontal or vertical
pipe deflection.
61.22.8. Manhole covers shall have a minimum of thirty-inch diameter
entryway clearance.
61.23.1. All channels shall be lined with adequate channel lining material,
regardless of the designed velocity or shear stress. Maximum permitted
channel velocities are:
1. Three feet per second where only sparse vegetation can be
established.
2. Four feet per second under normal conditions where vegetation is
to be established by seeding or sodding.
3. Velocities may not exceed four feet per second for newly
constructed grass channels, unless appropriately designed and
approved by the Allegheny County Conservation District.
4. The following conditions shall be met for all swales:
a. Swales shall be designed using Manning's equation. Vegetated
swales shall be designed based upon accepted "n" factors for
the anticipated degree of vegetative retardance. The maximum
allowable velocity for an established grass swale is four feet
per second.
b. The "n" factors to be used for paved or riprap swales or gutters
shall be based upon accepted engineering design practices as
specified by PennDOT or approved by the Engineer.
c. Swale side slopes shall be 2:1 minimum. Side slopes for grasscovered
swales which will be mowed shall be 3:1 minimum.
d. All swales shall be designed to concentrate low flows to
minimize siltation and meandering.
e. All vegetated swales shall have a minimum longitudinal slope
of 2% unless approved by the Municipal Engineer.
f. Swales shall be centered within a minimum twenty-foot-wide
easement.
61.24.1. Provisions for stormwater volume reductions are required for areas
being developed. Design of the stormwater BMPs shall give
61.22 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.24
1:586
consideration to providing groundwater recharge to compensate for
the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface
is paved and roofed over. These groundwater recharge measures are
required wherever feasible. Soils used for the construction of basins
shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors).
61.24.2. The low-impact development practices provided in the
Pennsylvania Stormwater BMP Manual shall be utilized for all
regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable using one of the
following methods:
1. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
as a method to any size of regulated activity. This method requires
detailed modeling based on site conditions. The following shall be
incorporated into the CG-1 method:
a. Reduce the post-development total runoff volume by 10% of
predevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or
less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation.
b. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the
runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer
provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible, and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall
be detained in a facility designed for a twenty-four- to seventytwo-
hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated
stormwater system.
c. For modeling purposes:
[1] Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas
must be considered meadow in good condition.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model
for existing conditions.
2. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) provided below
is independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design
Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to
regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that
require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious
surfaces:
a. Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces.
b. At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in
impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the
61.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.24
1:587
61.25. Calculation methodology.
runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters
of this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer
provides justification that the listed removal options are not
feasible, and the designated plan reviewer agrees, runoff shall
be detained in a facility designed for a twenty-four-hour
dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater
system.
c. Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
61.25.1. Stormwater runoff calculations for all development sites and
regulated activities shall be calculated in accordance with the following
computation methodologies:
Method
Accepted Calculation Methods
Applicability
Soil Cover Complex Method
(formerly SCS)
Acceptable for all watersheds.
Preferred for watersheds > 3
acres and for use with detention
basin routings.
Rational Method Acceptable for small watersheds
and residential underground
absorption systems.
Recommended for watersheds < 3
acres.
TR-20, USDA Soil Conservation
Service
Acceptable for all watersheds,
especially where full hydrologic
computer model is desired.
HEC-1 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Acceptable for all watersheds,
especially where full hydrologic
computer model is desired.
61.25.2. Selection of the method of calculation by the design professional
shall be based upon the limitations and suitability of each method for
the development site. The Municipal Engineer should be consulted for
method alternatives and applicability.
61.25.3. Stormwater event criteria.
1. All runoff calculations shall be completed in accordance with the
standard guidelines for the selected method of calculation.
2. Rational Method. The PennDOT Storm Intensity-Duration-
Frequency Chart shall be used. Where stormwater runoff
61.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.25
1:588
hydrographs are produced using the Rational Method, the provided
storage volume shall be verified with a critical duration analysis
that investigates similar storm occurrences with extended
durations and applicable intensities to determine the anticipated
maximum elevation to occur in the storage facility for each
required storm event.
3. Soil Cover Complex Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type II,
twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with the rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14.
a. Stormwater runoff control criteria.
[1] Stormwater management shall be accomplished by
controlling post-development runoff rates to 90%
predevelopment runoff rates for the two-year, five-year,
ten-year, twenty-five-year, and 100-year storms.
b. Assumptions and criteria.
[1] Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis indicating volume and velocities of flow
and the grades, sizes, and capacities of water-carrying
structures, sediment basins, retention and detention
structures and sufficient design information to construct
such facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both
predevelopment and post-development rates for peak
discharge of stormwater runoff from the development site.
[2] All predevelopment calculations, unless in woodland, shall
be based upon the assumption of meadow in good
hydrologic condition. Wooded areas shall utilize forest/
woodland cover coefficients. Where the site contains
existing impervious surface, up to 50% of the impervious
area may be considered as an existing predevelopment
condition. Runoff coefficients and curve numbers shall be
selected from the tables in the appendix.
[3] Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed
depressions shall be excluded from the modeled analysis
defining predevelopment flows. If left undisturbed during
construction, activities in areas draining to closed
depressions may also be removed from peak runoff rates
and post-development analysis. New additional
contributing runoff shall not be directed to existing
sinkholes or closed depressions.
[4] Runoff calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
comparison shall evaluate all stormwater
events listed within the stormwater runoff control criteria.
61.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.25
1:589
[5] Post-development analysis shall consider open areas of
possible water impoundments receiving rainfall (such as
detention basins, rain gardens, etc.) to have an impervious
cover area of the maximum surface storage area of the
water surface correlating to the storm event of interest.
[6] Design of stormwater facilities shall be verified by routing
the storm event hydrographs through the facilities using
the Storage Indication Method. Routings of Rational
Method hydrographs shall determine the critical duration
corresponding to the highest peak water surface elevation
in the detention facility based on extended runoff inflows
for each control storm event, or consist of a methodology
approved by the Municipal Engineer. The combination of
Rational Method hydrographs based on timing shall be
prohibited.
[7] Predevelopment and post-development time-ofconcentration
paths shall be delineated on topographic
mapping with the end and beginning of segments clearly
identified, as well as the lengths and corresponding end
elevations used for each segment. The post-development
time of concentration shall never be greater than the
predevelopment time of concentration for any watershed
or subwatershed. Times of concentration shall be based
upon the following:
[a] The maximum length of overland sheet flow shall be
100 feet before shallow concentrated or open channel
flow develops and shall be justified using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of the NRCS
Technical Release 55 (TR-55) to include the following.
[b] Travel time for shallow concentrated flows shall utilize
the NRCS methodology.
[c] Overland flows which are concentrated within field
depressions, swales, gutters, curbs or pipe collection
systems shall be designed using Manning's Equation
for time of concentration criteria for open channel
conditions between these design points using
Manning's n values per the current edition of
PennDOT Publication 584.
[8] Storm sewer pipes, culverts, gutters, inlets, outlets and
swales shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the standards of the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2,
Highway Design (latest edition), including the following
requirements:
61.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.25
1:590
Facility
Minimum Post-
Development Peak
Discharge Requirement
Pipes, gutters and swales,
culverts, streets, cross
drains and low points
25-year storm (Area <
100AC) and 100-year storm
(Area > 100AC)
Bridges and stream
crossings
100-year storm
[9] All stormwater collection facilities shall investigate and
account for bypass scenarios.
[10] Conveyance of the 100-year storm event in a safe manner
with acceptable hydraulic elevations shall be verified for
all systems that:
[a] May affect improvements such as buildings, etc.
[b] All drainage areas directed to stormwater facilities
used for post rate management.
[11] Swales shall be designed utilizing Manning's Equation to
insure adequate capacity, control of velocity and swale
stability. Calculations shall support swale stability for
initial conditions (prior to established vegetation) and
long-term conditions for the required peak flow rate.
Vegetated swales shall have a minimum longitudinal slope
of 2% and maximum side slopes of 3:1, unless specifically
designed as a BMP structure. Culvert design shall
investigate, at a minimum, inlet, barrel and outlet control
conditions.
c. Calculation process.
[1] A general procedure recommended for site evaluation and
stormwater design is as follows:
[a] Evaluate factors influencing stormwater runoff, with a
goal of limiting earth disturbance, minimizing
grading, and reducing or dispersing impervious
surfaces.
[b] Satisfy the volume control requirements.
[c] Meet water quality (BMP) standards, preferably with
BMPs near the source of the runoff.
[d] Calculate and satisfy peak runoff objective,
considering all measures other than detention basins.
[e] Size detention basins accordingly.
61.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.25
1:591
61.26. Best management practices.
[f] Demonstrate compliance with pre-development
hydrograph requirements.
61.26.1. Goals and objectives.
1. Preserve existing natural features, especially those which store,
infiltrate or filter water runoff.
2. Infiltrate rainfall to recharge the groundwater table.
3. Use physical (structural) and biological or vegetative
(nonstructural) filtration of water runoff to reduce pollutants and
remove sediment.
4. Moderate water runoff velocities to minimize erosion and damage
to downstream aquatic habitat.
5. Integrate BMPs into the site layout to perform a water quality
function and complement the developed use of the site.
6. Enhance site aesthetics through the use of a variety of BMP
techniques and components.
7. Maximize collection and treatment of small storm event (first flush)
stormwater runoff which contains the highest concentration of
pollutants.
8. Utilize a system of BMP facilities and groundwater recharge
devices throughout the site.
61.26.2. General standards.
1. Water quality shall be maintained through the requirement for
BMP design components for all subdivisions, land developments
and regulated activities, except where other provisions of this
chapter provide for plan or stormwater design exemptions.
Revision or expansion projects requiring land development
approval with stormwater design shall include measures to retrofit
the site with BMPs to maintain or improve the water quality of the
stormwater discharges.
2. The required volume control, specified elsewhere herein, shall be
detained and treated within BMPs for all areas of the site to be
developed.
3. Site designs shall minimize earth disturbance and the generation of
stormwater runoff while maximizing pervious areas for treatment
of stormwater.
4. All BMPs shall be sized to capture the required control volume,
designed according to the BMP criteria within this chapter,
constructed properly and maintained regularly.
61.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.26
1:592
5. Stormwater runoff which is directly discharged to wetlands,
streams, ponds, high-quality or exceptional value watersheds or
which originates from land uses or activities with higher potential
for pollutant loadings (such as auto salvage yards, vehicle service
areas, loading/unloading areas, truck centers, etc.) require the use
of additional or specific structural BMPs for pollution prevention
and maintenance of water temperatures and quality.
6. Place BMPs near the source of stormwater runoff and treat runoff
from impervious surfaces before mixing with runoff from less
contaminated sources.
7. Use native vegetation and water-tolerant plants. Trees and shrubs
shall not be planted on stormwater facility embankments or in
other areas where roots may endanger pipes, embankments,
headwalls, endwalls, spillway structures or other structural
facilities.
8. All impervious area runoff shall be directed to BMPs. The volume
control shall be provided within each watershed or subwatershed
to provide the intended treatment for upstream runoff. Volume
control credit will not be allowed toward noncontributing runoff
areas.
9. BMP categories used within these regulations are 1) ponds, 2)
wetlands, 3) infiltration systems, 4) filtering systems, and 5) open
channels. The design criteria subsection listed hereafter provides
specific descriptions of the BMPs within these classifications.
Where effectiveness can be demonstrated, alternative BMP designs
and concepts may be utilized.
10. Site designs shall include measures to reduce stormwater
velocities and collect sediment near the source of the water runoff
so that BMPs can be effective in treating water quality and
maintenance can be reduced. Recommended facilities are forebays,
energy dissipators, outlet stabilization structures, inlet protection
devices, level spreaders, and flow splitters.
11. Carbonate geology (limestone) areas require careful evaluation for
appropriate BMP design. Facility depths should be minimized and
impermeable liners will be required.
12. Forebays and micropools are recommended for ponds and required
for wetlands. Forebays and micropools should each contain
approximately 10% of the required water volume. Forebays should
be at least 10 feet long and be baffled from the main basin with a
berm of riprap or similar material, to a depth of one foot below the
water quality volume level, to insure an indirect flow path.
Additionally, when forebays are used, a minimum of 90% of the
discharge into the facility shall be directed into the forebays.
61.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.26
1:593
13. All ponds and wetlands shall be surrounded by a riparian buffer
strip of a minimum 25 feet in width. Streams shall be bordered by a
riparian buffer strip, a minimum of 25 feet or the width of the
floodplain, whichever is greater. All PA DEP standards for buffer
strips are required.
14. Planting of wetland plants is required within created wetlands and
encouraged in ponds and other applicable BMPs. Fringe wetland
plants may be used on aquatic benches or within shallow pools,
while emergent wetlands vegetation should be planted along the
side slopes and facility edges.
15. Infiltration, filtering or other BMP systems which are designed to
treat the required control volume from small storms shall be
preceded by a flow splitter or equivalent bypass device to route
larger water volumes around the system.
16. All underground stone and sand BMP systems shall be lined with
geotextile fabric on the sides, bottom and top (double layer on top),
have a flat bottom, be underlain by a minimum of two feet of soil or
sand above the seasonal high-water table and be placed a minimum
of 10 feet horizontally from building foundation walls.
17. Infiltration systems with stone shall utilize AASHTO No. 1 (No. 4)
stone and assume a maximum of 40% voids area.
18. Grass swales should be designed with a flat channel bottom at least
two feet in width, with a longitudinal slope of 1% to 2%. If grass
swale slopes exceed 4%, check dams or similar water velocity
modifiers should be used.
61.26.3. Design criteria.
1. The following site factors should be considered in selecting and
designing the appropriate BMPs:
a. Total contributing area.
b. Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
c. Slope and depth to bedrock.
d. Seasonal high-water table.
e. Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
f. Erodibility of soils.
g. Land availability and configuration of the topography.
2. The following factors should be evaluated when determining the
suitability of BMPs for a development site:
a. Peak discharge and required volume control.
61.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.26
1:594
61.27. Erosion and sediment pollution control.
61.28. Riparian corridors.
b. Stream bank erosion.
c. Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
d. The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
e. The nature of the pollutant being removed.
f. Maintenance requirements.
g. Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
h. Recreational value.
i. Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
61.27.1. All subdivision and land development plans which propose
earthmoving activity shall include erosion and sediment pollution
control design to satisfy the requirements of Chapter 102, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92 and/
or 102, and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et
seq.), and to prevent soil erosion, sediment and other pollutants from
entering streams, lakes and neighboring properties.
61.28.1. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian corridor
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision, land
development or stormwater management plan that encompasses a
riparian corridor.
61.28.2. Except as otherwise required by 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, the
riparian corridor easement shall be measured to be the greater of the
limit of the 100-year floodplain or 35 feet from the top of stream bank
(on each side).
61.28.3. Minimum management requirements for riparian corridors.
1. Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian corridor easement.
2. Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed, and the riparian corridor easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
61.28.4. The riparian corridor easement shall be enforceable by the
Engineer and shall be recorded in the Allegheny County Recorder of
Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of
the property located therein. The recorded easement shall be superior
61.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.28
1:595
to all liens of record. The easement shall allow for the continued private
ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as required by
zoning.
61.28.5. Any permitted use within the riparian corridor easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing
100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
61.28.6. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian corridors:
1. It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for
nonmotorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted,
provided they have adequate drainage.
2. Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
61.28.7. Septic drain fields and sewage disposal systems shall not be
permitted within the riparian corridor easement and shall comply with
setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
61.28.8. Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the riparian
buffer easement, but they shall cross the easement in the shortest
practical distance. Other structural stormwater management facilities
are not permitted within the riparian buffer easement.
61.28.9.New sanitary sewage conveyance pipes shall be permitted within
the riparian buffer easement, but the easement shall not be used as a
linear utility easement. Pipes shall cross the easement in the shortest
practical distance.
61.28.10. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as required.
61.28 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.28
1:596
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
61.29. General requirements.
61.30. Plan requirements.
61.29.1. For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary
or final approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the
issuance of any zoning, building or occupancy permit, or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until
the property owner or developer or his/her agent has received written
approval of an SWM site plan from the Municipality.
61.29.2. All stormwater management site plans shall be designed and
certified by individuals registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such duties based on education
and training in hydrology and hydraulics.
61.30.1. Appropriate sections from the Municipality's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM site plans.
61.30.2. The Municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is
found to be deficient, the Municipality may either disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Municipality may accept submission of modifications.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
1. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan.
2. The following signature block for the Municipality:
"(Municipal official or designated plan reviewer), on this date
(signature date), has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM
site plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal
Ordinance No. (number assigned to ordinance), except where
waivers have been granted as noted on the plan. The review is
based on a survey and plan prepared by others and assumes that
all information is correct and valid as submitted."
3. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
a. Plans no larger than twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets.
b. The name of the development; name and location and/or
address of the property site; name, address, telephone number,
61.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.30
1:597
and e-mail address of the applicant/owner of the property;
and name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
engineering seal and signature of the individual preparing the
SWM site plan.
c. The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
d. A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
e. A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
f. A USGS location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals
1,000 feet.
g. Bearing and distance descriptions of the entire tract perimeter,
existing and proposed easements, and rights-of-way.
h. Existing and proposed contours at intervals of two feet.
i. Existing waterbodies within the project area, including
streams, lakes, ponds, field-delineated wetlands or other
bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMAdelineated
floodplains and floodways), all sensitive
environmental features, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site, and overland drainage paths.
j. All existing and proposed utilities, on-lot wastewater facilities,
water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and water lines on and
within 50 feet of property lines.
k. A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
l. Soil names and boundaries with identification of the Hydraulic
Soil Group classification.
m. The proposed limit of disturbance line and associated proposed
disturbed acres.
n. Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, buildings, and other
improvements, including plans and profiles of roads and paved
areas and floor elevations of buildings.
o. Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales, and other BMPs.
p. The location and clear identification of the nature of
permanent stormwater BMPs. This information shall include
the limits of design impervious area and, where applicable,
modification of design for impervious area in excess of that
specified.
q. The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
61.30 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.30
1:598
r. A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress
to and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the Municipality or its designees access to all
easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
s. Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
Where possible, guidance for modification of the design for
additional impervious area shall be provided.
t. Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operations, and maintenance responsibilities.
u. Notes and statements:
[1] A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that
the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered
or removed without prior approval by the Municipality.
[2] A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is
part of the SWM site plan.
[3] A note indicating that as-built survey plans will be
provided for all stormwater management facilities prior to
occupancy of land or structures, or the release of financial
security for said facilities.
[4] The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the SWM site plan:
"I, __________, hereby certify that the stormwater
management site plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Municipality of Bethel Park Stormwater
Management Ordinance, Ordinance No. __________."
4. A stormwater management report containing:
a. An introduction which summarizes the development proposal,
methodology of calculations, and the main components of the
proposed stormwater management design.
b. Stormwater runoff calculations as specified in this chapter,
including complete hydraulic and structural computations for
all stormwater management facilities and volume control
designs.
c. Where multiple stormwater management facilities (including
water recharge and water quality) are used, an explanation of
how these facilities will interrelate is required.
61.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.30
1:599
d. Predevelopment and post-development watershed subareas
with time-of-concentration path delineations clearly marked to
indicate all sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow and open
channel segments by length and assumed beginning and end
elevations for each segment.
e. In carbonate geology areas, a geologic assessment of the
impact of the proposed project and associated site
improvements and any precautionary or remedial actions
recommended.
f. Design and specifications for all stormwater management
facilities, groundwater recharge areas, water quality features
and erosion and sedimentation facilities.
g. Horizontal and vertical profiles of all pipes, swales, open
channels and stormwater management facilities, showing
existing and proposed grades.
h. Cross section of swales, open channels, facilities, etc.
i. Evaluation of the project's effect on upstream and downstream
adjoining properties.
j. Adequate drainage easements around all stormwater
management facilities, with a twenty-foot minimum width
required. All easements require a bearing and distance
description which close within each lot and tie to known points
for final plan approval.
k. Ownership and maintenance provisions.
l. All designs, calculations and illustrations necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the design standards specified
within this chapter, as determined by the Engineer.
m. All applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual when
establishing volume controls.
n. Date of construction visit by a design professional.
5. Stormwater management facilities.
a. All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail. The volumes of stormwater
detention required shall be noted on the plan, as well as
approximate dimensions of the proposed facility.
b. Plans for groundwater recharge facilities must show the
locations of existing septic tank infiltration areas and any
wells. A minimum fifty-foot separation from on-lot disposal
system (OLDS) infiltration areas is required. Infiltration rates
61.30 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.30
1:600
shall be based upon percolation and probe tests conducted at
the site of the proposed facility.
c. All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of
the stormwater management facilities must be shown.
d. A plan note shall be added to grant municipal officials and
employees thereof the right of access to the property for
inspection of a stormwater BMP and, in the event of default by
the developer, installation of the stormwater management
facilities.
e. Maintenance and ownership provisions shall be clearly spelled
out on the plan.
[1] The overall stormwater management concept for the
project.
[2] A determination of site conditions in accordance with the
BMP Manual. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed
for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas.
[3] Stormwater runoff design computations and
documentation as specified in this chapter, or as otherwise
necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable
measures have been taken to meet the requirements of
this chapter, including the recommendations and general
requirements.
[4] Expected project time schedule.
[5] A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable,
as prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
[6] The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and
aquatic features and on any existing stormwater
conveyance system that may be affected by the project.
[7] The SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply
wells, property boundaries, existing and proposed
topography, point(s) of interest, utilities, and potential
utility conflicts.
[8] The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all
existing and proposed physical stormwater management
facilities. This plan shall address long-term ownership and
responsibilities for O&M, including type and schedule/
frequency of maintenance activities, personnel and
equipment requirements, estimated annual maintenance
costs, and method of financing continuing O&M. The O&M
61.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.30
1:601
61.31. Plan submission.
61.32. Plan review.
61.33. Modification of plans.
plan shall include the submission of an annual inspection
report to the Municipality of Bethel Park.
[9] A justification, acceptable to the designated plan reviewer,
must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs other than
green infrastructure methods and LID practices are
proposed to achieve the volume, rate and water quality
controls under this chapter.
61.31.1. Up to four copies of the SWM plan shall be submitted as follows:
1. Two copies to the Municipality.
2. One copy to the Municipal Consulting Engineer (when applicable).
3. One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District, if
requested by the District.
61.32.1.SWM plans shall be reviewed by the Municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
61.32.2. The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM plan is approved or disapproved or requires
additional documentation. If the SWM plan involves a subdivision and
land development plan, the notification shall occur within the time
period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code85 (90 days). If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Municipality.
61.32.3. For any SWM plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the Municipality will not approve
the SWM plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID
practices are not practicable.
61.32.4. If the Municipality disapproves the SWM plan, the Municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Municipality also
may approve the SWM plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
61.32.5. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to approval
of any SWM plan, subdivision or land development.
61.32.6. All required permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance
of a zoning or building permit.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
61.30 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.33
1:602
61.34. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
61.35. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
61.36. As-built drawings, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
61.33.1. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change
in SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign
of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the SWM site plan, as determined by the designated
plan reviewer, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site
plan in accordance with this article.
61.34.1. A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing the Municipality's concerns, to the Municipality in
accordance with this article. The applicable review fee, in accordance
with the fee schedule, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved
SWM site plan.
61.35.1. The Municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Municipality
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the
date the Municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an
approved SWM site plan is not installed according to the term of
validity, then the Municipality may consider the SWM site plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are considered disapproved by the Municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with this chapter.
61.36.1. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built drawings
of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the Municipality.
61.36.2. The as-built drawing submission shall include a certification of
completion signed by a qualified professional verifying that all
permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the
approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude
coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at
the central location of the BMPs. If any licensed qualified professionals
contributed to the construction plans, then a licensed qualified
professional must sign the completion certificate.
61.36.3. The Municipality must conduct inspections during construction at
critical times (prior to backfilling and connections to municipal
facilities) as it deems appropriate. If inspections performed by the
Municipality reveal deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM
61.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.36
1:603
61.37. Modification of facilities.
61.38. Modification of provisions.
site plan, the Municipality may request corrective actions. Any
corrective action shall be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner.
61.36.4. After receipt of the completion certification by the Municipality, the
Municipality may conduct a final inspection.
61.36.5. An as-built plan shall contain the following stormwater-related
information:
1. Actual location of floodplain by elevation and dimension from
property line.
2. Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying
easements.
3. Actual horizontal and vertical location of SWM BMPs, including
type and size of storm drainage pipes.
4. For all storage SWM BMPs (e.g., stormwater basins, rain gardens
and infiltration facilities), the following information shall be
provided:
a. As-built elevation contours of the SWM BMP as applicable, or
the horizontal and vertical dimensions of underground
facilities, to include depth from ground surface to top of
facility.
b. Verification of materials used in construction (e.g., geotextile,
liner materials, etc.).
c. As-built outlet structure details, including type, size, and
inverts of discharge pipes.
d. As-built elevations for embankments and emergency spillways.
e. A table showing the stage/storage/discharge information for
the constructed conditions.
f. A table providing a comparison of the approved design versus
the as-built discharge rates.
61.37.1. A modification which involves a change in stormwater management
methods, facilities or techniques, or that involves the relocation or
redesign of stormwater management facilities, or which is necessary
because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved plan,
shall require a resubmission in accordance with the plan requirements
set forth in this chapter and the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
61.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.38
1:604
61.39. Operation and maintenance (O&M) responsibilities.
61.38.1. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards
for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. The
Municipality of Bethel Park reserves the right to modify or to extend
these provisions conditionally in individual cases as may be necessary
in the public interest; provided, however, that such variation shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter, and
that the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Municipality that the
applicable regulation is unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or
that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results. The
list of such modifications shall be listed on the plan.
61.38.2. In granting waivers/modifications, Bethel Park may impose such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards and requirements of this chapter.
61.39.1. For the purpose of this section, drainage courses, swales,
stormwater inlets, pipes, conduits, detention and retention basins,
subsurface storage structures, and other stormwater management
facilities shall be included under the term "SWM BMPs."
1. The final plan shall reflect and/or be accompanied by supporting
documentation identifying the ownership and method of
administering and maintaining all permanent SWM BMPs.
2. The SWM site plan for the development site shall contain an
operation and maintenance plan for review by the Engineer. The
operation and maintenance plan shall outline required routine
maintenance actions and schedules necessary to insure proper
operation of the facility(ies).
3. The SWM site plan for the development site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed SWM BMPs, consistent with the following principals:
a. If a development consists of structures such as streets, sewers
and other public improvements which are to be dedicated to
the Municipality, SWM BMPs may also be dedicated to and
maintained by the Municipality. However, if the Municipality
accepts dedication of streets, the Municipality is under no
obligation to accept dedication of SWM BMPs located outside
of the public right-of-way.
b. If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership
or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance
of SWM BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee,
or private management entity (e.g., homeowners' association
or other parties of interest). Facilities owned and maintained
by a private entity shall be maintained in accordance with the
61.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.39
1:605
61.40. Maintenance of existing facilities; BMPs.
terms of an agreement, declaration of easement or other
legally binding documentation approved in form by the
Engineer. The agreement, declaration of easement or other
legally binding documentation shall provide that the Engineer
and/or their assigned representative have the right to:
[1] Inspect the facilities at any time.
[2] Require the private entity to take corrective measures and
assign the private entity reasonable time periods for any
necessary action.
[3] Authorize maintenance to be done and lien all cost of the
work against the properties of the private entity
responsible for maintenance.
4. The Municipality shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities. The Municipality reserves
the right to accept the ownership and operating responsibility for
any or all the stormwater management controls.
5. Maintenance of SWM BMPs shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
a. Liming and fertilizing vegetated channels and other areas in
accordance with soil test recommendations.
b. Reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or
sodding of scoured areas or areas where vegetation has not
been successfully established.
c. Mowing as necessary to maintain adequate grass and to
control weeds. Chemical weed control may be used if federal,
state, and local laws and regulations are met.
d. Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt
and sediment in order to keep the material from building up in
grassed waterways, pipes, detention basins, infiltration
structures, or other SWM BMPs, and thus reducing their
capacity to convey or store water.
e. Regular inspection of the areas in question to assure proper
implementation of SWM BMPs, maintenance and care.
f. All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of
any debris or other obstructions and maintained in original
design condition.
g. Replacement or repair of damaged structural SWM BMPs or
components of such SWM BMPs.
61.39 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.40
1:606
61.40.1.SWM BMPs existing on the effective date of this chapter on
individual lots which have not been accepted by the Municipality or for
which maintenance responsibility has not been assumed by a private
entity such as a homeowners' association shall be maintained by the
individual property owners. Such maintenance shall include at a
minimum those items set forth in this chapter. If the Municipality
determines at any time that any permanent stormwater management
facility has been eliminated, altered, blocked through the erection of
structures or the deposit of material, or improperly maintained, the
condition constitutes a nuisance, and the Municipality shall notify the
property owner of corrective measures which are required and provide
for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, within which the
property owner shall take such corrective action. If the property owner
does not take the required corrective action, the Municipality may
either perform the work, or contract for the performance of the work
and bill the property owner for the cost of the work plus a penalty of
10% of the cost of the work. If the property owner does not pay such bill
within 30 days, the Municipality may file a municipal claim against the
property upon which the work was performed in accordance with the
applicable laws.
61.40.2. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter stormwater
management facilities which have been installed on a property unless
an SWM site plan has been approved to permit such modification,
removal, filling, landscaping or alteration. No person shall place any
structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a stormwater
management facility or within a drainage easement which will limit or
alter the functioning of the facility or easement in any manner.
61.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.40
1:607

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
61.41. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
61.42. Operation and maintenance agreements.
61.43. Performance guarantee.
61.41.1. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as
deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
61.41.2. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
61.41.3. The Municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner
for any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
61.42.1. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner
shall sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement
covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately
owned.
1. The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
2. The owner shall convey to the Municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the Municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
3. The owner shall keep on file with the Municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
Municipality within 10 working days of the change.
61.42.2. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
the SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
Municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
61.43.1. For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development,
the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Municipality for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and
511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.86
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510, and 10511.
61.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.44
1:609
61.44. Schedule of inspections during construction.
61.45. Post-construction SWM BMPs schedule of inspections.
61.44.1. The Engineer or a designated inspector under the Engineer's direct
supervision shall inspect all phases of the installation of the SWM BMPs
as deemed appropriate by the Engineer.
61.44.2. During any stage of the work, if the Engineer determines that the
SWM BMPs are not being installed in accordance with the approved
SWM site plan, the Municipality shall provide written notification to the
owner(s)/developer(s) and the contractor(s) indicating the deficiencies
and require that the deficiencies be corrected within 30 days (or longer
as may be required). If the deficiencies are not corrected within the
specified period of time, the Municipality may:
1. Revoke any existing permits until a revised SWM site plan is
submitted and approved, as specified in this chapter.
2. Utilize financial security posted by the owner(s)/developer(s) as
part of the developer's agreement to install any unfinished facilities
or remedy any improperly constructed facilities.
3. Pursue other legal remedies pursuant to this chapter.
4. If applicable, at the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite
for the final release of the improvements guarantee, the owner/
developer or his representatives shall:
a. Provide a certificate of final completion letter from an
engineer, landscape architect, surveyor or other qualified
professional verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto.
b. Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
5. After receipt of the certification by the Municipality, a final
inspection shall be conducted by the Engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
61.45.1.SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner or the owner's
designee, including the Municipality for dedicated and owned facilities,
according to the following list of minimum frequencies:
1. Annually for the first five years following construction.
2. Once every three years thereafter.
3. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
4. All inspections reports should be forwarded to the Municipality for
their files. If the Municipality finds that they do not have inspection
61.44 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.45
1:610
reports on file, they will notify the owner asking for an inspection
to be complete in accordance with the following:
a. The letter will require the owner to complete the inspection
within three months of the date of notification.
b. The inspection should be complete by a qualified professional.
c. If no inspection report is received within the three-month
period, the Municipality has the right to inspect the facility and
charge the owner the cost of the inspection.
d. If corrective action is necessary, within a reasonable period of
time, not to exceed 30 days, the owner shall take such
corrective action. If the owner does not take the required
corrective action, the Municipality may either perform the
work, or contract for the performance of the work and bill the
owner for the cost of the work plus a penalty of 10% of the cost
of the work. If the owner does not pay such bill within 30 days,
the Municipality may file a municipal claim against the
property upon which the work was performed in accordance
with the applicable laws.
61.45 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.45
1:611

ARTICLE VI
Performance Guarantees
61.46. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to final plan approval.
61.46.1. Performance guarantee in lieu of installation. No plat shall be
finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been
improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition,
or improved as may be required by the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streets,
streetlights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, required plantings,
and other improvements as may be required by the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance have been installed in accordance with
this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any improvement required as a
condition for the final approval of a plat, the subdivider or developer
shall deposit with the Municipality a fiscal security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of any improvements or common amenities,
including, but not limited to, roads, stormwater detention and/or
retention basins and other related drainage facilities, open space
improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
61.46.2. Type guarantee. Without limitation as to other types of financial
security which the Municipality may approve, which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive escrow accounts
in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial
security for the purposes of this section. Such financial security shall be
posted with a bonding company or federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution chosen by the party posting the financial security,
provided said bonding company or lending institution is authorized to
conduct such business within the commonwealth. Such bond or other
security shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of
any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed in
the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for
completion of the improvements.
61.46.3. Amount of guarantee.
1. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Municipality may adjust
the amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of
the improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion.
61.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.46
1:613
2. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Municipality may require the
developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection. The
amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a licensed
professional as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
licensed professional to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such
cost. The Municipal Engineer shall review and approve the cost
estimate or, for good cause, refuse to accept the estimate.
3. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% of each year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above cost estimate
preparation procedure. A developer who fails to complete the
improvements within the allotted time specified in the financial
guarantee shall, at least 60 days in advance of the guarantee
expiration date, renew or resubmit a financial guarantee. Failure to
keep a financial guarantee in effect until the completion and
approval of all improvements shall be a violation of this chapter.
61.46.4. Progressive installation. In the case where development is
projected over a period of years, the Municipality may authorize
submission of final plats by sections or phases of development subject
to such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future
sections or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection
of any finally approved section of the development.
61.46.5. Release from guarantee.
1. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the release, from
time to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for
payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any
such requests shall be made in writing to the Municipality, and
within 45 days of receipt of such request, the applicable Municipal
Engineer shall certify, in writing, whether or not such portion of the
work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. When the improvements are certified to be
in accordance with the approved plat, the Municipality shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Municipal Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed. If the
Municipality fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the
release of funds shall be deemed to have been approved as
61.46 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.46
1:614
61.47. Insurance.
requested. The Municipality may, prior to final release at the time
of completion and certification by its Engineer, require retention of
10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvement.
2. The applicant shall assume the necessary expense incurred for the
inspection of improvements. Such inspection costs shall be based
upon a schedule, established by ordinance, and amended from time
to time as deemed necessary.
61.46.6. Maintenance guarantee. Where the Municipality accepts
dedication of all or some of the required improvements following
completion, the Municipality may require the posting of financial
security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as
the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications depicted on the final plat for a term of 24 months from
the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of
the same type as otherwise required in this section with regard to
installation of such improvements. The amount of financial security
shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements. The bonding amounts of all improvements included in
the maintenance guarantee may be reduced to said 15% and retained
within the performance guarantee.
61.46.7. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that
any required improvements have not been installed as provided in this
chapter or in accordance with the approved final plat, the Municipality
is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond, or other
security, by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of
such bond, or other security, are insufficient to pay the cost of installing
or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by
said security, the Municipality may, at its option, install part of such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and
may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All
of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal
or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used
solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security,
and not for any other municipal or county purpose. Failure to properly
install the required improvements shall also constitute a violation of
this chapter, punishable as provided by this chapter.
61.47.1. The developer agrees to indemnify and save harmless the
Municipality against and from any and all loss, cost, damage, liability,
and expense on account of damage to property of, or injury to or death
of, the parties thereto or third person caused by, growing out of, or in
any way whatsoever attributable to the construction of said
improvements and the use of the street(s) delineated on the subdivision
plat during construction. The developer further agrees, but without
limiting its liability to indemnify the Municipality or county, to carry
61.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.47
1:615
liability insurance contracts with a reliable insurance company
covering the period of said construction in the sum of $500,000 to
$1,000,000 for injury to or death of persons, and in the sum of $500,000
for damage to or destruction of property, which insurance contracts
shall include the Municipality as named insured.
61.47 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.47
1:616
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
61.48. General.
61.48.1. The Municipality shall charge a stormwater management plan
review fee in accordance with the fee schedule set forth by resolution
by the Municipal Council of Bethel Park. The Municipality may include
additional fees for third-party review of the stormwater management
plan when necessary.
61.48 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.48
1:617

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
61.49. Prohibited discharges and connections.
61.49.1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated MS4 or to enter the
surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
61.49.2. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are not
composed entirely of stormwater, except:
1. As provided in Section 61.49.3 below; and
2. Discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
61.49.3. The following discharges are authorized unless they are
determined to be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated
MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth:
1. Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
2. Discharges from potable water sources, including water line
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
3. Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
4. Diverted stream flows and springs.
5. Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
6. Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
7. Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
8. Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
9. Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges, as long as
the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are
followed.
61.49.4. In the event that the Municipality or DEP determines that any of
the discharges identified in Section 61.49.3 significantly contribute
pollutants to a regulated MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth,
the Municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease
the discharge.
61.49 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.50
1:619
61.50. Roof drains and sump pumps.
61.50.1. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
61.50 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.50
1:620
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
61.51. Right of entry.
61.52. Enforcement.
61.53. Suspension and revocation.
61.51.1. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Municipality or its
designated agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property
within the Municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater
structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this
chapter.
61.52.1. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted.
61.52.2. It shall be unlawful to violate this chapter.
61.52.3. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the Municipality.
61.53.1. Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
1. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
2. A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
3. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, or pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
61.53.2. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when:
1. The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
2. The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
61.53.3. An approval that has been revoked by the Municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter. If a violation causes no immediate danger to
life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion, the Municipality
may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation.
In these cases, the Municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's
designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period
allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the owner does not
correct the violation within the allowed time period, the Municipality
61.51 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.53
1:621
61.54. Penalties.
61.55. Appeals.
may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits
pertaining to any provision of this chapter.
61.54.1. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense, and penalties
shall be cumulative.
61.54.2. In addition, the Municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus,
or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
61.55.1. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its
designee, relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
Municipality within 30 days of that action.
61.55.2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality, relevant
to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the Municipality's decision.
61.53 BETHEL PARK CODE 61.55
1:622
Chapter 62
TAXES
61.55 GENERAL PROVISIONS 61.55
1:623

ARTICLE I
Annual Tax Rate and Senior Citizen Tax Relief87
[Adopted 11-27-1985 by Ord. No. 11-27-85B]
62.1. Levy; amount. [Last amended 11-12-2018 by Ord. No.
11-12-18A]
62.2. Tax gentrification. [Amended 11-30-1994 by Ord. No.
11-30-94E]
62.1.1. A tax be and the same is hereby levied on all real property in the said
Municipality, subject to taxation for municipal purposes for the fiscal
year 2019 as follows:
Tax rate for general purposes, the sum of 2.44 mills on each dollar
of assessed valuation for municipal purposes and 0.34 mills on each
dollar of assessed valuation for the provisions of funding to Bethel Park
Volunteer Fire Company and costs associated with the same.
62.2.1. Definitions.
1. ACT 146 — The Act of December 13, 1988, Public Law 1190, No.
146, codified as the First and Second Class County Property Tax
Relief Act, 72 P.S. § 4749.1 et seq.
2. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners of
Allegheny County.
3. COUNTY — Allegheny County.
4. DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY ASSESSMENT — The Allegheny
County Department of Property Assessment, Appeals, Review and
Registry of Allegheny County.
5. FIRST AND SECOND CLASS COUNTY PROPERTY TAX RELIEF
ACT — See the definition of "Act 146" above.
6. GENTRIFICATION — An increase in market value of a property as a
consequence of the refurbishing or the renovating of other
residences or the construction of new residences in long
established residential areas or areas of deteriorated, vacant or
abandoned homes and properties throughout the county.
7. GENTRIFICATION PROGRAM — The granting to long-time owner/
occupants of a principal residence of a tax exemption for that
portion of the increase in market value exceeding 5% from the
previously established market value due to gentrification.
87.Editor's Note: Ordinance 6-1-82A provided that for the tax year 1982 and all subsequent
years, unless and until modified by Council, the due date for all property taxes levied and
assessed by the Municipality of Bethel Park shall be as follows: Taxes entitled to discount:
August 31; Taxes payable at face amount: October 31; Ord. No. 11-30-94E amended the
gentrification rules.
62.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.2
1:625
8. LONG-TIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned and has occupied the same dwelling
place as a principal residence and domicile or any person who for
at least five years has owned and occupied the same dwelling as a
principal residence and domicile if that person received assistance
in the acquisition of the property as part of a government or
nonprofit housing program.
9. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park.
10. PERSON — A natural person.
11. PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person,
including the principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in
connection therewith which attribute to its enjoyment, comfort and
convenience; or a building with a maximum of one commercial
establishment and a maximum of three residential units of which
one residential unit must be the principal residence of the longtime
owner/occupant.
12. TAX OFFICE — The Bethel Park Tax and Sewage Billing Office.
62.2.2. Exemption for assessment increases exceeding 5%. Any increase in
the market value of real estate constituting the principal residence of a
long-time owner/occupant which exceeds 5% from the previously
established market value shall be considered to be attributable to
gentrification and shall be exempted from the payment of municipality
real property taxes. Any increase in value attributed to physical
improvements of the property constituting the principal residence of a
long-time owner/occupant shall not be exempted from municipality real
property taxes.
62.2.3. Length of exemption. The term of the exemption granted under
Section 62.2.2 of this article shall be for one tax year and subsequent
years; however, if the market value of the property constituting the
principal residence of a long-time owner/occupant is increased by more
than 5% in subsequent years, the long-time owner/occupant will be
required to reapply for participation in the gentrification program.
62.2.4. Participation in gentrification program. Any person paying real
property taxes in the Municipality may apply to the Department of
Property Assessment and the Tax Office for certification as a participant
in the gentrification program authorized under this article. In order to
be eligible for participation in the gentrification program established
herein, the following conditions must be met:
1. The property must be owned and occupied by a long-time owner/
occupant; and
2. The property must be the principal residence and domicile of a
long-time owner/occupant.
62.2 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.2
1:626
62.3. Tax assessment limitation; senior citizen tax relief. [Amended
6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 6-11-01A]
62.2.5. Rules and regulations. The Municipal Manager shall have the
authority to issue rules with respect to the administration of
Gentrification Program established under this section. Such rules and
regulations shall include, but not limited to, proof of residence, method
of application for participation in the Gentrification Program and such
other reasonable requirements and conditions as may be necessary to
operate the Gentrification Program.
62.3.1. Definitions.
1. ACT 77 — The Act of December 22, 1993, Public Law 529, No. 77,
codified as the Allegheny Regional Asset District Law, 16 P.S.
§ 6101-B et seq., as amended.
2. COUNTY — Allegheny County.
3. DISABLED PERSON — A permanently disabled person.
4. ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER — A long-time owner/occupant of a principal
residence in the Municipality of Bethel Park who is a single person,
aged 60 or older during a calendar year in which Municipal real
property taxes are due and assessed, or married persons if either
spouse is 60 or older during a calendar year in which Municipal
real property taxes are due and assessed, or a widow or widower
aged 50 or older during a calendar year in which municipal real
property taxes are due and assessed, or a disabled person aged 18
or older during a calendar year in which municipal real property
taxes are due and assessed; and whose household income as
defined by the Senior Citizen Rebate and Assistance Act88 does not
exceed $30,000.
5. HOUSEHOLD INCOME — All income received by an eligible
taxpayer and his or her spouse while residing in his or her principal
residence during a calendar year for which the relief is claimed.
6. INCOME — All income from whatever source derived, including
but not limited to, salaries, wages, bonuses, commissions, interest,
dividends, IRA distributions, income from self-employment,
alimony, support money, cash, public assistance and relief, the
gross amount of any pensions or annuities, including railroad
retirement benefits for calendar years prior to 1999, and 50% of
railroad retirement benefits for calendar years 1999, and
thereafter, all benefits received under the Federal Social Security
Act (except Medicare benefits) for calendar years prior to 1999,
and 50% of all benefits received under the Federal Social Security
Act (except Medicare benefits) for calendar years 1999 and
88.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 4751-1 et seq.
62.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.3
1:627
thereafter, all benefits received under state unemployment
insurance laws and veterans disability payments, all interest
received from the federal or any state government or any
instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, realized capital
gains, net income from rentals, workers' compensation and the
gross amount of loss-of-time insurance benefits, life insurance
benefits and proceeds, except the first $5,000 of the total death
benefit payments, and gifts of cash or property other than transfers
by gift between members of a household in excess of a total value
of $300, but shall not include surplus food or other relief in kind
supplied by a governmental agency or property tax or rent rebate
or inflation dividend.
7. LONGTIME OWNER/OCCUPANT — A person who for at least 10
continuous years has owned and has occupied a dwelling place
within the county as a principal residence and domicile, or any
person who for at least five continuous years has owned and
occupied a dwelling within the county as a principal residence and
domicile if that person received assistance in the acquisition of the
property as part of a government or nonprofit housing program.
8. PERSON — A natural person.
9. PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The dwelling place of a person,
including the principal house and lot, and such lots as are used in
connection therewith which are reasonably necessary for use of the
dwelling as a home owned and occupied by a person. The term
"principal residence" shall also include premises occupied by
reason of ownership in a cooperative housing corporation, mobile
homes which are assessed as realty for local property tax purposes
and the land upon which the mobile home is situated and other
similar living accommodations, as well as part of a multidwelling or
multipurpose building and a part of the land upon which it is built.
It shall also include premises occupied by a person and located on
land owned by a nonprofit incorporated association, of which the
person is a member, if the person is required to pay a pro rata share
of the property taxes levied against the association's land. It shall
also include premises occupied by a person if he is required by law
to pay a property tax by reason of his or her ownership or rental
(including a possessory interest) in the dwelling, the land, or both.
An owner includes a person in possession under a contract of sale,
deed of trust, life estate, joint tenancy, or tenancy in common or by
reason of statutes of descent and distribution.
10. REAL ESTATE PROPERTY TAXES — All taxes on a principal
residence (exclusive of municipal assessments, delinquent charges
and interest due and payable during a calendar year).
11. SENIOR CITIZEN REBATE AND ASSISTANCE ACT — The Act of
March 11, 1971, Public Law 104, No. 3, as amended, codified at P.S.
72 § 4751-1 et seq.
62.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.3
1:628
62.4. (Reserved)
62.3.2. Property tax rebate for eligible taxpayers. All eligible taxpayers in
the Municipality of Bethel Park who are long-time owner/occupants
shall be entitled to receive a discount limited to a maximum of 25% of
Municipality of Bethel Park real estate property taxes for each year
taxpayer(s) is/are eligible.
62.3.3. Participation in property tax rebate program. Any person paying
property taxes in the Municipality may apply to the Municipal Manager
for certification as a participant in the property tax rebate program
authorized under this article. In order to be eligible to participate in the
program, the person must meet the following conditions:
1. The person must be a single person aged 60 or older during a
calendar year in which Municipal real property taxes are due and
assessed; or be married persons with either spouse being 60 years
of age or older during a calendar year in which municipal real
property taxes are due and assessed; or be a widow or widower
aged 50 years of age or older during a calendar year in which
municipal real property taxes are due and assessed; or be a
disabled person aged 18 or older during a calendar year in which
municipal real property taxes are due and assessed;
2. The person must be a long-time owner/occupant;
3. The property owned by the person must be the principal residence
and domicile of the resident;
4. The person's total household income does not exceed $30,000; and
5. The taxpayer must apply to the Manager of the Municipality of
Bethel Park for certification under this program by June 30, of the
year for which tax relief is being sought. A new application must be
filed for each year relief is requested. The Municipality is permitted
but is not required to rely on the list of qualified individuals for tax
relief created and maintained by Allegheny County.
62.3.4. Rules and regulations. The Manager of the Municipality of Bethel
Park shall have authority to issue rules and regulations with respect to
the administration of the property tax rebate program established
under this article. Such rules and regulations may include, but are not
limited to, reasonable proof of household income, proof of residence,
proof of age and any other reasonable requirements and conditions as
may be necessary to operate the property tax rebate program. Proof of
participation in Allegheny County's Senior Citizen Tax Relief Program
shall be acceptable as proof that a person is eligible to participate in the
Municipality of Bethel Park's Senior Citizen Tax Relief Program.
62.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.4
1:629

ARTICLE II
Real Estate Tax
[Adopted 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 3-9-87A]89
62.5. Statement of intent.
62.6. Short title.
62.7. Authority.
62.8. Definitions.
62.5.1. The preambles set forth above are incorporated in the body of this
ordinance by this reference as an expression of the legislative intent in
the consideration an enactment thereof
62.6.1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance
of the Bethel Park."
62.7.1. A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed
upon the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within
in Municipality of Bethel Park, regardless of where the documents
making the transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the
actual settlements on such transfer took place as authorized by Article
XI-D, "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax", 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq. and by
the "Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law," Act of April 13, 1972,
No. 62, as amended, 53 P.S. § 101 et seq.
62.8.1. ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
form of unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more
persons other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
62.8.2.CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business
trust, or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
62.8.3.DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys,
transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences any wills, mortgages,
deeds of trust or other instruments of like character given as security
for a debt and deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts
where by the legal title does not pass to the grantee until the total
consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any
cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of
time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant, vest or
confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
Section 62.13 of this ordinance.
89.This ordinance repealed Ord. Nos. 11-28-84C and 11-13-78D, which formerly covered real
estate taxes.
62.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.8
1:631
62.8.4. FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least
75% of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least
75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by
members of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
1. Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
2. The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds,
fish, cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
3. Fur farming;
4. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
5. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
62.8.5.GENDER AND NUMBER — The masculine shall include the feminine
and neuter, and the singular shall include the plural.
62.8.6.MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such
individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such
individual's parents and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal
descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing,
and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half
blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the
whole blood.
62.8.7. REAL ESTATE —
1. All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, including without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees, and other improvements,
immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a
conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery
and equipment in an industrial plant.
2. A condominium unit.
3. A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing
corporation, trust or association under a proprietary lease or
occupancy agreement.
62.8.8. REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is
primarily engaged in the business of holding selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35%
or fewer persons and which:
1. Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
62.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.8
1:632
2. Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
62.8.9. TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
1. Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific
number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate, or perpetual leasehold; or
2. Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a
group of rights approximately those of an estate in fee simple, life
estate or perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a
leasehold interest or possessory interest under a lease or
occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold
interest or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has
equity.
62.8.10. TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
62.8.11. VALUE —
1. In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at length for actual
monetary worth, the amount of the actual considered on she actual
consideration therefore, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is
assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where
such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber
or are charged against other real estate; provided, that
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
2. In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgement or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions
without consideration or for consideration less that the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy
agreement, a leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of
properties, or the real estate of an acquired company, the actual
monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the
assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes
for the common level ration factor developed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer tax base
calculations;
62.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.8
1:633
62.9. Imposition of tax; interest.
62.10. Exempt parties.
62.11. Excluded transaction.
3. In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection 1 or 2, the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
4. The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any
executory agreement for the construction of buildings, structures
or other permanent improvements to real estate between the
grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not
removed thereby or between the grantor, the agent or principal of
the grantor of a related corporation, association or partnership and
the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
62.9.1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts of presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document under the provisions of 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., authorized by
Article XI-D "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax", as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq., which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
62.9.2. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Record of Deeds of
Allegheny County whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount
of the tax and the signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
62.9.3. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due, shall added and collected.
62.10.1. The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt
from payment of the tax imposed by this ordinance. The exemption of
such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to
a transaction from liability for the tax.
62.11.1. The tax imposed by Section 62.9 shall not be imposed upon:
1. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
62.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.11
1:634
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
2. A document which the Municipality of Bethel Park is prohibited
from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
3. A conveyance to the Municipality, township, school district or
county pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township,
school district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff sale
or Tax Claim Bureau sale.
4. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
5. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property past by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; whoever, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interests, tax is due on the excess.
6. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
7. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from as personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
8. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemptions shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
9. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinance trust.
10. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
62.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.11
1:635
11. A transfer: (a) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (b) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principle, no
tax be imposed under this ordinance. Where the document by
which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the
benefit of, his principle there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims as exemption from taxation under this clause.
12. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this ordinance.
13. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
14. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
15. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
a. The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
b. The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
16. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is a bona fide holder or a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
17. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer for commercial
purposes.
62.11 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.11
1:636
62.12. Documents relating to association or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
62.13. Acquired company.
18. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities.
19. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
20. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
21. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
22. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
62.11.2. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement
of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this ordinance.
62.12.1. Except as otherwise provided in Section 62.11, documents which
make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate
between associations or corporations and the members, partners,
shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes
of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate from
their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
62.13.1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
62.13.2.With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a
family farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
corporation of when, because of issuance of transfer of stock or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm corporation under this ordinance.
62.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.13
1:637
62.14. Credits against tax.
62.15. Extension of lease.
62.16. Proceeds of judicial sale.
62.13.3.Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company
shall present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each
county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary
stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real
estate holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
62.14.1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
62.14.2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which
was transferred to the builder within the preceding year as
consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time
of the transfer to the builder shall be given to the builder toward the
amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
62.14.3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the
grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall
be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
62.14.4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of sale shall be given the grantor toward
the tax due upon the deed.
62.14.5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given
under this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is
greater than the amount than the tax due, no refund or carry over credit
will be allowed.
62.15.1. In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right
or option to renew or extend a lease will be executed if the rental
charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental
charge is established.
62.16.1. The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other
obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the
writ upon which the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax,
62.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.16
1:638
62.17. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
62.18. Statement of value.
and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the
tax herein imposed out of the first monies paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire
tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
62.17.1. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983
(P.O. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Municipality of Bethel Park based on a redetermination of the amount
of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Municipality of Bethel Park.
62.17.2. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
62.17.3. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to
the Municipality of Bethel Park all local realty transfer taxes collected,
less 2% for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in
reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2%
commission shall be paid to the county.
62.17.4. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall re-record the
deed or record the additional realty transfer tax from only when both
the state and local amounts and a re-recording or recording fee has
been tendered.
62.18.1. Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds
for recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the
true, full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a
statement of value executed by responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and
complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this ordinance. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax statement of value may be submitted for this purpose. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real
estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship. Other documents presented for the affixation of stamps
shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document and statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the
transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and
complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this ordinance.
62.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.19
1:639
62.19. Registration of deeds.
62.20. Civil penalties.
62.21. Violations and penalties.
62.19.1. Every grantee or any persons acting as his agent or in his behalf
shall register the documents in the register of the Municipality of bethel
Park, and no documents shall be registered by the Secretary of the
municipality or by any person acting in that behalf, unless review
stamps of the Municipality of Bethel are affixed upon said document in
the manner herein required to the extent of 1-1/2% of the value of the
subject matter of said document, or unless a stamp imprint thereof is
impressed upon said deed indicating or evidencing receipt of such taxes
as herein imposed.
62.20.1. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this ordinance is
due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of
the underpayment.
62.20.2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this
ordinance on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such
failure is due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of
the amount of such tax is the failure is for not more than one month,
with an additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof
during which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% of the
aggregate.
62.21.1. Any person who fails to affix the required revenue stamps for the
taxes hereby imposed upon any document evidencing the privilege
hereby taxes or the transfer or conveyance of any interest in land,
tenements or hereditaments situate or located wholly partly within the
Municipality of Bethel Park as the subject matter of a deed in
accordance with the provisions hereof; or who fails to procure, in lieu of
revenue stamps, a stamp imprint impressed thereon showing or
evidencing the payment of the taxes hereby imposed; or who fails or
neglects to register the deed as required by this ordinance or by
another ordinance of the Municipality of Bethel Park; or who fails,
neglects or refuses to comply to the rules and prescribed, adopted and
promulgated by the Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park; or who
fraudulently tears, removes or destroys and cancelled revenue stamps
for any deed; or who improvises false stamp imprints; or who alters in
any manner a stamp imprint impressed upon any document; or who
fraudulently affixes a lesser amount of stamps than are required by the
provisions of this ordinance; or who forges or counterfeits the revenue
stamps hereby authorized; or who procures any impressions and
counterfeiting devises; or who willfully removes or alters cancelled
revenue stamps or the markings of stamp imprints thereon for the
purpose and with the intent of using or causing the same to be
fraudulently used again; or who knowingly buys, sells, offers for sale or
62.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.21
1:640
62.22. Lien.
62.23. Enforcement.
62.24. Regulations.
62.25. Severability.
gives away such altered or restored stamps or stamp imprints for the
reuse by any other person; or who knowingly or willfully possesses,
keeps, sells, or offers to sell any forged or counterfeit stamps; or who
make a false certification or affidavit required by the provisions of this
ordinance; or who aides, assists or abets in any way, either overtly
or in avoidance of the payment of tax hereby imposed, shall, upon
conviction before a Justice of the Peace, be liable to a penalty or fine
of $100 for each and every offense, together with costs of prosecution,
and be required to pay the amount of the taxes withheld or be subject
to imprisonment in the Allegheny County Jail or Allegheny County
Workhouse for a period not to exceed 30 days.
62.22.1. The tax imposed by this ordinance shall become a lien upon the
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying,
being situated, wholly or in part within the boundaries of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, which lands, tenements, or hereditaments
or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or transferred by
the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by
this ordinance, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under this
ordinance is due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment
or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a
municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and
Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 1701 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
62.23.1. All tax imposed by this ordinance together with interest and
penalties prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debt of like
character are recovered.
62.24.1. The Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated
into and made a part of this ordinance.
62.25.1. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance by declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance in its entirety or of
any part thereof other than that declared to be invalid.
62.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.26
1:641
62.26. Repealer.
62.27. Effective date.
62.26.1. Ordinance No. 11-13-78D and Ordinance No. 11-28-84C, and all
other amendments and additions thereto, are hereby repealed.
62.27.1. This ordinance shall be effective in 30 days.
62.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.27
1:642
ARTICLE III
Income Tax
[Adopted 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 12-11-78A; amended in its
entirety 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 11-8-99A90]
62.28. Legislative intent.
62.29. Definitions.
62.28.1. The preambles set forth above are incorporated in the body of this
ordinance by this reference as an expression of the legislative intent in
the consideration and enactment thereof. It is also Council's intent that
the tax levied hereby will be collected and administered in the same
manner, under the same procedures, at the same time and by the same
municipal employees and/or private agency as the tax presently
imposed pursuant to Ordinance No. 12-11-78A, as amended and
reenacted.
62.29.1. The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
62.29.2. ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
62.29.3. BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by a person, partnership,
association or any other entity.
62.29.4.CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association
organized under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
62.29.5. CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
62.29.6. DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent
home and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is
absent. Actual residence is not necessarily a domicile, for a domicile is
the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is
permanent rather than transitory. A domicile is the place in which a
person has voluntarily fixed the habitation of such person's family, not
for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce such
person to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of businesses
or associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of
business affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that its provisions be effective retroactive to
1-1-1999.
62.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.29
1:643
62.29.7.EARNED INCOME — Compensation as determined under Section
303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I, Subpt. B,
Art. V (relating to personal income tax). Employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971." The amount of any housing allowance provided
to a member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
[Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 5-12-03A]
62.29.8.EMPLOYEE — Any natural person domiciled in the Municipality of
Bethel Park or employed therein upon whose earned income, as above
defined, a tax is imposed by this ordinance.
62.29.9.EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity
employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
62.29.10.INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — The person, public
employee or private agency designated by the Municipality of Bethel
Park to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net profits;
the Finance Officer of the Municipality, or the Municipal Manager's
designee.
62.29.11.NET PROFIT — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the
"Tax Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt.
B, Art. V (relating to personal income tax). The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the
nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the
business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
[Amended 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 5-12-03A]
1. Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business;
2. Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
3. Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
4. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
62.29.12. PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
62.29.13. PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
62.29.14. RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
62.29.15. SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current
year.
62.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.29
1:644
62.30. Levy of tax; continuance without annual reenactment.
[Amended 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 11-10-03B; 11-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 11-10-08A]
62.31. Declaration and payment.
62.29.16. TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other
entity, required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net
profits, or to pay a tax thereon.
62.29.17.NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other
entity domiciled outside the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 5-12-03A]
62.30.1. A tax for general revenue purposes of 9/10 of 1% is hereby imposed
on:
1. Earned income received beginning January 1, 2009, and ending
December 31, 2009, by residents of the Municipality of Bethel Park;
and on
2. The net profits earned beginning January 1, 2009, and ending
December 31, 2009, of businesses, professions or other activities
conducted by residents of the Municipality of Bethel Park,
regardless of where the same were earned.
62.30.2. The tax herein levied and imposed shall continue in force on a
calendar-year basis following December 31, 2009, without annual
reenactment until such time as the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park shall change the rate of tax or by appropriate ordinance repeal
such tax.
62.31.1. Net profits.
1. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the Officer a declaration of his
estimated net profits during the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the current year, and pay to the Officer in
four equal quarterly installments the tax due thereon as follows:
the first installment at the time of filing the declaration and the
other installments on or before July 15 of the current year, and
October 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
2. Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before July 15 of the current year, October 15 of the
current year or January 15 of the succeeding year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the Officer in equal
installments the tax due thereon on or before the quarterly
payment dates which remain after the filing of the declaration.
62.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.31
1:645
3. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year,
make and file with the Officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the Officer, a final return showing the amount of net profits earned
during the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of tax
due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer the
balance of tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the
case of overpayment.
4. The Officer may provide by regulation for the making and filing of
adjusted declarations of estimated net profits, and for the payments
of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits
not previously declared or finds that he has overestimated his
anticipated net profits.
5. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
62.31.2. Earned income.
1. Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of each year, make and file with the Officer, on a
form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing
the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 of the preceding year, the total
amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the
amount of tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the
provisions relating to the collection at source and the balance of
the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
2. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source shall make and file with the Officer,
on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three-month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such returns shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Officer
the amount of tax shown as due thereon. [Amended 8-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 8-11-2008]
62.31 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.32
1:646
62.32. Collection at source.
62.32.1. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the Municipality of Bethel
Park, who employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants,
for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not
previously registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer,
register with the Officer his name and address and such other
information as the Officer may require.
62.32.2. Quarterly returns.
1. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, who employs one or more persons, other than
domestic servants, for salary, wage, commission or other
compensation, shall deduct, at the time of payment thereof, the tax
imposed by this ordinance on the earned income due to his
employee or employees who are subject to the levy thereof, and
shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the
current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Officer the amount of
taxes deducted during the preceding three-month periods ending
March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon
between the Officer and employer, shall show the name and social
security number of each such employee, the earned income of such
employee during such preceding three-month period, the tax
deducted therefrom, the political subdivisions imposing the tax
upon such employee, the total earned income of all such employees
during the preceding three-month period, and the total tax
deducted therefor and paid with the return.
2. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods,
has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority,
may be required by the Officer to file his return and pay the tax
monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the Officer
on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for
which the tax was withheld.
3. On or before February 15 of the succeeding year, every employer
shall file with the Officer:
a. An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year.
b. A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
62.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.32
1:647
62.33. Powers and duties of Officer.
current year, and ending December 31 of the current year,
setting forth the employee's name, address and social security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee
during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, and the
amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every employer shall furnish
two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it
is filed.
62.32.3. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove
required and pay the tax due.
62.32.4. Except as otherwise provided in Section 62.31 hereof, every
employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
62.32.5. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
ordinance relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
62.33.1. It shall be the duty of the Officer, who shall be the Finance Officer
of the Municipality of Bethel Park or the Municipal Manager's designee,
to collect and receive the taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this
ordinance. It shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount
received by him from each person or business paying the tax and the
date of such receipt.
62.33.2. Bond.
1. The Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Municipality of Bethel Park, unless it is
waived by Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park. If the Council
of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall, by resolution, designate
any bond previously given by the Officer as adequate, such bond
shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
2. Such bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this commonwealth and duly licensed by the Insurance
Commissioner of this commonwealth.
3. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the
Officer, his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts confided
in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of all
duties required by him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
62.32 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.33
1:648
faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of any
moneys and all balances thereof paid to, received or held by him
by virtue of his office and upon the delivery to his successor or
successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official
things held in right of his office.
4. Such bond shall be taken in the name of the Municipality of Bethel
Park, and shall be for the use of such political subdivision and for
the use of such other person or persons for whom money shall be
collected or received, or as his or her interest shall otherwise
appear, in case of a breach of any of the conditions thereof by the
acts or neglect of the principal of the bond.
5. The Municipality of Bethel Park, or any person, may sue upon said
bond in its or his own name for its or his own use.
6. Such bond shall contain the name or names of the surety company
or companies bound thereon. The Municipality of Bethel Park shall
fix the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the maximum
amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the Officer at
any given time.
7. The Municipality of Bethel Park may, at any time, upon cause
shown and due notice to the Officer and his surety or sureties,
require or allow the substitution or the addition of a surety
company acceptable to the Municipality of Bethel Park for the
purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing
the surety or sureties first approved from any accrued liability or
previous action on such bond.
8. The Municipality of Bethel Park shall designate the custodian of the
bond required to be given by the Officer.
9. The Officer charged with the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this ordinance is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of
this ordinance, including provisions for the reexamination and
correction of declarations and returns, and all payments alleged or
found to be incorrect, or to which an overpayment is claimed or
found to have occurred, and to make refunds in cases of
overpayment where a claim is made within three years of the due
date for filing an applicable declaration or return or one year after
payment of the applicable tax, whichever is later, and to prescribe
forms necessary for the administration of this ordinance. No rule or
regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been
approved by resolution of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall
be available for public inspection.
10. With the prior approval of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park, the Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the
62.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.33
1:649
62.34. Compensation of Officer.
62.35. Suit for collection of taxes.
taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and
necessary business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are
not paid by the taxpayer's employer.
62.33.3. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer, and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby
directed and required to give to the Officer, or to any agent designated
by him, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
62.33.4. Any information gained by the Officer, his agent or by any other
official or agent of the taxing district, as the result of any declarations,
returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized
by this ordinance shall be confidential, except for official purposes and
except in accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise
provided by law.
62.33.5. The Officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
62.33.6. The Officer shall, at least quarterly, distribute earned income taxes
to Bethel Park. Bethel Park shall not be required to request the Officer
to distribute the funds collected but shall at least annually reconcile
their receipts with the records of the Officer and return to or credit the
Officer with any overpayment. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
5-12-03A]
62.34.1. The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his
services and expenses as shall be determined by the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park from time to time. In the case of a single
collector established by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park
and the Board of Directors of the School District of Bethel Park, such
taxing jurisdictions shall share in the compensation and expenses of a
single Officer according to the proportionate share that the total annual
collection for all political subdivisions in a single collector district,
except that with the agreement of 2/3 of all participating political
subdivisions, a different manner of sharing may be substituted.
62.35.1. The Officer may sue in the name of the Municipality of Bethel Park
for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this ordinance.
62.33 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.35
1:650
62.36. Interest and penalties.
62.37. Violations and penalties.
62.35.2. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this ordinance shall
be begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
1. Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this ordinance, there shall be no limitation.
2. Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
3. In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall begin with six years.
4. Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
ordinance and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the
Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make
the deductions required by this section, there shall be no limitation.
5. This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by law.
62.35.3. The Officer may sue for the recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided that such suit is begun within two years after making such
refund, except that the suit may be brought within five years if it
appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or
misrepresentation of material fact.
62.36.1. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
6% per annum in the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/
2 of 1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction
thereof during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and
collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the
person liable therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
62.37.1. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this ordinance; any employer who fails, neglects
or refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees; any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers; and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
62.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.37
1:651
62.38. Administration and enforcement.
62.39. Authority.
62.40. Severability.
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amounts of his net profits or earned income in order
to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof before any Justice of the Peace
or Magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction in Allegheny County,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, and
costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days in the Allegheny County Jail.
62.37.2. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential
under the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof
before any Justice of the Peace or Magistrate or court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense, and costs, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days in the Allegheny
County Jail.
62.37.3. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this ordinance or
applicable law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
62.37.4. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this ordinance shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
62.38.1. The Municipal Manager and Finance Officer of the Municipality of
Bethel Park are charged with enforcement and collection of the taxes
enacted under the article. Assessment, enforcement and collection
procedures and any appeal therefrom shall be pursuant to rules and
regulations as have been or will be adopted by Municipal Council,
including such rules and regulations required to be adopted by
Pennsylvania Act 50 of 1998.
62.39.1. This ordinance and the tax imposed hereunder is adopted under
and by virtue of the authority contained in the Act of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania numbered 62,
approved the 13th day of April 1972, entitled the "Home Rule Charter
and Optional Plans Law," its supplements and amendments, the
provisions of which are hereby accepted and adopted by the Council of
the Municipality of Bethel Park, and where the interpretation of terms
or provisions of the ordinance are not in accord with or in compliance
with the provisions of said Act of Assembly, the provisions of said Act of
Assembly are intended to be ordained and enacted by this ordinance as
fully as though incorporated, set forth and made part of this ordinance.
62.37 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.40
1:652
62.41. Effective date.
62.41A. Repealer.
62.40.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any word,
words, part, parts, provisions, section, sentence, clause or exception
shall be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such illegality, invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
words, parts, provisions, sections, clauses, sentences or exceptions of
this ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Council of
the Municipality of Bethel Park that this ordinance would have been
ordained and enacted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional part
had not been included herein.
62.41.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective January 1,
1999.
62.41A.1. Any ordinance or part of ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
62.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.41A
1:653

ARTICLE IV
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 11-13-1978 by Ord. No. 11-13-78C]
62.42. Title.
62.43. Definitions.
62.42.1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Municipality of Bethel Park
Amusement Tax Ordinance."
62.43.1. The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section except when the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
62.43.2.AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including,
among others, lectures; vaudeville, circus, carnival and side shows; all
forms of entertainment at fairgrounds and amusement parks; athletic
contests, including wrestling matches, boxing and sparring exhibitions,
football, basketball and baseball games, skating, golfing, tennis,
hockey, swimming, archery, bathing, shooting, riding, dancing, bowling
and all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation or pastime; show
exhibitions; contests, displays and games and all other methods of
obtaining admission charges, donations, contributions, or monetary
charges of any character from the general public or return for other
than tangible property of specific personnel or professional services.
The term "amusement" shall not apply to actual participation in sports
where no fixed admission charge is paid.
62.43.3. ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership or other
form of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
62.43.4. ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any
character whatever, including donations, contributions and dues on
membership fees, periodical or otherwise fixed and exacted or in any
manner received by producers, as herein defined, from the general
public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for
the privilege of attending or engaging in any entertainment or
amusement, provided that when such entertainment or amusement is
conducted at any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret or other place where
the charge for admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid
for refreshment, service or merchandise, the amount paid for admission
to such amusement shall be deemed to be 50% of the amount for
refreshment, service and merchandise. The term "dues" shall not apply
to the regular established dues or membership fees of private clubs,
lodges or fraternal organizations, but any special assessment made by
such organizations for any affair at which entertainment is prohibited
shall be subject to tax as set forth in this ordinance.
62.43.5.PERSONS — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation or quasi-municipal corporation. Whenever used in any
62.42 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.43
1:655
62.44. Permit required.
clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, or both, the term "person,"
as applied to copartnerships or association, shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
62.43.6. PLACES OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors,
within the Municipality of Bethel Park where the general public or a
limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment of an
established price, attend or engage in any amusement, as herein
defined, including, among others, amusement parks; stadiums; arenas;
baseball parks, skating rinks; circus or carnival tents or grounds;
sporting, athletic, riding, gun and country clubs; golf courses; bathing
and swimming places; dance halls; bowling alleys; tennis courts; rifle or
shotgun ranges; roof gardens; cabarets; nightclubs; and other like
places.
62.43.7.PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place
of amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited
or selected number thereof may, upon payment of any established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
62.43.8. SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
62.44.1. On and after the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be
unlawful for any producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin
to conduct any form of amusement in any permanent or temporary
place of amusement, or any itinerant form of amusement within the
Municipality of Bethel Park, unless an amusement permit or permits
shall have been issued to him and the fees paid therefor as not
prescribed by law and the tax herein imposed paid in accordance with
the provisions herein made.
62.44.2. Application and issuance.
1. Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to
begin to conduct any amusement within the Municipality of Bethel
Park shall file an application for a permanent, temporary or
itinerant amusement permit or permits, as the case may be, with
the Secretary. Every application for such permit or permits shall be
made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the
Secretary and shall set forth the name under which the applicant
conducts or intends to conduct a permanent or temporary place of
an itinerant form of amusement, the location of the permanent or
temporary place or an itinerant form of amusement, the location of
the permanent or temporary place of amusement, whether or not
the applicant is the holder of a mercantile license in effect when the
application is made and, if so, the number of such license, and such
other information as the Secretary may require. If the applicant has
or intends to have more than one place of amusement within the
Municipality of Bethel Park, the applicant shall state the location of
62.43 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.44
1:656
62.45. Levy of tax.
each place of amusement and, in the case of itinerant forms of
amusement, the date and length of time such amusement is to
be conducted at each place. In the case of an application for
a permit for a temporary place of amusement, the application
shall state the name and address of the owners, or the lessee
or custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to
be conducted. If the applicant is an association or corporation,
the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof and any
other information prescribed by the Secretary for purposes of
identification shall be stated. The application shall be signed and
verified by oath or affirmation by the producer, if a natural person,
and, in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer thereof or
some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the
application, to which shall be attached the written evidence of his
authority.
2. Upon approval of the application and payment of any permit fee or
fees required by law, the Secretary shall grant and issue to each
applicant an amusement permit for each place of amusement
within the Municipality of Bethel Park set forth in his application.
3. Amusement permits shall not be assignable and shall be valid only
for a person in whose name issued and for the conduct of
amusements at the places designated therein and shall at all times
be conspicuously displayed at the places for which issued. The
producer of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the
Secretary promptly of any change in the originally contemplated
itinerary, either as to date or time of the conduct of the amusement
at each place.
62.44.3. The Secretary may suspend or, after hearing, revoke an amusement
permit whenever he finds that the holder thereof has failed to comply
with any of the provisions of this ordinance. Upon suspending or
revoking any amusement permit, the Secretary shall request the holder
thereof to surrender to him immediately all permits or duplicates, and
the holder shall surrender promptly all such permits to the Secretary as
requested. Whenever the Secretary suspends an amusement permit, he
shall notify the holder immediately and afford him a hearing if so
desired and if a hearing has not already been afforded.
62.45.1. A tax is hereby imposed for the year 1979 upon the admission fee or
privilege to attend or engage in any amusement at the rate of $0.01 for
each $0.20 or fraction thereof of the established price charged the
general public or a limited or selected group thereof by any producer
for such privileges, which shall be paid by the person acquiring such
privilege.
62.45.2. In the case of persons admitted free of charge or at reduced prices
to any prices to any place of amusement at a time when and under
62.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.45
1:657
62.46. Collection and payment.
62.47. Reports.
circumstances under which an established price is charged to other
persons, the tax imposed by this ordinance shall be computed on the
established price charged such other persons of the same class for the
same or similar accommodations, to be paid by the person so admitted.
62.45.3. In the case of persons having either permanent use of boxes or
seats in any place of amusement or a lease for the use of such box seats
in such place of amusement, the tax imposed by this ordinance shall be
computed on the established price for which a similar box or seat is
used or reserved by or for the lessee or holder.
62.46.1. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this ordinance and shall
be liable to the Municipality of Bethel Park, as agents, therefor, for the
payment of the same to the Municipality of Bethel Park as hereinafter
provided in this ordinance.
62.46.2. Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements
by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted or where the temporary
amusement is permitted by the owner, lessee or custodian of any place
to be conducted without the procurement of a permit or permits
required by this ordinance, the tax imposed by this ordinance shall be
paid by the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where such
temporary amusement is held or conducted unless paid by the producer
conducting the amusement.
62.47.1. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by
producers of the Municipality of Bethel Park, it shall be the duty of:
1. Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement, or before the tenth day of each month after the
effective date of this ordinance, to transmit to the Secretary, on a
form prescribed and prepared by him, a report under oath or
affirmation of the amount of tax collected by him during the
preceding month.
2. Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement to file a report with the Secretary of
any duly authorized agent of his promptly after each performance.
62.47.2. All reports required under this section shall show such information
as the Secretary shall prescribe.
62.47.3. Every producer, at the time of making every report required by this
section, shall compute and pay to the Secretary the taxes collected to
him due to the Municipality of Bethel Park during the period for which
the report is made; provided, however, that such producer may deduct
therefrom 2% thereof, provided that payment is made on or before the
62.45 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.47
1:658
62.48. Permit; fee.
62.49. Recovery.
62.50. Disposition.
62.51. Administration and enforcement.
62.52. Severability.
date due thereof. The amount of all taxes imposed under the provisions
of this ordinance shall, in the cases of places of permanent amusement,
be due and payable on the tenth day of the next succeeding month, and
in the case of temporary or itinerant forms of amusement, it shall be
due and payable on the 10th day of the next succeeding month, and in
the case of temporary or itinerant forms of amusement, it shall be due
and payable on the day the reports in such cases are required to be
made under this section, and all such taxes shall bear interest at the
rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month from the date they
are due and are payable until paid.
62.47.4. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and
payment as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax
shall be added by the Secretary and collected.
62.48.1. An annual permit shall be obtained by the producer for each place
of amusement on January 1 of each year. The fee shall be $25 for each
place of amusement.
62.49.1. All such taxes shall be recoverable by the Municipal Solicitor as
other debts of a like amount are now by law recoverable or by such
other actions as may be necessary for the recovery of the same.
62.50.1. All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered
under the provisions of this ordinance shall be paid into the Treasury of
the Municipality of Bethel Park for the use and benefit of said
municipality.
62.51.1. The Secretary of the Municipality of Bethel Park is charged with
enforcement and collection of the taxes enacted under this article.
Assessment, enforcement and collection procedures, and appeals
therefrom, should be pursuant to rules and regulations as have been or
will be adopted by Municipal Council, including such required to be
adopted by Pennsylvania Act 50 of 1998. [Amended 11-8-1999 by
Ord. No. 11-8-99A91]
62.52.1. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any of its
provisions shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that its provisions be effective retroactive to
1-1-1999.
62.47 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.52
1:659
62.53. Authority.
62.54. Violations and penalties.
62.55. Exemptions.
62.56. Repealer.
62.57. Continuance of tax without annual reenactment.
of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of
this ordinance. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Municipal
Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park that this ordinance would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provisions
had not been included herein.
62.53.1. This ordinance has been passed under the authority vested in the
Municipal Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park by Act No. 511 of
the 1965 General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
terms and provisions of which are hereby accepted and adopted, and in
accordance with the provisions thereof, the Secretary is hereby duly
constituted and appointed by the Municipal Council of the Municipality
of Bethel Park as the agent of said municipality for the assessment and
collection of the tax imposed under said act and the provisions of this
ordinance.
62.54.1. Any person, copartnership, association or corporation who shall
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of
this ordinance or of any regulation or requirement pursuant thereto and
authorized thereby shall, upon conviction thereof before any Justice of
the Peace of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $100 and, in default of payment of said fine, to imprisonment in the
Allegheny County Jail or Allegheny County Workhouse for period not to
exceed 30 days.
62.55.1. Nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable, educational or other nonprofit purposes are exempt from
the levy, collection and payment of the taxes hereinafter referred to.
62.55.2. Any exhibition, amusement, performance or contest conducted by a
nonprofit corporation or association organized for religious, charitable
or educational purposes is exempt from the aforesaid taxes.
62.55.3. In case of doubt or uncertainty as to the application or
nonapplication of the foregoing exemption privileges, the person,
corporation, institution or association claiming the benefit thereof shall
procure from the Secretary a certification of such exemption.
62.56.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed insofar
as the same affects this ordinance.
62.52 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.57
1:660
62.57.1. The tax herein levied and imposed shall continue in force on a
calendar year basis or a taxpayer fiscal year basis following December
31, 1978, without annual reenactment, until such time as the Council of
the Municipality of Bethel Park shall change the rate of tax or by
appropriate ordinance repeal such tax.
62.57 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.57
1:661

ARTICLE V
Agreement for Delinquent-Tax Sales
[Adopted 4-24-1950 by Ord. No. 4-24-50]
62.58. Agreement authorized; conditions.
62.59. Motions by Council required for particular properties.
62.60. Repealer.
62.58.1. Jointly and in cooperation with the County of Allegheny and the
School District of the Municipality of Bethel Park, proceedings shall be
instituted on delinquent-tax claims with the view to selling the real
estate subject to such taxes at sheriff sale in accordance with the
provisions of 1923, P.L. 27, as amended, and it is hereby expressed as
the intention of this Council that in the said proceedings none of the
three taxing bodies shall obtain any advantage over the other by reason
of the divestitures of their respective tax claims, and to that end proper
officers of this municipality, namely, the President of the Council and
the Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed to sign and execute
the agreement hitherto prepared for the foregoing purposes and now
approved by the Solicitor for the Municipality of Bethel Park, a copy of
which agreement so signed and executed, as well as signed and
executed by the proper officials of the County of Allegheny and the
School District of the Municipality of Bethel Park, shall be filed with the
Secretary of this municipality.
62.59.1. Particular properties to be sold under the proceedings and
arrangements as provided for in the preceding section hereof shall be
presented hereafter to the Council, and the foregoing proceedings and
arrangements adopted as to those particular properties by motion duly
adopted.
62.60.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same is repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
62.58 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.60
1:663

ARTICLE VI
Tax Discount or Penalty
[Adopted 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 10-10-77B]
62.61. Discount for early payment.
62.62. Penalty for failure to pay. [Amended 5-10-1982 by Ord. No.
5-10-82A]
62.63. (Reserved)92
62.64. Repealer.
62.61.1. All taxpayers of taxes assessed by the Municipality of Bethel Park,
other than those taxes assessed under the Authority of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257 (53 P.S. § 6201 et
seq.), shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax
upon making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months
after the date of the tax notice.
62.62.1. All taxpayers of such taxes assessed by the Municipality of Bethel
Park, other than those taxes assessed under the authority of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, PL. 1257 (53 P.S. § 62021
et seq.), who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged
against them within four months after the date of the tax notice, shall
be charged a penalty of 10%, plus interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per
month on the total of the face amount with penalty, which penalty and
interest shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and collected
by him.
62.64.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
92.Editor's Note: Former Section 62.63, Extension of deadline, which provided for an
extension of the filing deadline for residents serving in the Persian Gulf area, added
7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 7-8-91C, was repealed 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 11-8-99A, retroactive to
1-1-1999.
62.61 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.64
1:665

ARTICLE VII
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 11-10-08C93]
62.65. Title.
62.66. Definitions.
62.65.1. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services
Tax Ordinance."
62.66.1. As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following words shall have the meanings set
forth below:
62.66.2. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park.
62.66.3. MUNICIPAL COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
62.66.4. COLLECTOR — The person, persons, agency, association and/or
corporate entity designated by the Municipal Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park to collect the tax and to carry out and
administer the provisions of this article.
62.66.5.COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses,
fees, gross receipts or other income derived from engaging in an
occupation.
62.66.6.EARNED INCOME and NET PROFITS — Shall have the same
meanings as those terms are given in Section 13 of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, Act 511 of 1965 (53 P.S. § 6313).
62.66.7.EMERGENCY SERVICES — Emergency services, which shall
include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire
services.
62.66.8.EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation,
governmental agency, or any other body engaged in business or
situated within the Municipality employing one or more employees
engaged in any occupation, other than domestic servants.
62.66.9. EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE — An exemption certificate
substantially in the form of the uniform certificate prescribed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development
affirming that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income
and net profits from all sources within the Municipality of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed,
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. VII, Occupational Privilege Tax,
adopted 10-9-1987 by Ord. No. 10-9-78H, as amended.
62.65 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.66
1:667
62.67. Imposition of tax.
62.68. Exemptions.
which exemption certificate has attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
Municipality for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee
is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
62.66.10. LOCAL SERVICES — Emergency services; road construction and/
or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; and property tax relief
through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in
accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85 Subchapter F.
62.66.11.OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which
any compensation is received.
62.66.12. TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
62.66.13. TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this
article.
62.67.1. For local services purposes, a tax is hereby levied upon the
privilege of engaging in an occupation within the Municipality. Each
natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time in
any year shall be assessed and shall pay the tax in the annual amount of
$52 in accordance with the provisions of this article, subject to the
exemptions set forth in Section 62.68 of this article and the conditions
set forth in Section 62.67.2.
62.67.2. If a school district located within the boundaries of the Municipality
exercises its right under the Local Tax Enabling Act to levy the tax in
the amount of $5, the amount of the tax payable to the Municipality
under this article shall be reduced to $47.
62.68.1. The tax levied by Section 62.67 shall not be imposed upon the
following persons:
1. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
2. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component
of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve,
United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
62.66 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.68
1:668
62.69. Collection through employers.
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
3. Any natural person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Municipality during the taxable year is less
than $12,000.
62.69.1. Every employer shall, within 15 days after the effective date of this
article or within 15 days of first becoming an employer thereafter,
register with the collector the employer's name, address and such other
information as the collector may require.
62.69.2. As to each taxpayer employed for any length of time during any
payroll period of an employer during the calendar year, each employer
shall deduct a pro rata share of the tax from compensation payable to
the taxpayer with respect to such payroll period. The pro rata share of
the tax assessed on a taxpayer for a payroll period shall be determined
by dividing the rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the
number of payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar
year. For purposes of determining the pro rata share of the tax, an
employer shall round down the amount of tax deducted for each payroll
period to the nearest 1/100 of a dollar. Each employer shall file a return
on a form prescribed by the collector and pay the collector the full
amount of all such taxes deducted during a calendar quarter within 30
days after the end of the calendar quarter.
62.69.3. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation
before December 31 of any year shall, within 15 days after
discontinuing business or ceasing operation, file the return hereinabove
required and pay the tax to the collector.
62.69.4. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the collector, shall be liable for such tax in full, as
though the tax had originally been levied against such employer. No
employer shall be liable for failure to deduct the tax if the failure to
deduct the tax arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed.
62.69.5. The employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain adequate
records concerning the employees in the cases described in Sections
62:69.5(1) and 62.69.5(2).
1. In the case of concurrent employment, if the employee provides:
62.68 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.69
1:669
62.70. Direct payment by taxpayers.
a. A recent pay statement from a principal employer that
includes.
[1] The name of the employer; and
[2] The amount of the tax deducted; and
b. A statement from the employee that:
[1] The pay statement is from the employee's principal
employer; and
[2] That the employee will notify other employers of a change
in the principal place of employment within two weeks of
its occurrence.
2. In the case of an employee claiming the exemption set forth at
Section 62.68(1)3, if:
a. The employee has provided an exemption certificate to the
employer;
b. The collector has not otherwise instructed the employer;
c. The employer has not received notification from the person
who claimed the exemption or from the collector that the
person has received earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Municipality equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise
ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year; and
d. The employer has not paid to the person earned income within
the Municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000
in that calendar year.
3. The employer shall file with the collector a copy of each exemption
certificate, including attachments, received by the employer no
later than the last day of the first month of any year when such
taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax.
4. Each employer shall ensure that exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with an exemption certificate form at the time of
hiring.
5. A person seeking exemption from the tax under Section 62.68(1)3
must annually file an exemption certificate with the collector.
62.70.1. Every taxpayer who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other
reason is not collected under Section 62.69 of this article, shall file a
return on a form prescribed by the collector and shall pay a pro rata
share of the tax directly to the collector within 30 days after the end of
62.69 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.70
1:670
62.71. Nonresident taxpayers.
62.72. Administration and enforcement.
62.73. Collections.
62.74. Situs of tax.
each calendar quarter. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on a
taxpayer for a calendar quarter shall be determined by dividing the rate
of the tax levied for the calendar year by four.
62.71.1. Both resident and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of
engaging in an occupation within the Municipality, be subject to the tax
and the provisions of this article.
62.72.1. The collector, on behalf of the Municipality, shall collect and receive
the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed by this article, and shall
maintain records showing interest, fines and penalties imposed by this
article, and shall maintain records showing the amounts received and
the dates such amounts were received. The collector shall prescribe
and issue all forms necessary for the administration of the tax and may
adopt and enforce regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration of this article, including, but not limited to,
requirements for collection through employers, requirements for
evidence and records, and provisions for the examination and
correction of returns. The collector and agents designated by him may
examine the records of any employer or supposed employer or of any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to ascertain the tax due or
verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed
employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the
collector and any agent designated by him all means, facilities and
opportunity for the examinations hereby authorized.
62.73.1. The collector shall collect, by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interest,
costs, fines and penalties due under this article and unpaid. If for any
reason any tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year
on the amount of unpaid tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of
the amount of unpaid tax, for each month or fraction of month during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Whenever
suit is brought for the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection as well as for interest and
penalties. The collector may accept payment under protest of the tax
claimed by the Municipality in any case where any person disputes the
Municipality's claim for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction
thereafter decides that there has been overpayment to the collector, the
collector shall refund the amount of the overpayment to the person who
paid under protest.
62.70 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.74
1:671
62.75. Violations and penalties.
62.76. Refunds.
62.74.1. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day
the person becomes subject to the tax. In the event a person is engaged
in more than one occupation, that is, concurrent employment, the
priority of claim to collect the Tax shall be in the following order:
1. First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
2. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
3. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
62.74.2. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
62.75.1. Any person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be,
upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
for each violation, plus costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by
the Municipality in the enforcement proceedings, and in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment to the extent permitted
by law for the punishment of summary offenses.
62.75.2. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in
which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this article
found to have been violated. All fines and penalties collected for
violation of this article shall be paid to the Municipal Treasurer.
62.75.3. The Municipality may also commence appropriate actions in equity,
at law or other to prevent, restrain, correct, enjoin or abate violations of
this article.
62.75.4. The initial determination of a violation of this article and the service
of notice of violation are hereby delegated to the Municipal Manager,
the collector and their designees and to any other officer or agent that
the Municipal Manager or the Municipal Council shall deem
appropriate.
62.76.1. Any person who has overpaid the tax may obtain a refund by
making a written application for a refund to the collector no later than
one year after payment of the tax or three years after the due date for
payment of the tax, whichever is later, and satisfactorily proves to the
Collector that he is entitled to the refund. Refunds made within 75 days
of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is
62.74 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.76
1:672
62.76A. Receipt.
62.76B. Applicability.
62.76C. Duration.
62.76D. Use of funds restricted.
62.76E. Repealer.
required to remit the tax to the collector, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. A refund shall be
provided only for an amount overpaid in a calendar year that exceeds
$1.
62.76A.1. The collector shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment of the
tax upon request by the taxpayer.
62.76B.1. The tax shall not apply to any subject of tax or person not within
the taxing power of the Municipality under the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
62.76C.1. This article shall continue in force from year to year without
annual reenactment.
62.76D.1. The Municipality's use of the funds derived from the tax shall be
limited to local services. No less than 25% of the funds shall be used for
emergency services.
62.76E.1. Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation
privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for all prior
calendar years.
62.76 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.76E
1:673

ARTICLE VIII
Nonresident Patron Parking Tax
[Adopted 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 8-9-04]
62.77. Title.
62.78. Definitions.
62.77.1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Municipality of Bethel Park
Patron Parking Tax Ordinance."
62.78.1. The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
62.78.2. COLLECTOR — The person or persons appointed by ordinance of
Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park to collect all taxes imposed
by this ordinance.
62.78.3. CONSIDERATION — The payment or compensation of whatever
nature, of whatever amount, and however stated or calculated, received
by the operator from the patron, upon an express or implied contract,
or under lease, or otherwise, whether or not separately stated, and
whether paid in cash or credit to an account, for each parking or storing
of a motor vehicle by a patron. The consideration shall not include the
tax imposed and collected under this ordinance. Whenever the
consideration is not fixed in a cash amount or in a stated and bona fide
cash equivalent, the Collector shall make a reasonable determination of
its cash value. When the consideration is expressed in combination with
another product or service, it shall be presumed that the entire
consideration is attributable to the parking activity.
62.78.4.HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy primarily as the
temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without
meals.
62.78.5.MOTEL — A building designed for occupancy primarily as the
temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or without
meals and which is customarily designated as a "motel."
62.78.6.MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE — Every kind of vehicle used for
transportation and conveyance and allowed for those uses on the
highways of the commonwealth.
62.78.7.NONRESIDENT PARKING PLACE or PARKING PLACE — Any place
within the Municipality, whether wholly or partially enclosed or open, at
which motor vehicles are parked or stored for any period of time in
return for a consideration, not including:
1. Any parking area or garage, to the extent that it is provided or
leased to occupants of a residence on the same or other premises,
62.77 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.78
1:675
62.79. Imposition and payment of tax.
for use only in connection with and as accessory to the occupancy
of such residence; and
2. Any parking area or garage operated exclusively by an owner or
lessee of a hotel, motel, hotel utilized for occupancy and leased on a
daily, weekly or monthly basis, tourist court or trailer park, to the
extent that the parking area or garage is provided to guests or
tenants of such hotel, motel, hotel utilized for occupancy and
leased on a daily, weekly or monthly basis, tourist court or trailer
park for no additional consideration.
62.78.8. OPERATOR — Any person conducting the operation of a parking
place and charging and collecting the consideration for the parking or
storage of motor vehicles at such parking place, including, without
limiting the generality of the above, any governmental body,
governmental subdivision, municipal corporation, public authority,
nonprofit corporation, or any other person so performing as an agent of
any of the above.
62.78.9. PATRON — Any person who drives a vehicle of his own or of
another into and upon a nonresidential parking place, as herein
defined, for the purpose of having such vehicle parked or stored for any
length of time.
62.78.10. TOURIST COURT — A group of attached or detached buildings
containing only individual sleeping rooms or living units, designed for
temporary use by automobile tourists or transients; including areas for
the parking or storage of automobiles, motels, and the like.
62.78.11. TRAILER PARK — Any camp, trailer camp, trailer court, lot, parcel
or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodation for two or more trailers. "Trailer
park" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots upon which
unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of inspection or sale.
62.78.12. TRANSACTION — The parking or storing on a unit-peroccurrence
basis of a motor vehicle at a nonresidential parking place,
and such parking or storing on any other basis and the consideration for
the parking or storing.
62.78.13. Pronoun references shall be read and construed as appropriate to
the relevant circumstances.
62.79.1. Commencing on September 1, 2004, and on a calendar-year basis
from January 1 to each of the following December 31, a tax for general
revenue purposes is hereby levied upon each and every patron for each
and every parking transaction at the rate of 10% on the consideration
thereof. Every operator with each transaction shall add said tax from
the patron as a condition for the allowance of the parking or storing.
Further, the fact of allowing the parking or storing and the fact of
62.78 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.79
1:676
62.80. Parking registration certificates.
collection of the consideration or charge for the parking shall
conclusively presume the collection of this tax.
62.80.1. It shall be unlawful for any person and/or any operator to conduct,
continue to conduct, or thereafter begin to conduct any parking
transaction with reference to a nonresidential parking place within the
Municipality until or unless a parking registration certificate or
certificates shall have been issued to said operator, and unless the tax
imposed hereunder is accounted for in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance.
62.80.2. Every person and/or operator desiring to continue to conduct or to
begin any parking transaction, with reference to a nonresidential
parking place within the Municipality shall file annually an application
for parking registration certificate or certificates for each parking place
with the Collector. Every application for such certificate or certificates
shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the Collector
and authorized by the Manager of the Municipality. Such application
shall set forth the name under which the applicant conducts such
parking transactions, the location of said parking place, the size and
vehicle capacity of said parking place and other such pertinent
information as may be required by the Collector. If the applicant has or
intends to have more than one place of such parking within the
Municipality, the applicant shall state the required information with
respect to each and every place of parking. If the applicant is other than
an individual, the names and addresses of the principal officers thereof,
and any other reasonable information required by the Collector, shall be
stated in the application. The application shall be signed and sworn by
the applicant. The Collector may require that the application be verified
by oath or affirmation.
62.80.3. Upon a proper application being made, the Collector shall charge a
registration and certificate fee which shall be $200 plus $0.48 per
vehicle space, which shall be paid by the applicant, and the Collector
shall grant and issue to such applicant a parking registration certificate
for each place of nonresidential parking as set forth in the application.
A parking registration certificate shall not be assignable and shall be
valid only for the person and/or operator in whose name it is issued, and
it shall be valid only for the conducting of nonresidential parking at the
place designated therein. Said parking registration certificate shall at
all times be conspicuously displayed at the place for which issued.
62.80.4. The Collector may suspend, or after a hearing, revoke a parking
registration certificate whenever the Collector finds that the holder
thereof has failed to comply with any provision of this ordinance. Upon
suspending or revoking any parking registration certificate, the
Collector shall request the holder thereof to surrender immediately all
parking registration certificates and duplicates thereof. Whenever the
Collector suspends a parking registration certificate, he shall notify the
62.79 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.80
1:677
62.81. Records.
62.82. Returns and payments.
holder thereof immediately of such action and shall afford the holder
a hearing, if one is desired and has not already been afforded. After
such hearing, the Collector may either rescind his order of suspension,
continue said suspension or revoke the registration certificate or
certificates.
62.81.1. Each operator shall maintain, separately with respect to each
parking place, complete and accurate records of all transactions, of the
total amount of consideration received from all transactions, and the
total amount of tax collected on the basis of such consideration, and the
same shall be done on a uniform daily basis. Each operator shall issue
to the person paying the consideration such written evidence of the
transaction as the Collector may prescribe by regulations.
62.81.2. As to all transactions otherwise than in a unit-per-occurrence basis,
the operator shall make, have and keep segregated records of all such
transactions, or if oral, then do so by a record of relevant data as
adequately describes each such transaction for calculation of the
proper tax. Records shall be made at the time of the transactions. They
shall be kept in chronological order.
62.81.3. Each operator shall afford the Collector and his designated agents
and employees access to all such records and evidence at all reasonable
times and shall provide verification of the same as the Collector may
require. The Collector and his agents are hereby authorized at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to examine the books,
papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of
any return made.
62.82.1. Each operator in collecting the tax shall do so as the agent and
trustee for the Municipality under the provisions and for the purposes
hereof; and, on the form prescribed by the Collector, shall file with him
by the 15th day of each month returns on all transactions of the
operator in the preceding calendar month. With such filing, the
operator shall pay to the Collector all taxes due hereunder for such
preceding month, such "taxes due" being the full tax that the operator
was charged hereunder to obtain from his patrons, less 2% thereof as
compensation to the operator for his services. Every operator who fails
to comply with the provisions hereof shall be deemed to have
acknowledged his intentional failure of consideration and of his
voluntary surrender of such compensation.
62.82.2. If no return has been made, or if a false return has been made, or if
the operator's records are not properly made or kept, or if the operator
or anyone under his control in any way obstructs an orderly audit or
investigation relating to the determination of the proper tax due, then
the Collector may make such assessment of what he reasonable
62.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.82
1:678
62.83. Collector's powers and duties.
62.84. Penalties and interest.
62.85. Violations and penalties.
determines to be the proper tax due, and in addition to the penalty
and interest thereon as may be due, may add a liquidated damages
assessment of up to 100% of the proper tax, and any fine as may be
imposed shall be in addition to the liabilities hereunder.
62.83.1. The Collector or, on behalf of the Municipality, shall receive and
collect the taxes, interest, fines and penalties imposed hereunder and
shall have the power, in the event that any operator has, in the
judgment of the Collector, failed to pay over the amount of the tax due,
to collect the tax directly from the patron and charge the cost of
collection to the operator and shall maintain records showing the
amounts received and the date such amounts were received. The
Collector shall, with the approval of Council of the Municipality, adopt
and enforce regulations relating to the administration of this ordinance,
such regulations including, but not limited to, those relating to
evidence, records, forms, applications, registration certificates and
returns.
62.84.1. All taxes, assessments, penalties and interests due from the
operators under this ordinance shall be paid to the Collector. Any
operator who fails to file a proper report as due or who fails to make
proper payment as due, shall pay also a penalty of an additional 10% of
the amount of the tax, and in addition, shall pay interest on the tax at
the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof from the due date, the
same being in addition to liabilities.
62.85.1. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or any
regulations pursuant to it shall be subject to a fine of $500 per day.
Each day shall constitute a separate violation.
62.82 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.85
1:679

ARTICLE IX
Collection of Delinquent Earned Income and Occupational Privilege
Taxes
[Adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 3-13-06B]
62.86. Title.
62.87. Reasonable costs approved.
62.86.1. This ordinance shall be known as the "Delinquent Earned Income
and Occupational Privilege Tax Cost and Collection Ordinance."
62.87.1. The amounts established in Subsection 3 below shall constitute
reasonable costs of delinquent tax collection. Reasonable costs shall be
added to and become part of the delinquent taxes due and owing and
shall be collected from the payer of delinquent taxes and shall be
retained as compensation by the delinquent Tax Collector.
1. Pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act and specifically Act 192 of
2004, the political subdivision does hereby authorize the recovery
of reasonable costs set forth in Subsection 3 below, that are
incurred by the political subdivision or charged to the political
subdivision by its Delinquent Tax Collector retained by the political
subdivision in connection with delinquent tax collection as a result
of any taxpayer's failure to pay taxes promptly.
2. Delinquent tax collection services provided by the Delinquent Tax
Collector retained by the political subdivision may result in
voluntary payment of the delinquent taxes due without the
initiation of enforced collection proceedings. The political
subdivision will incur reasonable costs, including charges and
commissions in connection with the collection of the political
subdivision's delinquent taxes. It is the intent of this article to pass
the reasonable costs on to the delinquent person or entity owing
the delinquent taxes or person or entity paying the delinquent
taxes as part of the delinquent taxes due, making the political
subdivision whole on all delinquent taxes collected. The recovery of
reasonable costs established herein shall not be contingent upon
the initiation of enforced collection proceedings. The reasonable
costs authorized and established herein are exclusive of any
attorney fees and expenses, if any, otherwise due to legal counsel
from the political subdivision, the Delinquent Tax Collector, or
pursuant to other applicable laws.
3. Schedule. The following schedule of reasonable costs shall
constitute reasonable and appropriate costs of delinquent tax
collection. The reasonable costs shall be added to and become part
of each delinquent tax, together with the original tax, penalties,
and interest, as well as record costs, if any, and shall be payable in
full before the discharge or satisfaction of the delinquent taxes due.
62.86 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.87
1:681
62.88. Delinquent Tax Collector's authority to proceed with
appropriate legal proceedings.
The schedule of reasonable costs are separate and distinct from
any amounts imposed by the Sheriff, Prothonotary, court, or any
other public office in connection with the collection of the political
subdivision's delinquent taxes. Reasonable costs shall include: a
sum in the amount of 10% prior to the initiation of enforced
collection proceedings before the District Magistrate, and 33% on
or after the initiation of enforced collection proceedings before the
District Magistrate, of gross delinquent tax collections together
with the actual cost of postage and other out-of-pocket expenses
of delinquent tax collection. For the purpose of this provision, the
initiation of enforced collection proceedings shall occur when a
complaint, claim or proof of claim, is prepared on behalf of the
political subdivision or if the political subdivision, by and through
its Delinquent Tax Collector attends any legal proceeding or
responds to any taxpayer challenge relating to the collection of the
Delinquent Tax. From and after any such date, reasonable costs
shall be at the higher percentage.
a. Gross delinquent tax collections for the purpose of calculating
reasonable costs shall include the unpaid original Tax due
together with all penalties and interest for each year of unpaid
delinquent taxes.
b. Liability for payment of the reasonable costs related to the
collection of unpaid per capita, occupation, or occupational
privilege taxes may only be assessed, levied, and collected for
five years from the last day of the calendar year in which the
tax was first due and payable.
c. Liability for payment of the reasonable cost for delinquent
earned income taxes shall be assessed, levied, and collected
for any delinquent earned income tax due and owing to the
political subdivision.
62.88.1. The Delinquent Tax Collector is authorized to file and pursue
appropriate legal proceedings in accordance with Section 21 of the
Local Tax Enabling Act and in accordance with any other applicable law,
including Federal Bankruptcy Law, for the enforced collection of
delinquent taxes. The Delinquent Tax Collector shall inform the taxing
authority before any legal action is initiated for delinquent taxes. The
Delinquent Tax Collector is authorized to bring such proceedings in the
name of the political subdivision and to utilize legal counsel at the sole
cost and expense of the Delinquent Tax Collector to sign, file, and
pursue appropriate legal proceedings, in the name of the political
subdivision, to collect the political subdivision's delinquent taxes.
Pursuant to Act 192 of 2004, the political subdivision, whether
independently or through its Delinquent Tax Collector shall be
62.87 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.88
1:682
62.89. Effective date.
62.90. Severability.
62.91. Repealer.
represented by an attorney when bringing suit under the provisions of
the Local Tax Enabling Act pursuant to Act 192 of 2004.
62.89.1. This ordinance shall take effect April 17, 2006.
62.90.1. If any provision of this ordinance shall be determined to be
unlawful, invalid, void, or unenforceable, then that part shall be
considered severable from the remaining provisions of this ordinance
which shall be in full force and effect.
62.91.1. Any ordinance or part thereof conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance is hereby repealed so far as the same affects this ordinance.
62.88 GENERAL PROVISIONS 62.91
1:683
Chapter 63
TRAPPING AND WILD ANIMAL CONTROL
62.91 BETHEL PARK CODE 62.91
1:684
ARTICLE I
Trapping
[Adopted 2-14-1983 by Ord. No. 2-14-83D]
63.1. Definitions.
63.2. Enactment.
63.3. Persons authorized to trap.
63.1.1. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ANIMAL — Any living creature which roams free, excluding humans
and insects.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation,
unincorporated association or firm.
TRAP — To attempt to capture, injure or kill or to capture, injure or kill
an animal by means of a trapping device.
TRAPPING DEVICE — A still leg trap, wire snare, pit, net, baited hook,
weighted log, wire cage or any similar device.
WILDLIFE — Animals excluding dogs, cats and other traditional
domestic pets.
63.2.1. No person, on or after the effective date of this ordinance, shall set
or place a trapping device or devices on property owned, leased or
controlled by him or allow to be trapped any animals or wildlife at any
time within the limits of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
63.3.1. State or local law enforcement officers in the discharge of their
official duties.
63.3.2. Any governmental official, when such hunting or trapping is
necessary to a scientific biological survey or when related to any aspect
of wildlife management and control.
63.3.3. The trapping of domestic rodents, which include only house mice
and rattus norvegicus, when using traps designed specifically for this
purpose.
63.3.4. Any property owner or his designated agent who traps on his own
property to control damaging wildlife for the protection of his property,
after having secured a permit for the same from the Bethel Park Police
Department.
63.3.5. Any person holding a valid hunting license, trapping game in strict
conformance with the game laws and the regulations issued by the
Game Commission, and any supplemental regulations established
pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. [Added 12-12-1983 by Ord.
No. 12-12-83C]
63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 63.4
1:685
63.4. Permits.
63.5. Penalties.
63.6. Repealer.
63.7. Regulations. [Added by Ord. No. 12-12-83C]
63.8. Private use of traps.
63.4.1. Any person desiring to trap wildlife on his own property to control
wildlife which is damaging his property shall make application to the
Chief of Police or his designate in writing on a form provided for that
purpose. When it has been satisfactorily demonstrated that a
reasonable need exists for such trapping, and that the trapping devices
used will not present a hazard to children, domestic pets and desirable
forms of wildlife, a permit may be issued upon payment of a fee of $5.
63.5.1. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed $300
for each violation. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation, and each trapping device set shall constitute a
separate violation.
63.6.1. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
63.7.1. The Chief of Police, upon the approval of the Manager, is hereby
authorized and directed to issue regulations governing trapping within
the Municipality, said regulations to be consistent with and
supplemental to the Commonwealth Game Laws. Said regulations shall
contain, but need not be limited to, the following provisions:
1. The posting of a security deposit in an amount of no less than $25,
as determined by the Chief from time to time, when a municipal
trap is made available to a citizen.
2. A requirement that any citizen borrowing a trap agree to indemnify
and hold the Municipality harmless from any damage to persons or
property occasioned by the use of the trap, said indemnity to be in
writing on a form approved by the Solicitor.
3. A requirement that any person borrowing a trap hold a license
pursuant to Section 63.4 above or a license pursuant to the
Commonwealth Game Laws.
4. That any person borrowing a trap shall be responsible for the cost
of replacement or repair of said trap where said trap is stolen, lost
or damaged.
63.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 63.8
1:686
63.8.1. The Police Department may maintain a supply of traps for the
trapping of animals and may, pursuant to regulations issued by the
Chief of Police, make available the same to a citizen of the Municipality
of Bethel Park for use on said person's property within Bethel Park.
[Added 12-12-1983 by Ord. No. 12-12-83C]
63.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 63.8
1:687

ARTICLE II
Feeding of Deer
[Adopted 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2-10-14A]
63.9. Prohibited acts.
63.10. Violations and penalties.
63.11. Severability.
63.9.1. No person shall knowingly, purposely or intentionally feed deer,
cause deer to be fed or provide food to deer in Bethel Park on any public
or private property. The prohibition includes, but is not limited to,
disbursement of food on the ground, at a feeding station, in a feeding
device, or in a container of any form; providing a salt or mineral lick/
block; or any other means which serves to provide feed to any deer in
Bethel Park.
63.9.2. A person shall be deemed to have knowingly, purposely or
intentionally fed deer, caused deer to be fed, or provided food to deer if
the person places, or allows to be placed, wheat, pellets, livestock food,
corn in any form, fruit, vegetables, hay or alfalfa, human food scraps,
any form of community sold wildlife feed, birdseed or livestock feed, or
any other edible matter that deer will consume on the ground or within
the reach of deer. The prohibition shall include allowing residue that
deer will consume to remain underneath a birdfeeder. The prohibition
shall not include live vegetation such as ornamental landscaping,
flowers, trees, vines, vegetable gardens, edible matter located either in
an enclosed building or stored in a securely sealed package, or
unmodified commercially purchased bird feeders or their equivalent
when placed out of the reach of deer.
63.10.1. Any person that violates this ordinance shall immediately and
permanently, upon notification from Bethel Park, remove feed and
feeding devices utilized to feed deer and discontinue the activity for
which the notification was given. If a person promptly complies with
such notification, no penalties will be sought.
63.10.2. Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be liable
for a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense, in
addition to the costs of prosecution. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day thereafter during which a violation occurs or
continues.
63.11.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable; and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
63.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 63.11
1:689

ARTICLE III
Wild Animals and Feral Cats
[Adopted 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2-10-14B]
63.12. Definitions.
63.13. Consideration of and responsibilities of ownership.
63.14. Prohibited acts.
63.15. Responsibility for removal.
63.16. Nesting and breeding areas.
63.17. Violations and penalties.
63.12.1. For the purposes of this article, the words and phrases set forth in
this section shall be construed as defined herein:
1. CAT — A member of the species felis catus.
2. FERAL CAT — A cat that lives permanently outside of a domestic
home and is not owned and cared for as a typical companion animal
or pet, as a result of having been feral, abandoned by an owner, or
rendered homeless, wild or stray by any other means.
63.13.1. Individuals who feed and/or maintain shelter for feral cats, in
particular, shall be considered the animal's owner and responsible for
all required immunizations, as well as spaying/neutering of such feral
cat, in addition to other municipal ordinances, including fines and
penalties that govern the activities of animals that are considered pets.
63.14.1. No person shall purposely or knowingly feed, bait, or provide any
wild animal or feral cat with access to food on lands that are publicly or
privately owned. No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store
any refuse, garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or
supplement, salt, or fruit in a manner that would constitute an
attraction to any wild animal. Bird feeders, if used, shall be of the type
that restrict birdseed to the feeder, and any excess seed that falls upon
the ground shall be immediately removed by the property owner.
63.15.1. The removal of wild animals and feral cats from private property
shall be the responsibility of the property owner and not the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
63.16.1. Residents are prohibited from creating potential nesting or
breeding areas for wild animals, such as the outside storage of building
materials, decaying firewood, exposed compost piles, decaying shrub
and tree cuttings, standing water, tires or anything deemed by the
Municipality to provide shelter to wild animals.
63.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 63.17
1:691
63.17.1. Each property owner shall have the duty to remove any of the
above-named materials from the owner's property if in violation of this
ordinance. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each offense,
in addition to the costs of prosecution. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day or of each day thereafter during which
a violation occurs or continues.
63.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 63.17
1:692
Chapter 64
TREES
63.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS 63.17
1:693

ARTICLE I
Trees
[Adopted by Ord. No. 10-9-72F]
64.1. Trees and shrubbery prohibited in certain areas. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1-8-73B]
64.2. Nuisances. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-8-73B]
64.3. Declaration of nuisance by Secretary.
64.4. Removal of nuisance on private property.
64.5. Removal of nuisance on public property.
64.6. Notice to owner.
64.1.1. From and after the enactment of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, corporation, municipal organization or quasimunicipal
organization to place, raise, plant or grow any tree or
shrubbery whether on private or public lands, within 15 feet, measured
on the ground surface from a line directly above the center line, of any
public sanitary sewer located within the municipality.
64.2.1. Any tree or any shrubbery existing within the municipality before the
enactment of this ordinance, or which is planted after the effective date
of this ordinance, whether on private lands or public lands, which shall
constitute a danger to any public sanitary or storm sewer located within
the municipality is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
64.3.1. The Municipal Secretary, after due investigation and consideration,
may determine to be a nuisance any tree or shrubbery existing within
the municipality, whether on public lands of private lands, where, in his
opinion, such trees or shrubbery present a danger to any public
sanitary or storm sewer located within the municipality.
64.4.1. Any tree or shrubbery existing upon private lands within the
municipality and which is determined to be a nuisance as provided in
64.3 hereof shall be removed by the owner thereof within 20 days after
receipt of written notice from the Municipal Secretary as hereinafter
provided.
64.5.1. Any tree or shrubbery existing on public lands or on public streets or
rights-of-way within the municipality and which is determined to be a
nuisance as hereinafter provided, may be removed by the municipality
at its own expense.
64.6.1. The Municipal Secretary, upon determining any tree or shrubbery
existing on private lands to be a nuisance shall forthwith, in writing and
served personally or by registered or certified mail, notify the owner of
said land of his determination, said notice to contain a designation of
64.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 64.6
1:695
64.7. Appeal.
64.8. Hearing.
64.9. Notice of hearing.
64.10. Violations and penalties.
64.11. Severability.
64.12. Repealer.
the tree, trees or shrubbery determined to be a nuisance and that said
owner has 20 days from the receipt of said notice to remove said tree,
trees or shrubbery.
64.7.1. Any person aggrieved by any determination of the Municipal
Secretary under this ordinance may, in writing served upon the
Municipal Secretary personally or by registered or certified mail, within
10 days of the receipt of notice from the Municipal Secretary, where
applicable, appeal said determination to the Municipal Council.
64.8.1. When any person affected from any determination from the
Municipal Secretary under this ordinance as hereinbefore provided, the
Municipal Council shall, within 10 days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal by the Municipal Secretary, meet and hear arguments and
testimony and after full hearing sustain or reverse the determination of
the Municipal Secretary, the decision of the Municipal council to be
final in all cases.
64.9.1. The Municipal Secretary shall give any person appealing to the
Municipal Council, under the provisions of 56-8 hereof, at least five
days written notice of the date and time of the meeting of the Municipal
Council at which the appeal shall be heard.
64.10.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of 56-1 of
this ordinance, upon conviction before any Justice of the Peace of the
Municipality of Bethel Park in summary proceedings, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $100 and in default of payment of
said fine shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the Allegheny County
Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
64.11.1. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance be held for any reason to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, said section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase shall be considered to be severable and such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
64.12.1. Ordinance No. 5-9-60A of the Municipality of Bethel Park enacted
the 9th day of May, 1960, shall be and the same is hereby repealed in its
entirety and any other ordinance or part of any other ordinance
64.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 64.12
1:696
conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance shall be and the same
is hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
64.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 64.12
1:697
Chapter 65
VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC
64.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 64.12
1:698
ARTICLE I
Definitions
65.1. Definitions.
65.1.1. Whenever in this Ordinance the following terms are used, they shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
65.1.2. AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Bureau of
Fire, police vehicles, and such emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations, and ambulances, as are
authorized by the Municipal Manager.
65.1.3.BUS or COACH — A motor vehicle equipped to carry seven or more
persons and engaged as a common carrier in the transportation of
persons in either interstate or intrastate business or in both kinds of
businesses.
65.1.4.CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within
the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other
portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
65.1.5. INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation of
the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or
more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether
or not one such street or highway crosses the other.
65.1.6.MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is selfpropelled.
65.1.7. PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a roadway, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while expeditiously engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or
materials, or otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs, or signals.
65.1.8. PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
65.1.9. PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every road or driveway not open
to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
65.1.10.ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the
regularly established curblines or that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
65.1.11. SAFETY ZONE — That area or space officially set apart within
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or
is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all
times while set apart as a safety zone.
65.1.12. SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines and
the adjacent property lines or that part devoted to pedestrian travel.
65.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.1
1:699
65.1.13. TAXICAB — A licensed public vehicle for hire designed and
constructed to seat not more than seven persons and operating as a
common Carrier on call or demand.
65.1.14. TIME STANDARD — Hours regulating parking shall be construed
to mean Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time, as the same
may be in current use in the Municipality of Bethel Park.
65.1.15. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights,
sounds, or works, or any combination thereof, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and to proceed.
65.1.16. VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway.
65.1 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.1
1:700
ARTICLE II
Authority of Police
65.2. Police to direct traffic.
65.3. Emergency regulations, authority to adopt.
65.4. Ninety-day trial of regulations, authority to make.
65.2.1. It shall be the duty of the police of the Municipality of Bethel Park to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Such police are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or
audible signals in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance;
provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police or firemen may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
Ordinance.
65.3.1. The Municipal Manager and/or Chief of Police are hereby
empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make and
enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions, and the failure to obey the same shall constitute a violation
of this Ordinance.
65.4.1. The Municipal Manager, by and with the consent of the Council of
the Municipality of Bethel Park, is hereby empowered to make a ninetyday
trial of any traffic regulation.
1. Provided, that in advance of its becoming effective, the Council
shall be notified of such proposed regulation, with reasons for it,
and provided that notice of such regulation by signs shall be given
to the public in advance of its enforcement.
2. After the day the said regulation so becomes effective, it shall
govern traffic for a period of 90 days thereafter, within which time
there shall be introduced in meeting of the Council of the
Municipality of Bethel Park an ordinance embodying such
regulations or such part thereof as it may be desire to have
continued in force; and such regulation as is embodied in such
ordinance shall continue in force during such time as said
ordinance shall be pending.
3. And provided further, that if no ordinance embodying such
regulation or any part thereof shall have been introduced in
meeting of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park within the
said period of 90 days or if any such ordinance shall fail of final
enactment, then such regulation shall no longer be in force.
4. And provided further, that the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park may at any time rescind any such trial regulation.
65.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.5
1:701
65.5. Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
65.6. Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles.
65.7. Crosswalks, authority to designate.
65.8. Lanes for traffic, authority to designate.
65.9. Safety zones, authority to establish.
65.10. Authorization to prohibit turns.
65.11. School District properties.
65.5.1. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the operator of any
vehicle publicly or privately owned or used, and it shall be unlawful for
such operator to violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance except
as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance.
65.6.1. The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the movement, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles as defined in this Ordinance while the driver of such vehicle is
operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of
his duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety
of others.
65.7.1. The Municipal Manager and/or the Chief of Police is authorized to
establish and have maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks, at intersections and at
other places where they may deem them necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.
65.8.1. The Municipal Manager and/or the Chief of Police is authorized to
have lanes for traffic marked upon any street and to designate lanes for
traffic moving in a particular direction or at designated speeds.
65.9.1. The Municipal Manager and/or the Chief of Police is empowered to
establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as
they may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians provided
that whenever any new design of safety zone is proposed, the approval
of the Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park shall be obtained.
65.10.1. The Municipal Manager and/or the Chief of Police are empowered
to determine those intersections at which operators of vehicles shall not
make a left turn, right turn or any turn, and shall place proper signs at
such intersections to that effect, and upon adoption of the proper
ordinance by Municipal Council.
65.11.1. All roads of ingress and egress to and from property of the School
District of the Municipality of Bethel Park, and the parking areas of the
65.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.11
1:702
school district property, shall be deemed public roads and ways within
the meaning of Ordinance No. 5-13-63D, and all applicable provisions
of this ordinance shall apply with like effect to said school district
properties as though the same were public roads and parking areas
in accordance with Resolution of the Bethel Park School District and
Municipal Ordinance No. 5-10-65B.
65.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.11
1:703

ARTICLE III
Penalties
65.12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No.
6-13-11]
65.12.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
ordinance or aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of said
provisions shall, within five days of receipt of notice of violation, pay a
fine of $20. If not paid within the specified time period, the violation
shall be turned over to the District Magistrate. Upon determination of
guilt, the fine shall be $15 plus costs of prosecution.
65.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.12
1:705

ARTICLE IV
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
65.13. Pedestrians' rights and duties at controlled intersections.
65.14. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk.
65.13.1. At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or by police officers, operators of vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians crossing or those who have started to cross the roadway on
a green "GO" signal alone; and in all other cases, pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully proceeding directly ahead on a
vehicle "GO" signal.
65.14.1. Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half
of crosswalks.
65.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.14
1:707

ARTICLE V
Public Conveyances
65.15. Streetcar stops.
65.16. Driving on streetcar tracks.
65.17. Bus stops to be designated.
65.15.1. Streetcars shall stop to take on and discharge passengers only at
such points as are approved by the Council of the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
65.16.1. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on P.A.T. streetcar
tracks. This provision shall not pertain to P.A.T. vehicles performing
their regular duties or at designated vehicle crossings.
65.17.1. Municipal Manager is authorized to establish bus stops on such
public streets, in such places and in such numbers as he shall determine
to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public; and in no
event shall any stop be made except where authorized in writing by the
said Municipal Manager, or in obedience to a traffic officer or to a traffic
control signal, sign or marking or to avoid an accident. Every such bus
stop shall be designated by appropriate signs.
65.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.17
1:709

ARTICLE VI
Stopping, Standing, Loading and Parking
65.18. Standing for loading or unloading only in certain places.
65.19. Vehicle displaying advertising.
65.18.1. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any place marked as a loading zone for a period of
time longer than necessary for expeditious loading or unloading.
65.19.1. It shall be unlawful to operate or to park on any street any vehicle
for the primary purpose of displaying advertising or demonstrating
merchandise. It shall be unlawful to operate or to park on any street any
vehicle equipped with and using sound producing devices to attract the
public's attention for advertising purposes.
65.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.19
1:711

ARTICLE VII
Overweight and Through Truck Traffic
65.20. Overweight vehicles.
65.20.1. General Weight Limitation. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause
to be operated upon any of the highways of the Municipality of Bethel
Park, excepting vehicles for local delivery, any motor vehicle having a
gross weight, including chassis, body and load, of more than 18,000
pounds. The Municipal Manager and/or the Chief of Police may issue
permits for excessive weights as authorized by Section 4961 of the
Vehicle Code.
65.20.2. Posted Highways. Council authorizes posting of the following
highways as restricted weight limits in accordance with the general
weight limitations:
1. Church Road - South Park Road to Bethel Church Road.
2. Patterson Road - South Park Road to Logan Road.
3. Oregon Trail - Municipal Line to Highland Road.
4. Meadowbrook Drive - Bethel Church Road to Highland Road.
5. Truck traffic other than for local delivery is prohibited on Bertha
street.
6. Truck traffic, other than for local delivery, is prohibited at all times
on the entire length of North Lightwood Avenue. [Added by Ord.
9-10-91F]
7. Truck traffic is prohibited on Sioux Road from the supermarket
driveway to Comanche Road, and Pontiac Road from Weilsview
Road to Sioux Road. [Added by Ord. No. 10-3-94D]
8. Truck traffic is prohibited on Seneca Road. [Added by Ord. No.
11-14-94A]
65.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.20
1:713

ARTICLE VIII
Speed Limits
65.21. Speeding.
65.22. Signs.
65.23. Use of E.S.P. and Vascar Plus.
65.21.1. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at a greater rate of
speed than that posted on the various streets of the Municipality of
Bethel Park. The maximum speed limit permitted shall be 25 miles per
hour on all municipal roads, except for the following streets, which shall
have a speed limit as indicated below. This limitation shall not apply to
roads maintained by the County of Allegheny or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, which roads shall be separately posted and provided for.
[Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 5-11-92D; 5-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 5-12-97C; 11-10-1997 by Ord. No. 11-10-97B; 1-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-11-99C]
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph)
Andrea Drive 20
Berrington Court 20
Cherryview Lane [Added 3-13-2000 by Ord. No.
3-13-00B]
20
First Street 15
Jordan Street [Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No.
1-24-00A]
20
Orchard Park Drive [Added 1-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 1-24-00B]
20
Oregon Trail 20
Pinette Street [Added 1-24-2000 by Ord. No.
1-24-00C]
20
65.22.1. The Municipal Manager is authorized and directed to remove and
erect signs in conformity herewith.
65.23.1. The Municipal Police Department is hereby authorized to use
excessive speed preventor (E.S.P.) equipment and Vascar Plus
equipment to monitor and arrest violators in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and PennDOT Regulations.
65.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.23
1:715

ARTICLE IX
Stop Intersections
65.24. Stop signs.
65.24.1. The following stop signs are hereby declared to be necessary for
the safe movement of traffic within the municipality in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Section 6109.94
Stop Street Through Street
Airedale Drive at Clifton Road
Airedale Drive in each direction
[Added 10-12-1987 by Ord. No.
10-12-87B]
at Cocker Drive
Alicia Drive at Oxford Drive
Aljean Drive at Eastview Road
Alton Drive at Bethel Church Road
Amberwood Court in a northerly
direction [Added 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 9-14-87C]
at Rocky Ridge Road
Andrea Drive at Hamilton Road
Annetta Drive at Clark Avenue
Annetta Drive at West Munroe Street
Apache Road at Comanche Road
Applegate Avenue at Lytle Road
Arapahoe Road at Kennebec Road
Arkwood Drive at Fruitwood Drive
Ashland Drive at Patterson Road
Ashland Drive in each direction at Centergate Drive
Ashland Drive in each direction at Forest Road-S Crossing
Ashland Drive in each direction at Glen Rock Drive
Barlynn Road at Elderwood Drive
Bartley Drive in an easterly
direction [Added 6-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 6-12-90C]
at North Highland Road
Basset Drive at Fox Terrier Drive
Bassett Drive in each direction at Fox Terrier Drive
Beagle Drive at Library Road
Belmont Avenue at Center Street
94.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 6109.
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:717
Stop Street Through Street
Belmont Avenue at Summit Street
Berryman Avenue at Library Road
Bertha Street in each direction at North Pennsylvania Avenue
Bertha Street at West Library Avenue
at Park Avenue
Bethel Crest Drive at Orchard Avenue
Bethel Crest Drive [Added
4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 4-11-88E]
at Tischler Drive
Bethel Crest Drive at West Library Avenue
Bethel Green Drive at Kings School Road
Bethel Green Drive at Wallace Avenue
Bethelman Avenue at Library Road
Bethel Park Community Center exit
[Added 3-13-2000 by Ord. No.
3-13-00C]
Bethel Park Drive at Colonial Lane
Bethel Park Municipal Building
lower level and upper level parking
lot exits [Added 3-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 3-13-00D]
at West Liberty Avenue
Betsy Drive at Braun Road
Blossom Drive at Gardenville Road
Bluestown Drive [Added 9-10-1990
by Ord. No. 9-10-1990]
at Rocky Ridge Road
Boulder Drive in a northerly
direction [Added 9-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 9-10-90]
at Limestone Drive
Boxer Drive at Cocker Drive
Boxer Drive in each direction at Fox Terrier Drive
Boxer Drive in each direction at Grouse Run Road
Boxer Drive at Kings School Road
Boxer Drive at Whippet Drive
Boxer Drive in each direction at Whippet Drive
Boyer Avenue at Berryman Avenue
Boyer Avenue in each direction at Centerman Avenue
Boyerview Street at Kings School Road
Brady Place at Hillcrest Street
Brady Place at Milford Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:718
Stop Street Through Street
Braun Road at Churchill Road
Braun Road at Irishtown Road Extension
Brian Drive in each direction at Bethel Green Drive
Brightwood Road-south at Library Road
Brightwood Road in a northerly and
southerly direction [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
10-13-03A]
at crossover at the Port
Authority rail track to West
Library Avenue and the
entrance to the Port Authority
Park and Ride facility on
Brightwood Road
Broad Street in each direction at Orchard Avenue
Broad Street in each direction at Sherwood Road
Broad Street in each direction at Summit Street
Broad Street at West Library Avenue
Brookside Boulevard at Bethel Church Road
Brookside Boulevard at Commanche Road
Brookside Boulevard [Added
5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 5-12-97B]
at Kennebec Road
Brush Run Road at Clifton Road
Buick Street at Library Road
Buick Street at Leis Lane
Buick Street at South Park Road
Burnsdale Drive [Added 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 7-11-94E]
at Sherwood Drive
California Avenue in each direction at Cedar Street
California Avenue at Sarah Street
California Avenue at South Pennsylvania Avenue
California Avenue in each direction at West Munroe Avenue
California Avenue-South at O'Neill Drive
Cambridge Road at Pickwick Drive
Carlton Road at Greenwald Road
Carlton Road in each direction at Oakhurst Road
Carolina Drive in northerly direction
[Added 1-4-1991 by Ord. No.
1-14-91A]
at Aljean Drive
Carolina Drive at South Park Road
Cassidy Drive at Oregon Trail
Cassidy Drive at Santa Fe Drive
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:719
Stop Street Through Street
Casswell Drive at Hamrock Court
Casswell Drive at Milford Drive
Casswell Drive in each direction
[Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No.
7-12-99B]
at Oregon Trail
Casswell Drive in each direction at Santa Fe Drive
Cedar Street at California Avenue
Cedar Street-westerly at California Avenue
Cedar Street in each direction at Mahogany Street
Cedar Street in each direction at Main Street
Centerman Avenue in each direction at Boyer Avenue
Centerman Avenue at Murray Avenue
Center Street in each direction at Brightwood Road
Center Street at Orchard Avenue
Center Street at West Library Avenue
Cherryview Lane at Kings School Road
Cherryview Lane [Added
3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 3-11-96D]
at Wilson
Chessbriar Drive at South Park Road
Chessbriar Drive in each direction at Thornwood Drive
Chestnut Street at South Park Road
Church Road at Graeser Avenue
Church Road at Oakhurst Road
Church Road in each direction at Bethel Church Road
Church Road in each direction at Bethel Church Road
Church Road in a southerly direction
[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
12-9-02B]
at Greenwald Road
Churchill Road at Library Road
Clarene Drive at Logan Road
Clark Avenue at Logan Road
Clark Avenue at West Munroe Street
Clark Avenue in each direction
[Amended 10-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 10-14-02A]
at Sarah Street
Clark Avenue in each direction at Vancar Drive
Clearview Drive in each direction at Rolling Green Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:720
Stop Street Through Street
Clifton at McMurray Road
Clifton Road at Library Road
Cocker Drive in a westerly direction
[Added 9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
9-14-87D]
at Airedale Drive
Collie Drive at Kings School Road
Colonial Lane at Library Road
Comanche Drive at Airedale Drive
Comanche Drive in each direction at Navajo Road
Conestoga Drive at Cassidy Drive
Conestoga Drive at Sante Fe Drive
Conestoga Drive in each direction at Highland Road
Copperwood Drive at Limestone Drive
Copsewood Drive at Clifton Road
Cork Drive in each direction at Dashwood Drive
Corral Court at Stoltz Road
Crestview Drive at South Park Road
Crestview Drive at Drake Road
Crestview Drive at Elmdale Drive
Criss Road at Horning Road
Dale Road at Oakhurst Road
Dalmation Drive at Cocker Drive
Dalmation Drive at Kings School Road
Dalmation Drive in each direction at Fox Terrier Drive
Dalmation Drive in each direction at Beagle Drive
Dashwood Drive at Clifton Road
Dashwood Drive at Irishtown Road
Dashwood Drive at Marvle Valley Drive
Dashwood Drive in each direction
[Added by Ord. No. 8-9-89D;
amended 7-12-1999 by Ord. No.
7-12-99C]
at southerly intersection of Cork
Drive
Delaware Avenue at Logan Road
Delaware Avenue at Monongahela Avenue and
McKnight Drive
Delfield Drive at Irishtown Road
Delfield Drive at Glen Hill Drive
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:721
Stop Street Through Street
Delfield Drive in each direction at Southampton Drive
Delya Drive at Willow Heath Drive
Delya Drive at Wells Drive
Denise Drive at Florida Avenue
Denise Drive at Clark Avenue
Diablo Drive at McMurray Road
Diamondwood Court in a northerly
direction [Added 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 9-14-87C]
at Rocky Ridge Road
Diann Drive at Janet Drive
Diann Drive at Gardenville Road
Diann Drive in each direction at Marilynn Drive
Drake Road at South Park Road
Driftwood Drive at N. Lightwood Drive
Dublin Road at Clifton Road
Dublin Road at Irishtown Road
Dublin Road in each direction at Leprechaun Drive
Dublin Road in each direction at Hershire Drive
Dumbarton Place at N Street
Dumbarton Place in an easterly
direction [Added 2-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 2-12-96D]
at first intersection with N
Street
Eastview Drive at Church Road
Eastview Drive at each direction at Winfred Drive
Eastview Drive in each direction at Winfred Manor Drive
Eastview Drive in each direction at Aljean Drive
Eastview Road at Church Road
Eastview Road at each direction at Logan Road
Eastview Road in each direction at Logan Road
Eastview Drive in a southerly
direction [Added 2-10-1992 by
Ord. No. 2-10-92B]
at Sunnyside Road and Appel
Drive
Edwards Street at Bethel Church Road
Edwards Street at Sylvania Drive
Elderwood Drive at Thornwood Drive
Elderwood Drive at Patterson Road
Elderwood Drive in each direction at Chessbriar Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:722
Stop Street Through Street
Elm Street at Cherry Street
Elm Street in each direction at Cedar Street
Elmdale Drive at Patterson Road
Enterprise Boulevard at Industrial Boulevard
Fairview Drive at Logan Road
Fera Drive at Annetta Drive
Fera Drive at Sarah Street
Flamewood Drive at Fruitwood Drive
Florence Drive at Thornwood Drive
Florence Drive at Ashland Drive
Florence Drive at Ashland Drive
Florence Drive in each direction at Forest Road
Florida Avenue at Sarah Street
Florida Avenue at Sarah Street
Florida Avenue at California and S.
Pennsylvania Avenue
Florida Avenue in each direction at West Munroe Street
Florida Avenue in each direction at Denise Drive
Forest Road in each direction at Ashland Drive-N. Crossing
Forest Road in each direction at Ashland Drive-S. Crossing
Forest Drive in an easterly and
westerly direction [Added
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 7-12-10A]
at Florence Drive
Forest Road at Thornwood Drive
Forestview Drive at Highland Road
Forestview Drive at Oakwood Drive
Fourth Street in a westerly direction
[Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No.
11-13-06H]
at Railroad Street
Fox Terrier Drive at Grouse Run Road
Fox Terrier Drive at Boxer Drive
Fox Terrier Drive in each direction
[Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
12-11-95B]
at Great Dane Drive
Fredericka Drive in an easterly and
westerly direction [Added
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 7-12-10B]
at Willis Drive
Fredericka Drive, East at Holly Lynne Drive
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:723
Stop Street Through Street
Fruitwood Drive in each direction at Highfield Road
Fruitwood Drive in each direction at Thunderwood Drive
Galway Drive at Irishtown Road
Galway Drive at Dublin Road
Galway Drive in each direction at Donegal Drive
Gardenville Road at Horning Road
Gatewood Drive at Greenbriar Drive
Gatewood Drive at Logan Road
Gene Drive in each direction at Sinclair Drive
Genesee Road at Apache Road
Glendale Drive at Grandview Avenue
Glendale Drive at Logan Road
Glen Hill Drive in each direction at Delfield Drive
Glen Hill Drive at Kings School Road
Glen Hill Drive in each direction at McKnight Drive
Glen Hill Drive in each direction at Puddingstone Lane
Glen Hill Drive at Vista Glen Drive
Glen Oak Drive in southerly
direction [Added 1-11-1988 by
Ord. No. 1-11-88B]
at Bethel Church Road
Glenrock Drive at Patterson Road
Graeser Road in each direction at Church Road
Graeser Avenue at Fort Couch Road
Grandview Drive in each direction at Keystone Drive
Grandview Farms Court [Added
1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1-13-92G]
at Grandview Farms Drive
Grandview Farms Drive in a
northerly direction [Added
1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1-13-92F]
at Baptist Road
Great Dane Drive at Grouse Run Road
Greenbriar Road at O'Neill Drive
Greenwald Road in each direction
[Added 10-8-2012 by Ord. No.
10-8-12]
at Carlton Road
Greenwald Road at Church Road
Greenwald Road at Dale Road
Greenwald Road in each direction at Logan Road
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:724
Stop Street Through Street
Greenwald Road in each direction at Marbury Road
Grouse Run Road in each direction at Bassett Drive
Grouse Run Road at Boxer Drive
Grouse Run Road at Kings School Road
Grouse Run Road in each direction at Woodcock Court
Hamilton Road at Koeffler Drive
Hamlin Road [Added 10-9-1989 by
Ord. No. 10-9-89G]
at Irishtown Town Extension
Happy Hills Drive [Added
12-10-1990 by Ord. No.
12-10-90A]
at Glen Hill Drive
Havengate Drive in a southerly
direction [Added 3-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 3-8-04]
at Greenhaven Drive
Havenwood Drive at Vista Glen Drive
Heather Drive at Conestoga Drive
Heather Drive at Highland Road
Hemlock Street in an easterly
direction [Added 4-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 4-14-97B]
at Lento Boulevard
Hemlock Street at Main Street
Hi-Ridge Drive at Clearview Drive
Hi-Ridge Drive at Rolling Green Drive
Hickory Street in each direction at Mahogany Street
Highfield Road at Clifton Road
Highfield Road at Fruitwood Drive
Highfield Road in each direction at Fruitwood Drive
Highfield Road in an easterly or
westerly direction [Added
2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 2-8-88E]
at Limestone Drive
Highfield Road in a southerly
direction [Added 2-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 2-8-88D]
at Limestone Drive
Highfield Road at Tidewood Drive
Highland Avenue in an easterly
direction [Added 4-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 4-13-92E]
at Summit Street
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:725
Stop Street Through Street
Highland Avenue in a westerly
direction [Added 4-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 4-13-92E]
at Summit Street
Highland Avenue at West Library Avenue
Highland Circle-North at Brightwood Road
Highland Circle-South at Brightwood Road
Highland Road in each direction
[Added 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
9-8-86C]
at Forestview Road
Highland Road in each direction
[Added 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
9-8-86C]
at Meadowbrook Drive
Highland Road at Milford Drive
Highland Road in each direction
[Added 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
9-8-86C]
at Oregon Trail
Hillard Road at Sylvania Drive
Hillcrest Road at Greenwald Road
Hillcrest Road at Marshall Road
Hillcrest Road in each direction at Oakhurst Road
Hillcrest Street at Milford Drive
Hillside Drive at Library Road
Hilltop Lane at Horning Road
Hiscott Drive [Added 8-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 8-10-87E]
at Ruthfred Drive
Holly Hill Drive in a southerly
direction [Added 10-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 10-13-08]
at Plantation Drive
Horning Road at Janet Drive at easterly side of
tunnel
Horning Road in a northerly
direction [Amended 6-12-2000 by
Ord. No. 6-12-00C]
at Jordan Drive
Horning Road at Kevin Drive
Horning Road-West at Kevin Drive
Horning Road in both directions
[Added 3-12-2007 by Ord. No.
3-12-07B; amended 6-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 6-9-08C]
at N Street
Horseshoe Drive at Kings School Road
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:726
Stop Street Through Street
Idaho Avenue at Church Road
Independence School at Bethel Church Road
Industrial Boulevard [Added
2-13-1989 by Ord. No. 2-13-89C]
at Progress Boulevard
Industrial Boulevard at South Park Road
Irish Place at Irishtown Road
Irishtown Road at Clifton Road
Irishtown Road in each direction at Irish Place
Irishtown Road at Logan Road
Irishtown Road Extension at Clifton Road
Irishtown Road Extension in each
direction [Added 10-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 10-14-02C]
at Hamlin Drive
Iroquois Road at Comanche Road
Iroquois Road at Apache Road
Janet Drive in each direction at Diann Drive
Janet Drive at Horning Road
Janet Drive at Marilynn Drive
Jasmine Drive at Kings School Road
Jordan Drive at Broughton Road
Jordan Drive at Horning Road
Jordan Drive in a westerly direction
[Amended 6-12-2000 by Ord. No.
6-12-00B]
at Orchard Park Drive
Keith Drive at Sansue Drive
Kennebec Road at Brookside Boulevard
Kevin Drive at Baptist Road
Kevin Drive at Horning Road
Keystone Drive at Grandview Avenue
Keystone Drive at Logan Road
Keystone Drive [Repealed
4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 4-11-11C]
Kings Mill Road at Winfred Manor Drive
Kings School Road in a northerly
and southerly direction [Added
6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 6-14-04A]
at Allendale Drive
Kings School Road at Clifton Road
Kings School Road in each direction at Grouse Run Road
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:727
Stop Street Through Street
Kings School Road in a northerly
and southerly direction [Added
6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 6-14-04A]
at Red Barn Drive
Kings School Road at Stoltz Road
Lawrence Road at Horning Road
Lawrence Drive at Kevin Drive
Lawrence Drive at Locust Road
Leis Lane at Bertha Street
Leis Lane at Studebaker Street
Leprechaun Drive in a northerly
direction [Added 6-14-1993 by
Ord. No. 6-14-93A]
Dublin Drive
Lightwood Avenue at Highland Avenue
Limestone Drive in an easterly
direction [Added 3-14-1994 by
Ord. No. 3-14-94F]
at Boulder Drive
Limestone Drive [Added
12-12-1988 by Ord. No.
12-12-88C]
at McMurray Road
Limestone Drive at Rocky Ridge Road
Linda Drive at Diann Drive
Linda Drive at Marilynn Drive
Lindermer Avenue at Brightwood Road
Lindermer Avenue at Library Road
Linwood Drive at Elderwood Drive
Logan Road at Bethel Church Road
Logan Road at Irishtown Road
Logan Road at Patterson and Railroad
Tunnel
Long Avenue [Added 12-12-1988
by Ord. No. 12-12-88B]
at Berryman Avenue
Long Avenue at Library Road
Long Avenue at Murray Avenue
Longcrest Avenue at Brady Place
Longcrest Avenue at Superior Street
Lorene Drive at Bethel Green Drive
Loretta Street at Library Road
Lucille Drive at Melia Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:728
Stop Street Through Street
Lucille Drive at Valley Drive
Lutz Lane at Highland Avenue
Lytle Road at each direction at Applegate Avenue
Lytle Road at Brightwood Road
Lytle Road at Library Road
Madison Avenue at South Park Road
Madison Avenue in both directions
[Added 4-14-1997 by Ord. No.
4-14-97C]
at Steding Street
Madison Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
Main Street in each direction at Cedar Street
Main Street at Hemlock Street
Main Street in each direction at Pine Street
Main Street at South Park Road
Main Street at West Munroe Street
Maple Street [Added 11-13-1995
by Ord. No. 11-13-95E]
at Elm
Maple Street at Main Street
Maplevue Drive in each direction at Ashland Drive
Maplevue Drive at Florence Drive
Maplevue Drive in each direction
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99D]
at Middlegate Drive
Maplevue Drive in a westerly
direction [Added 6-11-2001 by
Ord. No. 6-11-01C]
at Parkridge Drive
Marbury Road at Greenwald Road
Marbury Road in each direction at Oakhurst Road
Marge Street at Lucille Drive
Marge Street in each direction
[Repealed 3-14-1987 by Ord. No.
3-14-87D; added 9-12-1988 by
Ord. No. 9-12-88C; amended
6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 6-11-01D]
at Lucille Drive
Marilynn Drive at Diann Drive
Marilynn Drive at Gardenville Road
Marilynn Drive at Horning Road
Marilynn Drive at Janet Road
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:729
Stop Street Through Street
Marilynn Drive in a southerly
direction [Added 6-9-2008 by Ord.
No. 6-9-08D]
at Janet Drive
Marshall Road at Bethel Church Road
Marshall Road at Greenwald Road
Marvle Valley Drive [Added
8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 8-14-89D]
at Dashwood Drive
McAnulty Road at Horning Road
McKnight Drive at Monongahela Avenue and
Delaware Avenue
McPherson Avenue at Berryman Avenue
Meadowbrook Drive at Highland Road
Meadowbrook Drive each direction at Milford Drive
Melia Drive at Valley Drive
Mesta Street at Brightwood Road
Mesta Street at North Pennsylvania Avenue
Mesta Street at Park Avenue
Mesta Street at West Library Avenue
Mica Court in a westerly direction
[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No.
2-8-88G]
at Boulder Drive
Middle Gate Drive at South Park Road
Milford Drive at Highland Road
Milford Drive in each direction at Hillard Road
Milford Drive in each direction at Hillcrest Street
Milford Drive at Meadowbrook Drive
Milford Drive in each direction at Meadowbrook Drive
Milford Drive in each direction at Strathmore Lane
Milford Drive in each direction at Superior Street
Milford Drive in each direction at Sylvania Drive
Mimosa Drive at Holly Hill Drive
Mimosa Drive at Plantation Drive
Mimosa Drive at Plantation Place
Mitch Haven Drive at Braun Road
Mollenauer Street at Library Road
Monongahela Avenue at Delaware and McKnight
Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:730
Stop Street Through Street
Monongahela Avenue in both an
easterly and westerly direction
[Added 12-11-1995 by Ord. No.
12-11-95C]
at Delfield Drive
Monongahela Avenue at Vista Glen Drive
Montour Avenue at South Park Road
Morrow Place at Edwards Street
Morrow Place at Superior Street
Municipal Parking Lot B at West Library Avenue
Munroe Street at West Library Avenue
Murdock Avenue in a southerly
direction [Added 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 7-11-11]
at Long Street
Murray Avenue at Berryman Avenue
Murray Avenue in each direction
[Added 1-8-2001 by Ord. No.
1-8-01C; amended 1-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 1-8-01D]
at Centerman Avenue
Murray Avenue at Long Avenue
N Street at Dumbarton Place
N Street at Horning Road
Navajo Road at Comanche Road
North Lightwood Avenue at Bethel Church Road
North Lightwood Avenue in each
direction
at DeMare Drive
North Lightwood Avenue in each
direction
at Driftwood Drive
North Pennsylvania Avenue at Bertha Street
North Pennsylvania Avenue at Mesta Street
North Pennsylvania Avenue at South Park Road
O'Neill Drive at California Avenue
O'Neill Drive at Logan Road
Oak Park Drive in each direction
[Added 12-14-1987 by Ord. No.
12-14-87C]
at Copsewood Drive
Oak Street at Main Street
Oakhurst Road at Bethel Church Road
Oakhurst Road in each direction at Carlton Road
Oakhurst Road at Church Road
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:731
Stop Street Through Street
Oakhurst Road in each direction at Dale Road
Oakhurst Road [Added 11-10-1997
by Ord. No. 11-10-97A]
Hillcrest Road
Oakhurst Road in each direction at Marbury Road
Oaklyn Road at South Park Road
Oakly Road in a northerly direction
[Added 8-13-1990 by Ord. No.
8-13-90]
at Eastview Road
Ohio Street at West Library Avenue
Ohio Street in each direction at North Pennsylvania Avenue
Old Ox Road at Highland Road
O'Neill Drive in both directions
[Added 3-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3-9-09]
West Munroe Street
Opalwood Drive in a northerly
direction [Added 6-8-1992 by Ord.
No. 6-8-92B]
at Stonewood Drive
Orchard Avenue at Bethel Crest Drive
Orchard Avenue in each direction at Broad Street
Orchard Avenue in each direction
[Added 7-12-1999 by Ord. No.
7-12-99D]
at Center Street
Orchard Avenue [Added 4-11-1988
by Ord. No. 4-11-88F]
at Tischler Road
Orchard Park Drive at Horning Road
Orchard Park Drive at Jordan Drive
Oregon Trail at Highland Road
Oregon Trail in each direction at Casswell Drive
Oregon Trail in each direction
[Added 5-12-1992 by Ord. No.
5-12-92C]
at Santa Fe Drive
Oregon Trail in a westerly direction
[Added 11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
11-9-92E]
at West Santa Fe Drive
Overhill Street at Sante Fe Drive
Overhill Street at Val Street
Park Avenue in each direction at South Park Road
Park Avenue in each direction at Steding Street
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:732
Stop Street Through Street
Park Avenue in each direction
[Added 12-14-1987 by Ord. No.
12-14-87B]
at Mesta Street
Parkridge Drive at South Park Road
Patterson Road at Logan Road
Patterson Road at Crestview Road
Patterson Road in each direction at South Park Road
Patterson Road in each direction at Thornwood Drive
Patterson Road-easterly at Sycamore Drive
Patterson Road-westerly at Glenrock Drive
Paxton Drive at Broughton Road
Paxton Drive/Yield Sign at Triangular Island
Paxton Drive/Yield Sign at Higbee Drive
Penwood Court at Clifton Road
Phillippi Avenue at Library Road
Pickwick Drive at Bethel Church Road
Pine Street at Main Street
Pine Street in each direction at Main Street
Pinehaven Drive at South Park Road
Pinehaven Drive in each direction
[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No.
2-8-88B]
at Myrna Drive
Pinette Street at Broughton Road
Pinette Street at Orchard Park Drive
Plantation Drive at Willow Terrace Drive
Plantation Place at Stoltz Road
Plantation Place in each direction at Holly Hill Drive
Pleasant Street at Sylvania Drive
Pleasant Street at Hillcrest Street
Pleasant Street at Longcrest Avenue
Pontiac Road at Wellsview Road
Pontiac Road at Sioux Road
Poplar Street at Main Street
Postgate Drive at Ashland Drive
Pougate Drive at Maplevue Drive
Progress Boulevard at Industrial Boulevard
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:733
Stop Street Through Street
Progress Boulevard in a southerly
direction [Added 8-13-1990 by
Ord. No. 8-13-90D]
at Progress Court
Puddingstone Lane at Glen Hill Drive
Railroad Street in a southerly
direction [Added 11-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 11-13-06G]
at E. Alley
Railroad Street at Milford Drive
Ramsgate Drive at Gatewood Drive
Red Barn Road in a westerly
direction [Added 12-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 12-11-89A]
at Kings School Road
Red Barn Road in a easterly
direction [Added 12-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 12-11-89A]
at Fox Terrier Drive
Red Barn Road Court in a northerly
direction [Added 12-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 12-11-89A]
at Red Barn Road
Richard Drive at Valley Drive
Ridgeway Drive in each direction at Railroad Crossing
Rocky Ridge Road in a northerly
direction [Added 8-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 8-13-01]
at Greenhaven Drive
Rittenhouse Road at Horning Road
Rolling Green Drive at Baptist Road
Rolling Green Drive at Rolling Green Drive
Rolling Road at Bethel Church Road
Rolling Road at Milford Drive
S. Pennsylvania Avenue at South Park Road
S. Pennsylvania Avenue at Florida Avenue
Sandra Drive at Marilynn Drive
Sandstone Court in an easterly
direction [Added 9-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 9-14-87C]
at Rocky Ridge Road
Sansue Drive at Broughton Road
Santa Barbara Drive at Milford Drive
Santa Barbara Drive at Strathmore Lane
Santa Fe Drive at Coredera Road
Sante Fe Drive at Old Ox Road
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:734
Stop Street Through Street
Sante Fe Drive at Oregon Trail
Sante Fe Drive in each direction at Conestoga Drive
Sarah Street in each direction
[Added 10-14-2002 by Ord. No.
10-14-02A]
at Clark Avenue
Sarah Street at Library Road
Sarah Street at California Avenue
Sarah Street at Greenbriar Road
Sarah Street in each direction at Fera Drive
Sarah Street in an easterly direction
[Added 6-10-1996 by Ord. No.
6-10-96C]
at Florida Avenue
Sarvis Drive at Jasmine Drive
School Street at Library Road
Seminole Road at Apache Road
Seneca Road at Comanche Road
Seneca Road at Wellsview Road
Setter Place at Fox Terrier Drive
Shawnee Road at Comanche Road
Sherwood Road at Broad Street
Sherwood Road at Bethel Church Road
Sherwood Road at Bethel Crest Drive
Sherwood Road Ext at Bethel Church Road
Sherwood Road Ext. at Milford Drive
Shirley Drive at Kings School Road
Short Street at Hillcrest Street
Simmons Park exit [Added
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 3-13-00E]
at Clifton Road
Sinclair Drive at Gene Drive
Sinclair Drive in each direction at Richard Drive
Sinclair Drive in each direction at Richard Drive
Sioux Road at Comanche Road
Sioux Road in each direction at Pontiac Road
Slater Road at Brightwood Road
Slatewood Court at Rocky Ridge Road
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:735
Stop Street Through Street
Southampton Drive in an easterly
direction [Added 6-9-2008 by Ord.
No. 6-9-08B]
at Delfield Road
Sparton Drive at Graeser Avenue
Spruce Street at Pine Street
Steding Street at Brightwood Road
Steding Street at Madison Avenue
Steding Street [Added 3-13-1989
by Ord. No. 3-13-89D]
at Park Avenue
Sterling Drive at Patterson Road
Sterling Drive at Glenrock Drive
Stoltz Road at Library Road
Stonewood Drive [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 9-10-90D]
at Rocky Ridge Road
Strathmore Lane at Graeser Avenue
Strathmore Lane at Meadowbrook Drive
Strathmore Lane at Milford Drive
Strathmore Lane in each direction at Cambridge Road
Strathmore Lane in each direction at Pickwick Drive
Stonewood Court in a westerly
direction [Added 6-8-1992 by Ord.
No. 6-8-92C]
at Stonewood Drive
Stuart Street at Library Road
Studebaker Avenue at Library Road
Studebaker Avenue at South Park Road
Summit Street at Highland Avenue
Summit Street at Highland Avenue
Summit Street at Broad Street
Summit Street Ext. at Highland Avenue
Summit Street in each direction at Orchard Avenue
Sunset Drive at South Park Road
Sunset Drive [Added 9-10-1991 by
Ord. No. 9-10-91E]
at Forest Road
Superior Street at Bethel Church Road
Superior Street at Highland Road
Superior Street in each direction at Milford Drive
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:736
Stop Street Through Street
Superior Street [Added
11-11-1996 by Ord. No.
11-11-96B]
Longcrest Avenue in a northerly
direction
Surrey Wood Road in a southerly
direction [Added 10-12-1987 by
Ord. No. 10-12-87A]
at Broughton Road
Sweetbay Drive at Kings School Road
Sweetbay Drive at Sarvis Drive
Sycamore Drive at Patterson Road
Sycamore Drive at Glenrock Drive
Sylvan Road at Altherton Road
Sylvania Drive at Milford Drive
Sylvania Drive at Edwards Street
Sylvania Drive in each direction at Superior Street
Transit Boulevard at Enterprise Boulevard
Transit Boulevard at Progress Boulevard
Texas Avenue at South Park Road
Third Street in a westerly direction
[Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No.
11-13-06I]
at Railroad Street
Thornwood Drive at South Park Road
Thornwood Drive at Forest Road
Thornwood Drive in each direction at Glenrock Drive
Thornwood Drive in each direction at Patterson Road
Thunderwood Drive at Tidewood Drive
Thunderwood Drive in each
direction
at Fruitwood Drive
Thunderwood Drive in each
direction
at Tidewood Drive
Thunderwood Drive/2 signs easterly at Clifton Road
Tidewood Drive at Fruitwood Drive
Tidewood Drive at Highfield Road
Tidewood Drive in each direction at Thunderwood Drive
Tischler Road at Orchard Drive
Topaz Court in a westerly direction
[Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No.
2-8-88C]
at Highfield Road
Tracy Drive at Marilynn Drive
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.24
1:737
Stop Street Through Street
Tracy Drive at Gardenville Road
Val Street at Overhill Street
Valley Drive at Library Road
Valley Drive at Lucille Drive
Valley Drive in each direction at Melia Drive
Valley Drive in each direction at Richard Drive
Valleyview Drive at Willow Terrace Drive
Van Voorhis Drive [Added
10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 10-9-89F]
at Clifton Road
Vista Glen Drive at Irishtown Road
Vista Glen Drive in each direction
[Added 10-12-1987 by Ord. No.
10-12-87C]
at Havenwood Drive
Vista Glen Drive in a westerly
direction [Added 10-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 10-14-02B]
at Monongahela Avenue
Voss Road at South Park Road
Wagner Drive at Library Road
Wallace Avenue in a southerly
direction [Added 11-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 11-13-06J]
at Long Avenue
Walnut Street at Main Street
Walther Lane at Bethel Church Road
Wells Drive at Sante Fe Drive
West Library Avenue at Highland Avenue
West Library Avenue in a northerly
and southerly direction [Added
10-13-2003 by Ord. No.
10-13-03B]
at the crossover at the Port
Authority rail tracks to
Brightwood Road and the
entrance to the Port Authority
Park and Ride facility on
Brightwood Road
West Library Avenue at South Park Road
West Library Avenue in each
direction
at Mesta Street
West Library Avenue in each
direction
at Highland Avenue
West Munroe Street at Brightwood Road
West Munroe Street at Florida Avenue
West Munroe Street at Main Street
65.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.24
1:738
65.25. One-way streets.
Stop Street Through Street
West Munroe Street in a easterly
direction [Added 3-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 3-9-09]
at Main Street
West Munroe Street at O'Neill Drive
West Munroe Street in each
direction
at California Avenue
West Santa Fe [Added 5-12-1992
by Ord. No. 5-12-92B]
at Oregon Trail
Whippet Drive at Dalmation Drive
Wilamit Drive at Logan Road
Willis Road at Horning Road
Willis Road at Broughton Road
Willis Road in each direction at Fredricka Drive
Willow Glen Drive at Irishtown Road
Willow Terrace Drive at Kings School Road
Willow Terrace in each direction at Valleyview Drive
Wilson Drive at Kings School Road
Wilson Drive at Puddingstone Lane
Wilson Drive-westerly at Cherryview Lane
Windgate Avenue at Lytle Road
Windsor Place at Highland Road
Winfred Manor Drive at Church Road
Winfred Manor Drive in a northerly
direction [Added 1-10-2000 by
Ord. No. 1-10-00B]
at Eastview Drive
Woodford Road at Bethel Church Road
Woodford Road at Sylvan Road
Woodlawn Avenue at Library Road
Woodlawn Avenue at Park Avenue
Woodlet Lane [Added 12-14-1987
by Ord. No. 12-14-87D]
at Copsewood Drive
Wyncote Road-North at Milford Drive
Wyncote Road-South at Milford Drive
65.25.1. Upon the streets herein designated, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction specified. A sign indicating the direction of traffic
65.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.25
1:739
65.26. Right and left turns.
shall be erected and maintained at every intersection where movement
in the opposite direction is prohibited.
1. First Street from its intersection with Milford Drive to its
intersection with School Street upon which street traffic shall be
permitted only in an easterly direction;
2. Third Street from its intersection with East Alley to its intersection
with Railroad Street upon which street traffic shall be permitted
only in a westerly direction;
3. Fourth Street from its intersection with East Alley to its
intersection with Railroad Street upon which street traffic shall be
permitted only in a westerly direction;
4. East Alley from its intersection with Railroad Street to its
intersection with Third Street upon which street traffic shall be
permitted only in a northerly direction.
5. Locust Road between Broughton Road and Lawrence Road in a
northerly direction.
6. Sunnyside Road between Appel Road and Voss Road; traffic limited
to an easterly direction.
7. Idaho Street; traffic limited to a westerly direction.
8. Second Alley from School Street to Railroad Street in a westerly
direction. [Added 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 12-12-88D]
9. Restrict traffic on Park Avenue to one way in a southerly direction
from South Park Road intersection to the Steding Road
intersection. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 8-10-15]
65.26.1. Upon the streets herein designated, vehicular traffic shall not make
right or left turns as follows. A sign indicating the restriction of the turn
shall be erected and maintained at every intersection where movement
in that direction is prohibited.
1. No right turn on red at the intersection of Milford Drive onto Route
88 (LR 247).
2. No right turn on red at the intersection of Route 88 (LR 247) and
Baptist Road (LR 02063), traveling in a northerly direction on
Route 88 entering onto Baptist Road.
3. No right turn on red at the intersection of Logan Road (LR 02061)
and Route 88 (LR 247), traveling in an easterly direction on Logan
Road.
65.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.26
1:740
65.27. No passing signs and no through traffic restrictions.
4. No right turn on red at the intersection of Highland Avenue and
Bethel Church Road, traveling in a northerly direction on Highland
Avenue.
5. No right turn on red at the intersection of Church Road and South
Park Road (LR 02063), traveling in a southerly direction on Church
Road.
6. No right turn on red at the intersection of Meadowbrook Drive and
Bethel Church Road, traveling in a southerly direction on
Meadowbrook Drive.
7. No left turn onto Library Road from Mollenauer Street, traveling in
an easterly direction.
8. No right turn on red at the intersection of Brightwood Road and
South Park Road (LR 02063), traveling in a southerly direction on
Brightwood Road onto South Park Road.
9. No right turn on red at the intersection of South Park Road (LR
02063) and Brightwood Road, traveling in an easterly direction on
South Park Road onto Brightwood Road.
10. No right turn on red from Wellsview Road onto Fort Couch Road in
a southwesterly direction. [Added 9-8-1986 by Ord. No.
9-8-86D]
11. No left turn onto Giant Eagle Oxford Drive access from Oxford
Drive travelling in an southerly direction. [Added 10-10-1988 by
Ord. No. 10-10-88B]
12. No right turn on red at intersection at South Park Road and
McMurray Road travelling in easterly direction on South Park Road
onto McMurray Road. [Added 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-13-89G]
13. No left turn into the Hills Department Store right-in, right-out
driveway access, travelling in an easterly direction on Oxford
Drive. [Added 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 2-11-91A]
14. Restrict a left-hand turn from easterly direction of South Park Road
to Park Avenue. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 8-10-15]
15. Restrict traffic on northerly side of the Park Avenue/South Park
Road intersection to right turn only (in a westerly direction) onto
South Park Road. [Added 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 8-10-15]
16. No left turn from the southerly direction of Willis Road to
Broughton Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between
4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. [Added
10-8-2018 by Ord. No. 10-8-18D]
65.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.27
1:741
65.27.1. The following "No Passing" signs are hereby declared to be
necessary for the safe movement of traffic within the Municipality in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
1. Bethel Church Road travelling west at Church Road.
2. Bethel Church Road at Edwards Street and North Lightwood
Avenue. [Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 9-9-96B]
65.27.2. Street Closed to Through Traffic. West Library Avenue from its
intersection with Mesta Street to its intersection with Ohio Street shall
be closed for through traffic between the hours of 10:55 a.m. to 12:30
p.m. [Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 11-13-95F]
65.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.27
1:742
ARTICLE X
Parking Prohibitions
65.28. All night parking prohibited.
65.29. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
65.28.1. No vehicle shall be permitted to park upon the streets of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, nor upon the State and County Highways
within the Municipality of Bethel Park between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. when posted accordingly. No vehicle shall be permitted to
park or be parked upon the grounds of any school, church or other
public institutions in the Municipality of Bethel Park between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the owner or driver of such vehicle
shall be attending a meeting in said church, school or other public
institution or shall be attending to the business or affairs of the church,
school or public institution on the grounds of which he has parked or
left his vehicle standing. (The above to include all cemeteries in the
Municipality of Bethel Park).
65.29.1. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same
on any of the streets or parts of streets designated in this section during
the hours specified. When no hours are specified, parking is prohibited
at any time. Signs shall be erected and maintained in each block
designating the provisions of this section.
1. On the westerly side of Park Avenue between Mesta Street and
intersection of South Park Road.
2. On the southerly side of South Park Road between Main Street and
Chestnut Street.
3. On the northerly side of Patterson Road from Elderwood Drive to
South Park Road.
4. On the easterly side of West Library Avenue from the intersection
of Mesta Street for 675 feet in a northerly direction. [Amended
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 11-10-03D]
5. On the southerly side of Mesta Street between the intersection of
West Library Avenue and the intersection of North Pennsylvania
Avenue.
6. On either side of East Alley.
7. On the northerly side of First Street.
8. On the northerly side of Second Street.
9. On the southerly side of Third Street.
10. On the southerly side of Fourth Street.
65.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.29
1:743
11. West Library Avenue, easterly and westerly side, from South Park
Road to 200 feet south of Mesta Street.
12. Milford Drive - No Parking from Rt. 88 to Port Authority Trestle.
13. Oxford Drive - Entire length.
14. Industrial Boulevard - Entire length.
15. McMurray Road - from Municipal Line to approximately 200 feet
past Clifton Road - both sides.
16. Library Road - from 4767 Library Road to the intersection of
Wagner Drive.
17. Loretta Street - Entire length on the northerly side.
18. Buick Street - Entire length - both sides.
19. Andrea Drive - 1526 to 1530 - westerly sides. 1519 to end of drive,
easterly side.
20. Carlton Road - Dead End Portion - "No Parking Both Sides" - 8:00
a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
21. Bethel Crest Drive - 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Monday through Friday
- southerly side.
22. Burnsdale Drive - both sides or within the cul-de-sac area.
23. Broad Street - Monday through Friday - 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. -
southerly side.
24. Sherwood Road - Monday through Friday - 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. -
easterly side.
25. Second Street - Entire paved portion of easterly side. Parking
permitted on westerly side within painted and designated area.
26. South Park Road - southerly side from Main Street to West Library
Avenue.
27. First Street - Entire length - westerly side.
28. Third Street - Entire length - westerly side.
29. Fourth Street - Entire length - easterly side.
30. East Alley - Entire length - both sides.
31. Logan Road - southerly side - Library Road to O'Neill Drive - 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m./3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays and
Holidays.
32. On the southerly side of Railroad Street.
65.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.29
1:744
33. On the easterly side of Wallace Avenue.
34. On the southerly side of Ohio Street from N. Pennsylvania Avenue
to 2709 Ohio Street - 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays and 7:00
a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. [Added 9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
9-14-87B]
35. On the northerly side of Ohio Street from W. Library Avenue to
2730 Ohio Street. [Added 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 9-14-87B]
36. On the northerly side of Greenbriar Road from Sarah Street to and
including House No. 1131. [Added 12-14-1987 by Ord. No.
12-14-87A]
37. On both sides of Bethelman Avenue from Route 88 to Murdock
Avenue. [Added 12-14-1987 by Ord. No. 12-14-87E]
38. On the southerly side of Ohio Street, 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on
Sundays. [Added 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 2-8-88A]
39. On both sides of Alicia and Oxford Drives. [Added 11-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 11-14-88A]
40. On both sides on Avon Lane. [Added 12-12-1988 by Ord. No.
12-12-88E]
41. In front of 4500 Mollenauer Street. [Added 3-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 3-13-89E]
42. On the north side of Beagle Drive between Route 88 and PAT
Trolley tracks. [Added 8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 8-14-89E]
43. On both sides of Donati Road from Fort Couch Road to Pathfinder
School. [Added 9-12-1989 by Ord. No. 9-12-89A]
44. On the westerly side of Brightwood Road from existing pedestrian
crosswalk across Brightwood Road at the northerly and platform
known as Mesta Street stop for distance of 113 feet in a southerly
direction. [Added 2-12-1990 by Ord. No. 2-12-90A]
45. On the southerly side of Beagle Drive from Route 88 to Port
Authority trolley tracks. [Added 3-12-1989 by Ord. No.
3-12-89C]
46. On the southerly side of Greenbriar Road from Sarah Street to and
including House No. 1311, except whereas residents who require
street parking shall contact the Police Department for
consideration. [Added 3-12-1989 by Ord. No. 3-12-89D]
47. On the dead end portion of Robert Drive. [Added 9-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 9-10-90B]
48. On the shoulder of the dead end portion of Robert Drive. [Added
9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 9-10-90B]
65.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.29
1:745
49. Within the cul-de-sac on McPherson Avenue. [Added 10-8-1990
by Ord. No. 10-8-90B]
50. On south side of Loretta Street in front of 88 Loretta Street, from
Prescot Drive to the end of the property line. [Added 11-12-1990
by Ord. No. 11-12-90A]
51. On the gravel berm of the west side of Brightwood Road, between
the old railroad bridge and the Slater trolley crossing. [Added
2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 2-11-91B]
52. On Murray Avenue from Phillippi Avenue to the beginning of the
Neil Armstrong School property between hours of 8:15 a.m. to 9:15
a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. [Added 1-13-1992 by Ord. No.
1-13-92C]
53. On Boyer Avenue from Phillippi Avenue to the beginning of the Neil
Armstrong School property between the hours of 8:15 a.m. to 9:15
a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. [Added 1-13-1992 by Ord. No.
1-13-92D]
54. South side of Alicia Drive to the east of the Scandinavian Spa and
the entrance to Village Green Park. [Added 11-9-1992 by Ord.
No. 11-9-92D]
55. On the southerly side of Railroad Street between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:00 a.m. [Added 7-12-1993 by Ord. No. 7-12-93B]
56. Parking prohibited south of the entrance to Sandy Creek
Apartments to the trolley tracks on the west side of the road, and
from the trolley tracks heading north 500 feet on the east side of
the road. [Added 2-14-1994 by Ord. No. 2-14-94A]
57. Parking on both sides of Wilson Drive from Kings School Road up to
5855 Wilson Drive on the north side and from 5846 Wilson Drive to
Kings School Road on the south side, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. [Added 8-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 8-14-95F]
58. Patterson Road. [Added 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 3-11-96C;
repealed 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2-9-98A]
59. Prohibit parking on Brightwood Road along the west berm from
Slater Crossing to the existing guide rail at the Lytle Road trolley
stop. [Added 3-11-1996 by Ord. No. 3-11-96E]
60. Prohibit parking on the easterly side of West Library Avenue
between South Park Road and Bertha Street. [Added 3-11-1996
by Ord. No. 3-11-96F]
61. Prohibit parking between 5323/5318 Studebaker Street, south to
5360 Studebaker Street. [Added 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2-9-98B]
65.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.29
1:746
62. Prohibit parking on both sides of Berrington Court between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
1-11-99D]
63. Prohibit parking on Keystone Drive between Grandview Drive and
the lower parking entrance to Logan School. [Added 1-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 1-8-01E]
64. Prohibit parking on the easterly side of West Library Avenue in a
northerly direction from the intersection of the crossover at the
Port Authority rail track to Brightwood Road to the intersection
with Broad Street. [Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 11-10-03D]
65. Prohibit parking on the easterly side of West Library Avenue in a
southerly direction from the intersection of the crossover at the
Port Authority rail track to Brightwood Road for a distance of 100
feet. [Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 11-10-03D]
66. Prohibit parking on the easterly side of West Library Avenue in a
southerly direction from a point located 100 feet south of the
intersection of the crossover at the Port Authority rail track to
Brightwood Road for a distance of 225 feet between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. [Added 11-10-2003 by Ord. No.
11-10-03D]
67. Prohibit parking on North Highland Road between the Village
Executive Suites and the Southmark Building. [Added 6-14-2004
by Ord. No. 6-14-04B]
68. Prohibit parking on both sides of West Library Avenue at Mesta
Street from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. [Added
6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 6-14-04C]
69. Prohibit parking on Cambridge Drive on the south side of the street
Between 100 Cambridge Drive and Avon Lane. [Added 6-12-2006
by Ord. No. 6-12-06C]
70. On the east side of Voss Road from South Park Road to Appel Road
from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. [Added 8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
8-13-07B]
71. On the west side of Florida Avenue from Pennsylvania Avenue to
West Munroe Street (six signs). [Added 3-10-2008 by Ord. No.
3-10-08C]
72. On the west side of Baptist Road from the intersection of Hamilton
Road to Horning Road. [Added 10-8-2018 by Ord. No.
10-8-18D]
65.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 65.29
1:747
Chapter 66
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 66, Recreational Vehicles, adopted 3-12-1973 by Ord.
No. 3-12-73A, was repealed 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-1495A]
Chapter 67
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN
65.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 65.29
1:748
ARTICLE I
Vehicles, Unlicensed Motor-Driven
[Adopted by Ord. No. 10-9-72C]
67.1. Certain vehicles prohibited.
67.2. Exceptions.
67.3. Impoundment of vehicle.
67.1.1. It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate any type of
unlicensed motor-driven vehicles known as "minibikes," trail bikes,
motor scooters, four-wheel vehicles known as "go-carts" and multiplewheel
or three-wheel motorcycles and all-terrain type machines or
vehicles, under the following conditions:
1. On the private property of another without the express written
permission of the owner or occupant of the property. This
prohibition shall prevail whether or not the vehicle or operator is
licensed or unlicensed.
2. On any public street or public ground located within the
Municipality.
3. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or
conveyances so as to create loud and unnecessary or unusual
noises which disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of the
residents of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
4. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles in a
careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of any property or person, including
the operator of said vehicle.
5. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or
conveyances within a distance of 300 feet of a residence or
occupied or inhabited building or structure. [Added by Ord. No.
3-14-77A]
6. To operate the aforesaid unlicensed motor-driven vehicles or
conveyances in such a manner as to raise unnecessary dust or dirt.
For the purpose of this provision, "unnecessary dust or dirt" shall
mean suspended particulate matter visible to the unaided or naked
eye from a distance of 50 feet. [Added by Ord. No. 3-14-77A]
67.2.1. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to police and
emergency vehicles.
67.3.1. The Police Department of the Municipality of Bethel Park or any law
enforcement officer of the Municipality shall confiscate and impound
the unlicensed vehicle operated in violation of 59-1 of this Ordinance.
The unlicensed vehicle shall be returned to the owner thereof upon
67.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 67.3
1:749
67.4. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-9-79A]
67.5. Repealer.
payment of any fine imposed as a result of the violation of this
Ordinance and upon payment of any storage charges incurred as a
result of the impoundment.
67.4.1. Any person or individual violating any provision of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof before a Justice of the Peace of the
Municipality of Bethel Park, by subject to a fine not to exceed $300 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Should the
owner of any unlicensed vehicle be subject to a second violation of the
terms of this Ordinance within a period of six months from the date of
the first violation, the Police Department shall impound the vehicle and
shall sell the same pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor
Code pertaining to forfeited vehicles.
67.5.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
67.3 BETHEL PARK CODE 67.5
1:750
Chapter 68
WATER
67.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 67.5
1:751

ARTICLE I
Water-Saving Devices
[Adopted by Ord. No. 7-11-77E.]
68.1. Installation of new plumbing fixtures.
68.2. Duty of Building Inspector to enforce.
68.3. Violations and penalties.
68.4. When effective.
68.5. Severability.
68.1.1. From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, every person,
firm, or corporation constructing a new structure or installing new
plumbing fixtures in any existing structure within the Municipality of
Bethel Park shall:
1. Install shallow-trap toilets which use no more than 3 1/2 gallons of
water per flush; and
2. Install flow-control devices in each inside nonappliance water
outlet which will limit outflow to no more than 2 1/2 gallons per
minute at full from faucets and three gallons per minute at full from
showers.
68.2.1. The Building Inspector of the Municipality of Bethel Park is and shall
be charged with the duty of obtaining compliance with this Ordinance
by inspecting structures and, if necessary, by obtaining necessary
warrants for the entry of premises for the purpose of determining
compliance with or violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
68.3.1. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense for each violation and,
upon conviction thereof by a District Magistrate, shall be subject to a
fine of up to $100 and, in default of payment thereof, confinement in the
Allegheny County Jail for a period of not more than 30 days.
68.4.1. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately following its
adoption.
68.5.1. If a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction holds any
provisions of this Ordinance or the application of any provision to any
circumstances to be illegal or unconstitutional, the other provisions of
this Ordinance or the application of such provisions to other
circumstances shall remain in full force and effect. The intention of
Council is that the provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable and
that this Ordinance would have been adopted if any such illegal or
unconstitutional provisions had not been included.
68.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 68.6
1:753
68.6. Repealer.
68.6.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same is hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
68.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 68.6
1:754
Chapter 69
ZONING
68.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 68.6
1:755

ARTICLE I
Preliminary Provisions
[Adopted 12-19-1966 by Ord. No. 12-19-66A]
69.1. Enactment.
69.2. Short title.
69.3. Effective date.
69.4. Validity and conflict.
69.5. Purpose and intention.
69.1.1. From and after the passage and approval of this ordinance, the
several classes of districts specified herein shall be established and the
following regulations shall be in full force and effect.
69.2.1. This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance, and the map
referred to herein and made a part of this ordinance shall be known as
the Zoning District Map.
69.3.1. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of its signature
of approval by the Mayor, and as provided in the Municipal Code and its
amendments.
69.4.1. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid,
the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole nor any
part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. Where a
provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any building or housing code or in any applicable health regulation or in
any other ordinance of the Municipality existing on the effective date of
this ordinance, or in any regulation issued under the authority of such
code or ordinance, the provision, which establishes the higher standard
for the protection of health, safety and welfare shall prevail.
69.5.1. The purposes of this ordinance are set forth in general terms in the
act of Legislature which enables the Municipality to enact this
ordinance, and in the preamble to this ordinance. The provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
protection of health, safety and welfare of the people at large, and to be
designed to encourage the establishment and maintenance of
reasonable community standards of physical environment.
69.5.2. It is fundamental to the purpose of this ordinance to recognize that
many existing lots or properties throughout the Municipality are less
adequate than others because of their location, size, odd shape or
difficult topography, or any combination of these limitations. A claim of
hardship under this ordinance, therefore, shall not be allowed on behalf
of any lot because the physical characteristics of the lot prevent it from
being built upon exactly as in another lot abutting or close to it or in the
69.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.5
1:757
69.6. Filing.
same zoning district. The regulations herein permit most such lots to
be satisfactorily built upon. There can be some alleviation for other lots
through variances (minor concessions) granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board when special physical conditions make literal enforcement of
the regulations either unsatisfactory in the interest of the people at
large or actually impossible. It is not the ordinance but the physical
conditions that prevent a lot from accommodating a type or area or bulk
of structure unsuited to it. For typical example, it is not intended that
each lot in a Multiple-Family Dwelling District automatically become
the prospective site for a multiple-family dwelling and use. If a lot in
such a district after provision of the yards and other spaces prescribed
for its own and adjacent property protection has a buildable area too
small in area or dimensions for a multiple-family dwelling, then the lot
may be used under its district regulations for another type of dwelling
or building permitted in that district.
69.6.1. This ordinance, including the Zoning District Map, together with any
succeeding amendments thereto, shall be on file and may be viewed by
any interested party in the municipal office.
69.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.6
1:758
ARTICLE II
Rules and Definitions
69.7. Rules.
69.8. Definitions.
69.7.1. The following rules of construction shall apply to this ordinance:
1. The particular shall control the general.
2. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
4. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
5. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for" and/or "occupied for".
69.8.1. All definitions in the Municipalities Planning Code, (53 P.S. 10101 et.
seq.) as amended, are hereby adopted and made a part hereof by
reference.
69.8.2. ACCESSORY BUILDING or ACCESSORY USE — A building or use
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use
and located on the same lot with such principal building or use. The
combined floor area of all building(s) accessory to a nonresidential use
shall be limited to not more than 10% of the gross floor area size of the
first floor of the principal building. The combined floor area of all sheds
or buildings for domestic storage shall not exceed 400 square feet, and
detached garages for residential use with approved driveways shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet. An accessory use includes, but is not limited
to, the following: [Amended 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 5-13-91C;
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
1. Children's playhouse, garden house or private greenhouse.
2. Civil defense shelter serving not more than two families.
3. Garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
4. Incinerator incidental to residential use.
5. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any commercial use unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
69.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:759
6. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities,
on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such
storage is excluded by district regulations.
7. Nonpaying guesthouse or rooms for nonpaying guests within an
accessory building, provided such facilities are used for the
occasional housing of guests of occupants of the principal building
and not for permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units.
8. Servants' quarters or servants' house.
9. Off-street motor vehicle parking area; loading unloading facility;
and residential parking areas. Driveways serving residential
parking areas or garages shall not be included in the calculation of
percentage of lot coverage. [Amended 8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
8-14-17]
10. Home occupation.
11. Fence, sign.
69.8.3.ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by depicting
or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. [Added by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.4.ADULT BOOK STORE — A commercial establishment having a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade including books,
magazines, photographs or other materials, which are distinguished
and characterized by their evidence of matter depicting, describing or
relating to the specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
defined herein or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of such material. [Added by Ord. No. 8-10-87C]
69.8.5.ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. [Added by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.6.ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment which:
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:760
1. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
2. Offers sleeping rooms for rent four or more times in one calendar
day during five or more calendar days in any continuous thirty-day
period. [Added by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.7.ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. [Added
5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.8.ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or
specified sexual activities. [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.9.ADULT USE — Any use involving specified sexual activity
notwithstanding the characterization of that use by the applicant.
[Added 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 8-10-87C]
69.8.10. ALLEY — A serviceway at least 25 feet wide providing a secondary
public means of access to abutting properties.
69.8.11. ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location to another, or any change in use from
that of one zoning district classification to another.
69.8.12. ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders
or foundations.
69.8.13.AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT — An enclosed building where
the principal use is the entertainment or recreation of the general
public or a particular organization excluding adult use as defined
herein. [Amended 5-11-1987 by Ord. 5-11-87C; 5-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 5-8-89G]
69.8.13.1.ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels,
dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:761
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic
antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna. An antenna shall not
include tower-based wireless communications facilities as defined
below. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.14. APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family
structure which is used as a single housekeeping unit and which
contains complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities permanently
installed.
69.8.15. APARTMENT HOUSE — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and containing dwelling units.
69.8.16. ARCHITECT — A professional architect licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87E]
69.8.17. APPROVED — Approved by a designated authority or person in
strict conformance with the terms of this ordinance and the Bethel Park
Code. [Added 1-21-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.18. AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory
buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
69.8.19. AREA, FLOOR — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors
of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of common walls separating buildings.
[Amended 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.20. ASSEMBLY HALL — A room, hall or building used for lectures,
meetings, sermons and gatherings of over 50 people. [Added
8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.20.1. ASSISTED LIVING CARE — A residential facility designed and
designated for the long-term care of persons requiring special
assistance. This includes nursing homes, personal care boarding homes
intended to provide residence for over eight adults and specialized
elderly housing and similar types of residential facilities. Such
residential units shall not include full cooking facilities as part of each
unit. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.21. AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR — Engine rebuilding or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision
service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and
overall painting of vehicles.
69.8.22. AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR — Incidental repairs, replacement
of parts, motor service to automobiles and state inspection, but not
including any operation specified under "automobile repair, major"
above.
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:762
69.8.23.BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of
its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement if
the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the
adjoining ground is five feet or more or if the basement is used for
business or dwelling purposes.
69.8.24. BILLBOARD — See "sign, off-premises and "sign, commercial
outdoor advertising." [Amended 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E;
4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07]
69.8.25. BOTTLE CLUB — Principal use of property involving the assembly
of patrons for social, amusement or entertainment purposes wherein
the patrons either provide or bring onto the premises their own
intoxicating beverages. [Added 10-11-1978 by Ord. No. 10-11-76D]
69.8.26. BUFFER AREA — A strip of land which is landscaped and
maintained in a manner prescribed by the Planning Commission. Walls
and fences as approved by the Planning Commission may be erected in
a buffer area. However, all other structures are excluded and not
permitted in a buffer area. Structures included are, but not necessarily
limited to, buildings, parking lots, parking spaces, roads, streets,
driveways and signs. [Amended 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 11-13-72A]
69.8.27. BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or
by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or any other property. Separation by party and fire walls shall
not constitute separate buildings. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No.
12-11-78C]
69.8.28. BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of the building from
the average elevation of the proposed finish grade to the highest point
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the
eave line for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Said measurement shall be
made on the side of the building with the primary building entrance
used by the public. No floor area above the height may be occupied for
any use. [Amended 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 10-9-89F]
69.8.29. BUILDING LINE — An established line within a property defining
the minimum required distance between the face of any structure to be
erected and an adjacent street line. [Amended 8-13-1979 by Ord.
No. 8-13-79B]
69.8.30. BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Any use involving
business or professional offices and not including retail trade or
manufacturing. [Added 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.31. CELLAR — A portion of a building having 1/2 or more of its height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground. In a dwelling, a cellar
may not contain living quarters.
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:763
69.8.32. CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL — A facility for the outpatient
diagnosis and treatment of human ailments not involving twenty-fourhour-
per-day operation and not involving the sale of drugs or foodstuffs
on the premises.
69.8.33. CLUB AND CLUBHOUSE — A nonprofit association of persons who
are bona fide members paying periodic dues, which owns, hires or
leases a building or lot or portion of either or both, the use of which is
primarily restricted to members and their guests. [Added 8-11-1986
by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.34. CLUSTER AREA — A recorded lot within a cluster subdivision
containing a group of single-family homes. Further subdivision of the
cluster area is permitted for conveyance and recording of the individual
residences. Said lots in the subdivision do not need to meet the
dimensional requirements set forth for the zoning district they are
located in. [Added 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 6-10-96B]
69.8.34.0.0.CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more WCFs,
including antennae, on an existing tower-based WCF, or on any
structure that already supports at least one non-tower WCF. [Added
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.34.0.COLUMBARIUM — A structure of vaults lined with recesses for
urns containing cremated human remains. The structure is used, or
intended to be used, for the placement of urns containing cremated
human remains. This structure can be located as a separate structure
or located within the walls of an existing structure. [Added 11-8-2010
by Ord. No. 11-8-10D]
69.8.34.1. (Reserved)95
69.8.34.1.1. (Reserved)96
69.8.34.1.2. (Reserved)97
69.8.34.2. (Reserved)98
69.8.34.3.COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and/or appurtenant land
owned, leased and/or operated by the Municipality, used for meetings,
assemblies, theatrical performances, recreation, limited retail sales
directly associated with the community uses and associated functions
within the center and with the recreational functions on the
appurtenant land, providing meals to Bethel Park residents and guests,
95.Editor's Note: The former definition of “communications antenna,” added 1-11-1999 by
Ord. No. 1-11-99B, was repealed 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B.
96.Editor's Note: The former definition of “communication antenna, alternative mounting
structure,” added 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2-9-2009C, was repealed 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15B.
97.Editor's Note: The former definition of “communications antenna, stealth,” added
2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2-9-2009C, was repealed 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B.
98.Editor's Note: The former definition of “communications facility, added 1-11-1999 by Ord.
No. 1-11-99B, was repealed 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B.
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:764
education and other similar uses reasonably calculated to improve the
quality of life of the residents of the Municipality. [Added 6-8-1998 by
Ord. No. 6-8-98D]
69.8.35.COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY, MAJOR — A residential
facility providing residence for no more than eight dependent children,
foster children, disturbed children, mentally retarded persons or
physically handicapped persons or adjudicated delinquents and
including no more than two live-in supervisors who provide service for
such residents. For the purposes of this definition, a "child" is any
person under the age of 19. This definition does not include rest homes,
convalescent homes, homes for the elderly or other similar uses
described elsewhere in this ordinance. [Added 10-11-1982 by Ord.
No. 10-11-82A]
69.8.36.COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY, MINOR — A residential
facility providing residence for no more than three dependent children,
foster children, disturbed children, mentally retarded persons or
physically handicapped persons and including no more than two live-in
supervisors. For the purposes of this definition, a "child" is any person
under the age of 19. This definition does not include rest homes,
convalescent homes, homes for the elderly or other similar uses
described elsewhere in this ordinance. [Added 10-11-1982 by Ord.
No. 10-11-82A]
69.8.37.COMMUTER PARKING — A parking lot constituting a principal use
on a lot intended for use by the public to park vehicles while using
available mass transit.
69.8.38.CONVALESCENT HOMES — An institution or building for the
inpatient long-term care of convalescent or postoperative patients,
including therewith full-time nursing care.
69.8.39. COPY SHOP — A retail establishment for the purposes of
reproducing and printing written and graphic materials by
photographic methods. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.40. COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of Bethel Park. [Added
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.41.COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot covered by the building
area.
69.8.42.DAY-CARE FACILITY — A use involving the care of children in lieu
of parental care for a portion of the day or the care of elderly or
handicapped adults for a portion of the day. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 5-8-89G]
69.8.43.DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — A written agreement between
the developer or applicant and the Municipality which guarantees the
completion of site improvements and specifies the requirements for the
posting of security. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:765
69.8.44.DEVELOPMENT AREA — An area or parcel of land that is to be
developed under one subdivision or land development plan. This can
include land that extends into abutting municipalities. Any land in other
municipalities shall be considered zoned the same as the property in
Bethel Park for the purpose of determining any overall parking,
dimensional and density requirements for the development.
Regulations in the abutting neighboring Municipality must also be met
for areas within that Municipality. [Added 6-10-1996 by Ord. No.
6-10-96B]
69.8.44.1. DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of
spatially separated antenna sites connected to a common source that
provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.45. DISTRICT, ZONING — A section of the Municipality for which
uniform regulations governing the use, height, area and intensity of use
of buildings and land and open spaces about buildings are herein
established.
69.8.46. DISTURBED CHILD — A child who, because of dysfunctions in
emotions, behavior or social relationships, is unable to successfully
continue his developmental progress utilizing only the ordinary
community influences and supports. [Added 10-11-1982 by Ord. No.
10-11-82A]
69.8.47. DRIVE-IN FACILITIES — Establishments which offer in-car service
or take-out service, including, but not limited to, banks, food stores and
film developing, but not including drive-in theaters and carry-out
restaurants. Where the drive-in facility is accessory to the principal use,
the parking requirements of the principal use shall be used. [Added
8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.47.1. DRIVING LANES — That interior driving aisle or aisles used for
the main access or vehicles within a parking lot. [Added 9-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
69.8.48.DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
69.8.49.DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, twofamily
or townhouse dwellings, multiple-family dwellings or multistory
multiple-family dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having
common yards. [Amended 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 7-9-73A;
2-10-1975 by Ord. No. 2-10-75A]
69.8.50.DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling or group of
dwellings on one plot or lot containing separate living or dwelling units
for three or more families, but which may have joint services or
facilities, or both, and not exceeding 35 feet in height. [Amended
6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:766
69.8.51.DWELLING, MULTISTORY MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A multiple-family
dwelling of more than 35 feet in height, but not exceeding 75 feet in
height, unless further restricted in district regulations herein.
[Amended 6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 68-70A]
69.8.52.DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
69.8.53.DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A building developed for or occupied
exclusively by not fewer than three families living independently of
each other in dwelling units that are attached side by side by an
unpierced party wall, each with a separate and distinct entrance.
[Added 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 7-9-73A; 2-10-1975 by Ord. No.
2-10-75A]
69.8.54.DWELLING TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other, with
separate dwelling unit entrances.
69.8.55.DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing
complete housekeeping facilities for one family.
69.8.56.EDUCATIONAL STUDIO — A use involving the training of
individuals or groups in specialized physical activities, not including
specified sexual activities. Included, but not limited to, are dance
studios, martial art studios and gymnastic studios. [Added 5-11-1987
by Ord. No. 5-11-87C]
69.8.56.1.EMERGENCY — A condition that: 1) constitutes a clear and
immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public; or 2)
has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be
unusable and result in loss of the services provided. [Added 5-11-2015
by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.57. FAMILY — A single person occupying a dwelling unit and
maintaining a household; two or more persons related by blood or
marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and sharing common
kitchen and cooking facilities, living together and maintaining a
common household; not more than three unrelated persons occupying a
dwelling unit and sharing common kitchen and cooking facilities and
living together and maintaining a common household; and not more
than two unrelated persons when residing with at least two persons
related by blood, marriage or adoption. [Amended 12-11-1978 by
Ord. No. 12-11-78C]
69.8.58. FARM — A tract of land under one ownership or forming a single
property not less than five acres in area, and may include a private
housing for animals not less than 200 feet distant from any adjacent
property line. [Amended 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-1987E;
5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:767
69.8.58.1. FCC — Federal Communications Commission. [Added
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.59. FENCE — [Repealed 7-13-1970 by Ord. No. 7-13-70A]
69.8.59.1. FENCE, SNOW — An enclosure or barrier of nonmasonry
construction, not more than five feet high, used for a temporary period,
not to exceed from November 1 through May 1, to control the drifting
snow. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.60. FENCE, ORNAMENTAL — An enclosure or barrier of nonmasonry
construction where the open portion thereof exceeds in area the closed
portion when viewed from a perpendicular position. [Added
7-13-1970 by Ord. No. 7-13-70A]
69.8.61. FENCE, PRIVACY — An enclosure or barrier of nonmasonry
construction where the closed portion thereof exceeds in area the open
portion. [Added 7-13-1970 by Ord. No. 7-13-70A]
69.8.61.1. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Establishments which offer
financial-related services, including but not limited to banks, saving and
loans, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of
securities and commodities. Establishments offering short-term loans
or offering cash loans in return for physical collateral are not
considered to be financial institutions. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
69.8.62.FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry areas. [Added
6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.8.63. GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building housing only motordriven
vehicles, the property of and for the use of the occupants of the
lot on which the private garage is located.
69.8.64. GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage,
available to the public, and which is used for storage, parking, repair,
rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of motordriven
vehicles.
69.8.65. GASOLINE SERVICES FACILITIES — An area of land, together
with any structure thereon, used for the retail sale of motor fuel and
lubricants and incidental services, such as the lubrication and hand
washing of motor vehicles, and the sale, installation or minor repair of
tires, batteries or other automobile accessories. Any use meeting the
definition of "gasoline service facilities" shall not be considered an
accessory use. Gasoline service facilities, where permitted, shall be the
principal use, and any other uses on the same lot shall be subject to the
district regulations governing setbacks, times of operation, lighting,
signage and any other regulation governing gasoline service facilities.
[Added 12-13-1971 by Ord. No. 12-13-71B; amended 3-13-1972
by Ord. No. 3-13-72A; 12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 12-11-78C;
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:768
69.8.66.GROSS FLOOR AREA — Same as area floor. [Added 8-11-1986 by
Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.66.1.HEALTH SERVICES OFFICES — Offices of health practitioners,
such as physicians, dentists, chiropractors, physical therapists,
psychiatrists, optometrists and veterinarians. [Added 9-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.8.67. HEIGHT — See "Building Height."
69.8.67.1. HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest
point on a tower-based WCF, including antennae mounted on the tower
and any other appurtenances. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15B]
69.8.68.HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean an accessory use of a
nonresidential nature which is conducted within a dwelling unit by a
resident of the dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and accessory
or secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes and
which meets the following additional conditions: [Amended
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 12-14-81B; 8-10-1987 by Ord. No.
8-10-87A]
1. The occupation or activity, including the storage of materials, shall
be carried on wholly within the principal building.
2. No more than one paid assistant not residing at the resident
household shall be employed at the location of the home
occupation. Said paid assistant may not be involved in the actual
manufacturing or production of a product(s).
3. There shall be no exterior display or sign except a nameplate not
exceeding 1 1/2 square feet and attached to the principal building,
no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of
the home occupation or variation from the residential character of
the lot or of the surrounding neighborhood.
4. No offensive odor, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat glare shall be
produced.
5. The home occupation shall not generate traffic, including truck
deliveries, in any greater volume than would normally be expected
in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated
by the occupation shall be met by offstreet parking
accommodations and shall be in accordance with the regulations of
this ordinance.
6. No more than two vehicles related or identified as related to the
home occupation are permitted to be parked off-street at any one
time. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:769
7. Employees or persons affiliated with said home occupation, other
than the one permitted assistant and residents, shall not report to
or meet at such residence.
8. All home occupations are required to obtain a certificate of
occupancy.
9. In particular, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to the
following: art studio, dressmaking, teaching (with musical and art
instruction limited to a single pupil at a time), family day-care
homes (as defined by the Pennsylvania Department of Welfare) and
the professional office of an engineer, architect or insurance agent.
Among those home occupations excluded are: dancing studios, art
and musical instruction in groups, automotive repairs,
barbershops, beauty shops, mortuary establishments, stores,
medical, chiropractor, dental offices, group day-care homes (as
defined by the Department of Welfare). The acceptability or
unacceptability of a home occupation not specifically listed above
will be determined by the Director of Community Development in
accordance with the provisions set forth above.
69.8.69. HOSPITAL — An institution or building for the reception, care and
medical treatment of the sick or injured, containing facilities for
surgery and twenty-four-hour-per-day emergency treatment, including
ancillary commercial activities customarily incident thereto.
69.8.70.HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — See "assisted living care."
[Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.70.1.HOUSING FOR SENIORS — Multiple-family dwelling or
multistory multiple-family dwelling designed and operated specifically
for occupancy by residents who are 55 years old or older, where 80% or
more of the occupied units in the development are occupied by a
resident who is 55 years old or older. Such multiple-family dwelling or
multistory multiple-family dwelling may include full cooking facilities as
part of each residential unit, a central kitchen and dining room for the
building, or any combination thereof. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15A]
69.8.71.HOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from
rooms is made from an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in
charge at all hours and which is open to transient guests in
contradistinction to a boardinghouse, lodging house or rooming house.
69.8.72. HOTEL, MOTOR — A building in which lodging is provided and
offered to the transient public for compensation and in which egress
and ingress to and from rooms may be made either through an inside
lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all times or directly
from the exterior.
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:770
69.8.73. INSTITUTIONAL HOUSE — A public or private benevolent or
eleemosynary establishment devoted to the shelter, maintenance or
education and care of minor children; homeless, aged or infirm persons;
or members of a religious community. This classification shall not
include an almshouse or penal or reformatory institutions for the
custody, care or treatment of persons suffering from amentia, mental
derangement or drugs or alcohol addiction.
69.8.73.1. LARGE MEDICAL CENTER — A mix of medical uses with
common service areas and a total floor area exceeding 12,000 square
feet. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.74. LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the
same lot therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of
vehicles.
69.8.75. LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets and having frontage on two or more such streets.
69.8.76. LOT, COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot covered by the
principal and accessory buildings. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87E]
69.8.77. LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the rear lot line, measured midway between the side lot
lines.
69.8.78. LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
69.8.79. LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of an interior lot, the line
separating the lot from the street; in the case of a corner lot, the line
separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street.
69.8.80. LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line which is most distant from and is
most parallel to the front lot line. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87E]
69.8.81. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
[Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.82. LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
69.8.83. LOT WIDTH — The dimensions of a lot measured between the side
lot lines on the building line.
69.8.83.1.MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole
structure, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure,
to support communications antennae and connecting appurtenances.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.84. MOTEL — See "hotel, motor."
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:771
69.8.85.MPC — The Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.)
as amended. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.8.86. MUNICIPALITY — The Municipality of Bethel Park. [Added
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.86.1.NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed
and constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an Oil and
Gas well or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for
delivery of Oil and Gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline,
natural gas processing plant or underground storage field, including
one or more natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes,
valves, tanks and other equipment. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
9-13-10]
69.8.86.2.NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility designed and
constructed to remove materials such as ethane, propane, butane, and
other constituents or similar substances from natural gas to allow such
natural gas to be of such quality as is required or appropriate for
transmission or distribution to commercial markets, but not including
facilities or equipment designed and constructed primarily to remove
water, water vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from natural gas.
[Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 9-13-10]
69.8.86.2.1.NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
(NON-TOWER WCF) — All non-tower wireless communications
facilities, including but not limited to antennae and related equipment.
Non-tower WCF shall not include support structures for antennae or
any related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground level.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.87.NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration, except when such place has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing. [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.88. NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human
bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.
[Added 5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
69.8.89. NURSING HOME — See "convalescent homes."
69.8.90.NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care
or instruction for two or more children of preschool age.
69.8.91. OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — Any building or portion
thereof devoted to office purposes, of which no part is used for
manufacturing, retail trade or dwelling other than a sleeping quarter
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:772
for a watchman or custodian. [Added 8-11-1986 by Ord. No.
8-11-86D]
69.8.91.1. OIL AND GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed
methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other constituents or similar
substances that are produced by drilling a well of any depth into,
through, and below the surface of the earth. [Added 9-13-2010 by
Ord. No. 9-13-10]
69.8.91.2. OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOPMENT — The well
site preparation, well site construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing,
and/or site restoration associated with an oil and gas well of any depth;
water and other fluid storage, impoundment and transportation used
for such activities; and the installation and use of all associated
equipment, including tanks, meters, and other equipment and
structures, whether permanent or temporary; and the site preparation,
construction, installation, maintenance and repair of oil and gas
pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and activities
associated with the exploration for and production and transportation
of oil and gas other than natural gas compressor stations and natural
gas processing plants or facilities performing the equivalent functions
that operate as midstream facilities. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
9-13-10]
69.8.92.ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is
likely to occur every hundred years, that is to say it has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year although the flood may occur in any year.
[Added 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.8.93.OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — A residential subdivision where
individual detached single-family dwellings are permitted closer
together than normally allowed in a residential zone and on smaller lots
than normally permitted, but where the overall density of the
development is not increased beyond that allowed in the district. Open
space areas of undisturbed land are required to be preserved in such a
plan. [Added 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 6-10-96B]
69.8.93.1. OPERATOR (oil and gas) — Any person, partnership, company,
corporation and its subcontractors and agents who have an interest in
real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or
transporting oil or gas. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 9-13-10]
69.8.94.OUTDOOR PATIO USE — An accessory use of an outdoor portion of
a lot for the service and/or consumption of food and drink, not including
live entertainment and/or not including recorded music of any type
where such music would be audible from the property line of the
nearest property zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3. [Added by 1-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 1-10-83C; amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 7-11-88D]
69.8.94.1.OUTDOOR WINTER RECREATIONAL USE — A use that consists
of providing outdoor physical fitness and sports activities occurring
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:773
principally during the winter portion of the year and is conducted on
snow or ice covered areas. Activities include, and are similar to the
following: tobogganing, sledding, snow tubing, snowboarding, skiing,
cross country skiing, snow surfing, acrobatic skiing, ice skating, curling
and ice hockey. This excludes the use of specialized motorized
equipment for individual recreational use, such as snowmobiles.
[Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2-12-07A]
69.8.95.OVERLAY ZONE — A special zoning district with a set of
requirements that is described in the ordinance text, is mapped and is
imposed in addition to those of the underlying district.
69.8.95.1. PARKING AREA — That interior portion of an improved or
impervious parking lot. This is measured for landscaping calculation
purposes as being the total area inside the edge of pavement, excluding
the portion occupied by the buildings or structure. [Amended
9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
69.8.96. PARKING LOT — Any lot, parcel or yard used in whole or in part for
the storage of parking of two or more vehicles where such usage is not
incidental to or in conjunction with a one-family or two-family dwelling.
69.8.97. PARKING SPACE — An off-street parking space available for the
parking of one motor vehicle and having passageways and driveways
appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto and having a direct
access to a street or alley. [Amended 12-11-1978 by Ord. No.
12-11-78C]
69.8.98. PAVING — Concrete or bituminous wearing surfaces with
appropriate base consistent with sound engineering practices. "Paving"
shall not include tar and chip and other similar practices. [Added
12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 12-11-78C]
69.8.99. PERSONAL CARE BOARDING HOME — A state licensed
residential facility for adults in which food, shelter and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24
consecutive hours for more than three adults but not exceeding eight
adults, who are not relatives of the operator and who require assistance
or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet or medication
prescribed for self-administration, but do not require hospitalization or
care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care facility. [Amended
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.100. PERMITTED USE — Use which, upon proper application for
development, shall be granted by the designated authority if in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. [Added 1-12-1987
by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.101. PETITIONER — An individual, group of individuals or firm who
requests a zoning text or Zoning Map change through the filing of an
application for such change. The Council is not a petitioner. [Added
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:774
69.8.102. PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings,
including customary accessory buildings, designated or intended for
public worship. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.103. PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning
Commission of the Municipality of Bethel Park.
69.8.104. PRINTING SHOP — A retail establishment for the purpose of
reproducing and printing written and graphic materials where type is
cast and inserted into a mechanical printing press machine. [Added
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.104.1. PROTECTED STRUCTURE (oil and gas) — Any residence,
commercial business, school, religious institution or other public
building located within 1,000 feet of the surface location of a well that
may be impacted by noise generated from drilling or hydraulic
fracturing activity at a well site. The term shall not include any
structure owned by an oil and gas lessor who has signed a lease with
the operator granting surface rights to drill the subject well or whose
owner or occupants have signed a waiver relieving the operator from
implementation of the measures established in Section 69.88.2(15) of
this ordinance for the owners' or occupants' benefit. [Added
9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 9-13-10]
69.8.105. RECREATIONAL USE — A use which consist of providing indoor
physical fitness and sports activities. Recreational uses include, but are
not limited to, the following: gymnasiums, roller and ice skating rinks,
indoor sport courts, indoor golf, educational studios, weight lifting and
aerobic exercise facilities, swimming pools, bowling and batting cages.
Recreational uses do not include video arcades, billiards and adult uses.
[Added 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 9-13-93A]
69.8.106. RECREATIONAL CENTER — A site where the principal use is a
private recreation development as defined in this ordinance or a public
park or public facility. [Added 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.107. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING — The temporary storage of
recreational vehicles for a continued period of time not exceeding 72
hours. Continuity of a single period shall not be considered broken or
terminated unless the recreational vehicle involved shall have been
removed from the property owner's premises for a period of at least 24
consecutive hours. [Added 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-14-95A]
69.8.108. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle
structure mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made
mobile for the purpose of travel, recreational and vacation use, and
shall include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, mobile homes, tent
trailers, boat trailers, pickup campers and horse trailers. [Added
8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-14-95A]
69.8.109. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE — The placement of
recreational vehicles at a given location within the Borough for
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:775
continuous periods of time exceeding 72 hours. [Added 8-14-1995 by
Ord. No. 8-14-95A]
69.8.110.REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. [Added 6-8-1981
by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.8.111. REPAIR SHOP — A building or lot or portion of either or both
where the principal use, which must be operated within the building, is
for the repair of goods and servicing of buildings. This includes, but is
not limited to, plumbing, electrical repair, automotive body repair and
appliance repair. [Added 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.111.1. RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to,
incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a tower-based WCF or
non-tower WCF. By way of illustration, not limitation, related equipment
includes generators and base stations. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15B]
69.8.111.2. RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREA — An off-street parking area
(including a driveway) accessory to a residential use, which shall be an
area of land (concrete, asphalt, compacted gravel or like material),
other than a street or right-of-way, designated and used principally for
parking and temporary loading and unloading. The residential parking
area must have direct access from a driveway; or if the residential
parking areas are detached from driveways, they must have direct
access from a public street or alley. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
8-14-17]
69.8.112. RESTAURANT — An establishment where refreshments,
beverages or meals may be obtained by the public. It includes, but is
not limited to, the following: cafes, lunchrooms, dairy lunchrooms,
cafeterias, tearooms, pancake and waffle shops, etc. [Added
12-11-1978 by Ord. No. 12-11-78C]
69.8.113. RESTAURANT, CARRYOUT — An establishment where
refreshments, beverages, meals or frozen desserts are served for
consumption primarily outside of the premises and where not more
than 12 permanent seats are provided. [Amended 1-12-1987 by Ord.
No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.113.1. RESTAURANT, HIGH-TURNOVER — An eating establishment
with over 10 seats where refreshments, beverages, meals or desserts
are not served at the table and include both carryout and eat-in meals.
An establishment that has fewer than 10 seats and serves prepared food
shall be considered a retail use for the purpose of this chapter. [Added
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.113.2. RESTAURANT, LOW-TURNOVER — An eating establishment
with over 10 seats where refreshments, beverages or meals are served
by wait staff for consumption primarily on the premises. [Added
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:776
69.8.114. REST HOME — A building of residential character housing longterm
aged residents capable of self-care. However, nothing in this
ordinance shall prohibit the employment or retention of nursing or
attendant staff.
69.8.115. RETAIL BUSINESS — Any building or lot or portion thereof the
principal use of which is for the selling of goods to the general public.
[Added 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.115.1. RETAIL BUSINESS, DISCOUNT — An establishment which
offers a broad range of retail trade or specialty items with a pricing
structure normally below retail costs. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
9-14-98A]
69.8.116. SEAT — Space provided for one individual to sit as provided for by
the local building code regulations. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87E]
69.8.117. SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — A business that provides home-type
washing, drying or ironing machines or dry-cleaning machines to be
used by customers on the premises.
69.8.118. SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Same as "repair shop." [Added
8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.119. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any
form of consideration: [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 5-9-94A]
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
2. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity.
69.8.120. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. [Added
5-9-1994 by 5-9-94A]
69.8.121. SHOPPING CENTER — A parcel of land at least 10 acres in size
under one ownership which contains at least five individual businesses
all sharing a common parking lot and with not more than two access
points per street. [Added 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 5-11-87C]
69.8.121.1.SHORT-TERM LENDING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
which offers short-term cash loans (15 days or less) or offers cash loans
in return for physical collateral. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
69.8.122. SIGN — Any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial,
sculptured or other matter designed to convey information visually and
exposed to public view; any structure designed to carry the above visual
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:777
information; any structure or device designed or installed principally
to direct or attract attention, except traffic signs or devices.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, noncommercial copy
may be substituted for commercial copy on any lawful sign structure.
[Amended 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07]
69.8.123. SIGN, BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION — A sign as defined in this
ordinance whose purpose is to attract attention to a business
establishment or its wares, including decorative and ornamental signs
or those bearing script, except for information signs. [Added
1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.123.1. SIGN, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A
permanent off-premises, sign, erected maintained or used in the
outdoor environment for the purpose of providing copy area for
commercial or noncommercial messages. [Added 4-9-2007 by Ord.
No. 4-9-07]
69.8.124. SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign, located on premises, providing
information of traffic circulation patterns within a parking facility.
[Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.124.1. SIGN, FLOODLIGHTED — Sign externally illuminated by a
single or several light sources. These include painted bulletins and
poster panels. Floodlighted signs may only be illuminated from the top
of the sign, except where identified in Section 69.50.1.5, allowing for
lighting of signs in connection with residential subdivisions. [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
69.8.125. SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign not attached to or part of any
building, but separate and permanently affixed by any other means in
or upon the ground. Included, without limitations, are pole signs, pylon
signs and masonry wall-type signs. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No.
1-12-87E]
69.8.125.1. SIGN, LUMINOUS-ELEMENT — Sign with panels of translucent
plastic or glass which are illuminated by interior light sources, such as
HID, fluorescent or incandescent lamps or luminous tubing. [Added
11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
69.8.125.2. SIGN, LUMINOUS-LETTER — Sign with illuminated letters and
nonilluminated background, such as those with exposed lamps, exposed
luminous tubes, raised glass or plastic letters. [Added 11-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
69.8.125.3. SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign whose message content may
not necessarily bear any relationship to the activities conducted on the
premises on which it is located, or the expansion of commercial or
noncommercial speech by the owner or bona fide user of the premises
on which it is located. [Added 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07]
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:778
69.8.126. SIGN, PRICING AND INFORMATIONAL — A sign permanently
fixed and located on premises providing a description of prices and
services at that location. Included are menu boards, price listings and
similar such signs. [Added 1-12-1987 by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.127. STABLE, PRIVATE — Any accessory building in which horses are
kept for riding, driving and stabling for private use, not for hire or sale.
69.8.128. STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no
floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
69.8.129. SPECIAL EDUCATION SCHOOL — A private or public school
which either: i) does not provide a curriculum similar to that of a public
school; or ii) that maintains hours not similar to a public school; or iii)
both of the above. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
69.8.129.1. SPECIALTY MEDICAL CENTERS — A medical center for
specialized medical care not found in a typical physician's office.
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.8.130. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — [Added 8-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 8-10-87C]:
1. Areas of the human body less than completely opaquely covered
and limited to:
2. Human genitals and pubic regions.
3. Buttocks.
4. Female breast below the point immediately below the top of the
aureole.
5. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
69.8.131. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — shall mean: [Added by Ord.
No. 8-10-878C]
1. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
2. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, or female breasts;
3. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
69.8.131.1. STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to
wireless communications towers, antennae and other facilities which
render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into
the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render
it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennae,
building-mounted antennae painted to match the existing structure and
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:779
facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles. [Added
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.132. STREET — A public or private way, other than an alley, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. If there is
no officially established grade, the Municipal Engineer shall establish
same.
69.8.132.0. SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — 1)
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than
10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is
greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth herein if
necessary to avoid interference with existing antennae; or 2) any
further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which has
already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array. [Added
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.132.1.SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any permanently or indefinitely
constructed structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing
that contains water over 18 inches deep at any point, or a surface area
exceeding 100 square feet. This includes in-ground, aboveground and
on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. [Added 9-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.8.133. TIGHT SCREEN PLANTING — An evergreen planting of
shrubbery or trees whose growth within three years will be at least six
feet in height and which shall be planted at a distance apart which will
provide a tight vegetative screen within three years. [Added by Ord.
No. 5-8-89G]
69.8.133.1. TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
(TOWER-BASED WCF) — Any structure that is used for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennae, including, but not limited to, selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles, utility poles and
light poles. DAS hub facilities are considered to be tower-based WCF.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.134.USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be
deemed to include any nonconforming use.
69.8.135.WALL, ORNAMENTAL — An enclosure or barrier of masonry
construction other than standard structural cinder block or concrete
block, and not including a wall for the purpose of retaining earth.
[Added by Ord. No. 7-13-70A]
69.8.136.WAREHOUSE, FREIGHT TERMINALS AND TRUCKING
TERMINALS — An enclosed building, or portion thereof, where the
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:780
principal use is temporary storage of goods to be later moved to
another location. [Added by Ord. No. 8-11-86D]
69.8.136.0.WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act, as
amended (53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.). [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15B]
69.8.136.1.WELL SITE (oil and gas) — A graded pad designed and
constructed for the drilling of one or more oil and gas wells. [Added
9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 9-13-10]
69.8.136.2. WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including,
but not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, personal
communications services, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.136.3. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The
antennae, nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts,
pedestals, electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of
transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating
wireless communications services. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No.
5-11-15B]
69.8.136.4. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF
APPLICANT) — Any person that applies for a wireless communication
facility building permit, zoning approval and/or permission to use the
public right-of-way (ROW) or other municipality-owned land or
property. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.136.5. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure,
such as a tower-based wireless communications facility or any other
support structure that could support the placement or installation of a
wireless communications facility if approved by the municipality.
[Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
69.8.137. YARD — A space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance.
69.8.138. YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts
and similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between
the front lot line and the building line.
69.8.139. YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line,
unoccupied by other than accessory buildings, uses or structures, the
depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the
rear of such building. In the case of through lots, the rear lot abutting
the street shall provide a yard equal to the front yard of the applicable
zoning district or equal to an established building line.
69.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.8
1:781
69.8.140. YARD, SIDE — A yard between the principal building and the side
lot line, extending between the rear yard line, the front yard line,
unoccupied other than by accessory buildings, uses, or structures. In
the case of corner lots, the sides abutting a street shall provide a yard
equal to the front yard of the applicable zoning district or equal to an
established building line. [Amended by Ord. No. 1-12-87E]
69.8.141. ZONING DISTRICT — See "District, Zoning."
69.8.142. ZONING DISTRICT MAP — A map entitled "Municipality of Bethel
Park, Pennsylvania, Zoning District Map", dated September 1, 1966.
69.8 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.8
1:782
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
69.9. Establishment of districts and the Zoning District Map.
69.9.1. Districts. [Amended 7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 7-9-73A; 2-10-1975
by Ord. No. 2-10-75A]
1. The Municipality of Bethel Park is hereby classified and divided
into districts as follows:
Short Name Full Name
R-1 District R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
R-2 District R-2 One-Family Dwelling District
R-3 District R-3 One-Family Dwelling District
R-4 District R-4 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
R-5 District R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
R-T District R-T Townhouse Dwelling District
C-1 District Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 District General Commercial District
C-3 District Professional-Service District
C-4 District Office-Commercial District [Added 6-13-1983
by Ord. No. 6-13-83E]
M District Manufacturing, Light Industrial District
CD District Conservation District [Added 10-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 10-8-79B]
2. "R District," where used in the text, refers to any and all residential
classifications, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5. "C District," where used
in the text, refers to any and all commercial districts, C-1, C-2, C-3
and C-4. [Amended 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 6-13-83E]
69.9.2. The Zoning District Map, dated the first day of September, 1966,
which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, shows the boundaries
of the areas covered by the districts listed in this section.
69.9.3. Floodplain districts are hereby established as delineated on the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and further defined in the Flood
Insurance Study for the Municipality of Bethel Park, dated December
15, 1980, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
and as may be amended from time to time. The Floodway District (FW),
Floodway Fringe (FF) and the General Floodplain District (FA) are
overlay districts of those identified above. Where conflicts arise
between requirements of the floodplain district and those of any
underlying district, the more-restrictive provision shall apply. [Added
6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.9
1:783
69.9.4. The Zoning District Map is hereby amended to include Floodway
(FW), Floodway Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain Boundary Maps
and further defined by the Flood Insurance Study for the Municipality
of Bethel Park, dated December 15, 1980, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. Any changes in the boundary maps
must be approved by the Federal Insurance Administration. [Added
6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.9.5. Flood elevations in the General Floodplain District shall be
established by determining a point of land on the outer edge of the
mapped floodplain area, using a scaled dimension from the center of
the stream. Said points shall be related to existing topographic maps or
United States Geological Survey Maps, as approved by the Municipality.
[Added 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]
69.9.6. An Airport Hazard District is hereby established as delineated on the
Airport Hazard District Map and as further defined from the nearest
point of the nearest runway of the Allegheny County Airport ("Airport").
This district shall be designated as the "Airport Hazard District (AD)."
Said district shall be an overlay district and is further defined in the
section identified as the Airport District Overlay District.99. [Added
12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 12-14-81C; amended 3-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 3-12-12B]
69.9.7. The Zoning Map is hereby amended to include as an overlay district
map the Airport Hazard District (AD). [Added 12-14-1981 by Ord.
No. 12-14-81C]
69.9.8. A Highway Overlay District is hereby established as delineated on
the Highway Overlay Map. This district shall be designated as the
"Highway Overlay Zone (HO)." Said district shall be an overlay district.
[Added 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 6-9-86A]
69.9.9. The Zoning Map is hereby amended to include as an overlay district
map the Highway Overlay Zone (HO). [Added 6-9-1986 by Ord. No.
6-9-86A]
69.9.10. An Open Space Overlay District (OS) is hereby established in
accordance with the requirements set forth herein. [Added 6-10-1996
by Ord. No. 6-10-96B]
69.9.11. Oxford Drive Transportation District, as delineated on Figure 3 of
Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 3-8-99B (Oxford Drive Transportation
District Ordinance100), is hereby established in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein. This district shall be designated as the
"Oxford Drive Overlay Zone (ODO)." Said district shall be an overlay
district. [Added 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 3-8-99C]
99.Editor's Note: See Art. XII, Airport Hazard District.
100. Editor's Note: See Section 69.36A.
69.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.10
1:784
69.10. Interpretation.
69.10.1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center lines of streets, highways, street lines, highway right-of-way
lines or streams, such center lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
69.10.2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
69.10.3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow or are parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or the
rights-of-way of the same, such district boundaries shall be construed to
be parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
Zoning District Map.
69.10.4. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad or streetcar line,
such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main
tracks of such railroad or streetcar line.
69.10.5. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream or other body of
water abutting another Municipality, the boundary shall be deemed to
be the limits of jurisdiction of the Municipality, unless otherwise
indicated.
69.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.10
1:785

ARTICLE IV
General Provisions101
69.11. Conformance and permits.
69.12. Height, occupancy, lot and yard restrictions.
69.13. Yards.
69.14. Substandard dwellings.
69.15. Public utility lines.
69.11.1. No building or land shall, after the effective date of this ordinance,
except for existing nonconforming uses, be used or occupied, and no
building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered, unless in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
is it located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits
and licenses required by all laws and ordinances.
69.12.1. No building shall hereinafter be erected or altered to exceed the
height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, to
occupy a greater percentage of lot area to have a narrower or smaller
rear yard, side yard or front yard than is herein specified for the district
in which the building is located.
69.13.1. No part of a yard or other open space about any building required
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall
be included as a part of a yard or open space similarly required for
another building.
69.14.1. No structure shall be used or occupied as a dwelling if such
structure is in need of such major structural repairs as to render it
unsafe 102or unsanitary, or if the premises do not have connection with
the municipal sewer system103 or alternative sanitary sewage facilities
approved by the local public health authorities having jurisdiction. The
provisions of the edition of the BOCA Building Code adopted by the
Municipality104 and the Health Code of the County of Allegheny shall be
the criteria for determination of substandard dwellings for the purposes
herein.
69.15.1. Public utility lines for the transportation, distribution and control of
water, gas, electricity, oil, steam, telegraph and telephone
communications, and their supporting members other than buildings
and railroad, railway or streetcar trackage, shall not be required to be
101. Editor's Note: Temporary Use of Land was repealed by Ord. No. 5-13-96E and replaced as a
conditional use.
102. Editor's Note: See Dangerous Buildings and Structures Chapter.
103. Editor's Note: See Sewers Chapter.
104. Editor's Note: See Building Code Chapter.
69.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.15
1:787
69.16. Plan compliance and maintenance. [Added by Ord. No.
5-13-91C]
69.17. Lot of record not meeting lot area requirements.
69.18. Lot access. [Added by Ord. No. 12-11-78C]
69.19. Prohibited uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-12-80B]
located on a zoning lot nor held to reduce the required yard dimensions
for other buildings on a lot.
69.16.1. Total and complete compliance with the approved land
development plan is required. All improvements except those accepted
and maintained by the Municipality shall be provided and maintained in
a safe, sanitary and functional manner. Required plantings and
landscaped areas shall be properly maintained free of weeds and
deleterious vegetation. Dead, dying and diseased trees, shrubs or other
required vegetation shall be replaced by the type, species and sizes
indicated on the approved plan. Substitute planting elements must be
approved by the Municipality.
69.17.1. Nothing in the district regulations shall be held to prohibit the
erection of a one-family dwelling upon a lot whose size is inadequate to
meet the lot area regulations set for the district, provided that such lot
has direct legal access to a public street, is a lot in a recorded plan and
complies with all district regulations except lot area requirements.
[Amended by Ord. No. 9-12-77A]
69.18.1. All access from any lot shall be made to the side of a public street.
No access shall be permitted to an unopened public street or to the end
of a temporary dead-end street.
69.19.1. The following uses are prohibited and are hereby excluded from the
entire municipality:
1. Abattoirs.
2. Acetylene gas [manufacture of compound acetylene in excess of 15
pounds' pressure per square inch].
3. Acid manufacture; chlorine or bleaching powder, manufacture or
refining.
4. Airfields and airports.
5. Asphalt manufacture or refining.
6. Automobile trailers or other movable or portable structures or
contrivances used for human habitation or business purposes,
except as a temporary office on construction sites and except as
otherwise permitted in Article V.
69.15 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.19
1:788
7. Automobile vehicle wrecking yard.
8. Boardinghouse.
9. (Reserved)105
10. Blast furnaces, rolling mills or smelters.
11. Boiler works.
12. Brick, tile or terra-cotta manufacture.
13. Carpet-cleaning, rag- or garment-cleaning establishment using
explosives or flammable cleaning agents.
14. Celluloid manufacture or storage.
15. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
16. Cemeteries, except additions to present cemeteries.
17. Coke ovens.
18. Creosote manufacture or treatment.
19. Disinfectant or insecticide manufacture.
20. Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
21. Dog kennels (except as part of a farm), boardinghouses or stables
for animals (except as part of a farm). [Amended 6-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 6-14-76B]
22. Dyestuff manufacture.
23. Fat rendering; soap, tallow, grease or lard, manufacturing and
refining.
24. Fertilizer, animal; manufacture.
25. Garbage, offal, dead animals or refuse incineration, reduction or
storage.
26. Gas, manufacturing of.
27. Gasoline storage in excess of an amount necessary for use on the
premises or in supplying retail trade at service stations.
28. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
29. Gunpowder, fireworks or other explosives manufacture or storage.
30. Iron or steel foundry or works.
105. Editor's Note: Former Section 69.19.1.9, which prohibited certain billboards, signboards
or other signs, was repealed 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07.
69.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.19
1:789
31. Junk, scrap, metal, paper or rags; storage, sorting or bailing.
32. Match manufacture.
33. Oilcloth and linoleum manufacture.
34. Oil or leather goods manufacture.
35. Open-air theaters.
36. Ore reduction and general smelting operations.
37. Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture.
38. Paper and pulp manufacture.
39. Petroleum refining.
40. Petroleum and petroleum by-products; storage in excess of an
amount necessary for use on the premises or retail trade.
41. Potash manufacture.
42. Pyroxylin plastic manufacture.
43. Riding academy.
44. Rubber, caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
45. Soda ash, caustic soda and washing compounds manufacture.
46. Stockyards.
47. Strip mining.
48. Tanning, curing or storage of rawhides or skins.
49. Tar distillation or manufacture.
50. Tar roofing or tar waterproofing manufacture.
51. Tourists or overnight cabins, not including motor hotel.
52. Slag dumps, gob piles and dumping of mine or industrial slag, gob
or refuse without special permission from the Municipal Council.
53. In general, those uses which may be noxious or offensive by reason
of the emission of odor, dust smoke, gas, vibration or noise.
54. Electrical fences. [Added 3-8-1976 by Ord. No. 3-8-76A]
55. Barbed wire fences except as part of a farm or as a security fence,
provided that the security fence is a minimum of five feet in height.
[Added 3-8-1976 by Ord. No. 3-8-76A]
56. (Reserved)106
69.19 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.19
1:790
69.20. Performance bond.
69.21. Finish grading.
69.22. Expiration. [Added by Ord. No. 11-13-72A; amended by Ord.
No. 12-8-80A]
57. Bottle clubs. [Added 10-11-1976 by Ord. No. 10-11-76D]
69.19.2. Any of the above uses existing on the effective date of this
ordinance are hereby classified nonconforming uses and are subject to
the provisions of Article VII herein.
69.20.1. To guarantee the restoration of the site, a performance bond of 10%
of the cost of all projects in excess of $10,000 shall be filed with the
municipality at the time of application, together with approved site
plans. This requirement shall apply to all zoning classifications.
69.21.1. Finish grading in connection with construction for which a building
permit has been issued hereunder shall not exceed a slope ratio of 1-1/2
horizontal to one vertical.
69.22.1. All permits, licenses and site plan approvals issued pursuant to this
ordinance shall become null and void and of no further force or effect if
the work for which such permit, license or site plan has been issued
shall not be substantially started within six months from the date of
issuance. However, upon written application for an extension by the
applicant to the Municipal Manager, accompanied by a fee of $50, the
Municipal Manager may extend the time within which said work can be
substantially started, but not more than six additional months. The
Municipal Manager, in his sole discretion, shall determine if the work
has been substantially started.
106. Editor's Note: Former Section 69.19.1.56, which prohibited billboards, added 3-8-1976 by
Ord. No. 3-8-76A, was repealed 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07.
69.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.22
1:791

ARTICLE V
Provisions Governing Residential Districts
69.23. R-1 One-Family Dwelling District.
Within the R-1 One-Family Dwelling District, the following regulations
apply:
69.23.1. Permitted uses. [Amended by Ord. No. 61-22-A(g)]
1. One-family detached dwelling.
2. Public school or private school having a curriculum similar to that
ordinarily given in a public school, including religious instruction in
parochial schools.
3. Church and similar place of worship.
4. Convent, monastery, rectory or parish house to be occupied by not
more than 10 persons.
5. Temporary building and use for construction purposes, not to
exceed a period of one year.
6. Farm.
7. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses, and including:
a. Home occupation.
b. Private garage.
c. Fences.
i. Ornamental fence, not exceeding eight feet in height,
provided that any ornamental fence located within any
required front yard may not exceed four feet in height.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-9-79A; 8-13-2018 by Ord.
No. 8-13-18B]
ii. Privacy fence or ornamental wall, not exceeding eight feet
in height, provided that no privacy fence is permitted in
any required front yard or side yard facing a street or a
corner lot, and provided further that any ornamental wall
located within any required front yard or side yard facing a
street may not exceed three feet six inches in height.
[Amended by Ord. No. 5-12-80A, approved
5-19-1980]
iii. Retaining wall, provided that when located within five feet
of any lot line, the exposed portion thereof is constructed
or faced with a material other than standard structural
cinder block or concrete block.
69.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.23
1:793
iv. Swimming pool fence, provided that said fence shall be not
less than four feet nor more than eight feet in height and
shall be so constructed as not to have any openings, walls
or gaps larger than two inches in any dimension, except
for doors and gates. If the fence is a picket fence, the
horizontal dimensions maintained between pickets shall
not exceed four inches.
v. Electrical fences are not permitted in any zoning district in
the municipality, except as part of a farm.
vi. Barbed wire fences are not permitted in any district of the
municipality except as part of a farm or a security fence,
provided that the security fence is at least five feet in
height.
d. Off-street parking and loading facility.
e. Private swimming pools accessory to a one-family dwelling and
on the same lot. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
f. Signs as regulated herein.
g. Such permitted accessory uses as sited in the definition of
"accessory use" and which are incidental to residential use. No
accessory structure can be located in front of the front face of
the principal building. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
8. Conditional Uses as regulated herein. [Amended by Ord. No.
5-8-89F]
69.23.2. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or
altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling: not to exceed 35 feet, except as
provided in Supplementary Regulations hereof. [Amended by
Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
2. Church or similar place of worship: 45 feet for the principal
building and 75 feet for steeples or towers.
3. Accessory building: 20 feet.
4. Any other permitted building: not to exceed 30 feet. [Amended by
Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
69.23.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling minimum lot area: 1/2 acre (21,870 square feet) and a width at the
building of 100 feet.
69.23 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.23
1:794
69.24. R-2 One-Family Dwelling District.
Within the R-2 One-Family Dwelling District the following regulations apply:
2. Church and similar place of worship: 1 1/2 acres and a width at the
building line of not less than 200 feet.
3. Public or private school.
a. Elementary school: five acres, plus one acre for every onehundred-
student design capacity.
b. Junior high school: eight acres, plus one acre for every onehundred-
student design capacity.
c. High school: 12 acres, plus one acre for every one-hundredstudent
design capacity.
4. Convent, monastery, rectory or parish house: 1/2 acre
69.23.4. Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
a. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located
within the front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to,
firewood, automobile parts and machinery and any material or
articles typically found inside the primary building. This does
not apply to the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered
under Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
2. Side yard: on each side, not less than 20 feet. The combined total of
side yards for corner lots shall be not less than 70 feet. The side
yard on each side of a lot of record which is less than 100 feet wide
at the building line shall be 20% of the width of the lot but shall be
not less than 12 feet. For a church or similar place of worship, not
less than 40 feet on each side of the principal building.
3. Rear yard: not less than 50 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot,
whichever is greater, but it need not exceed 90 feet.
4. When a use in an R-1 District, other than a one-family dwelling,
abuts upon an R District, there shall be provided, in addition to the
above yard requirement, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.23.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory uses,
shall cover not more than 20% of the area of the lot.
69.23.6.Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article X.
69.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.24
1:795
69.24.1. Permitted uses: any use and accessory use permitted in the R-1
District.
69.24.2. Height: as permitted or required in the R-1 District.
69.24.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 12,450 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 75 feet, except for lots with a majority of their street
frontage on the radius of a cul-de-sac which must have a width of
not less than 60 feet at the building line. [Amended 7-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 7-11-94D]
2. Church and similar place of worship: as required in the R-1 District.
3. Public or private school: as required in the R-1 District.
69.24.4. Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or altered
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 35 feet when there are at least 60 feet
from the building line to the center line of the road and when the lot
fronts on a street dedicated for public use after August 1, 1994;
otherwise, 40 feet. In no case shall a building line established by
existing residences be changed except for the intersection of two or
more streets. [Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 7-11-94D]
a. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located
within the front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to,
firewood, automobile parts and machinery and any material or
articles typically found inside the primary building. This does
not apply to the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered
under Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
2. Side yard: on each side, not less than 12 1/2 feet. The combined
total for side yards for corner lots shall be not less than 52 1/2 feet.
The side yard on each side of a lot of record which is less than 75
feet wide at the building line shall be 20% of the width of the lot but
shall be not less than 10 feet. For a church or similar place of
worship, not less than 40 feet on each side of the principal building.
3. Rear yard: not less than 35 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot,
whichever is larger, but it need not exceed 60 feet.
4. When a use in an R-2 District, other than a one-family dwelling,
abuts upon an R District, there shall be provided, in addition to the
above yard requirement, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.24
1:796
69.25. R-3 One-Family Dwelling District. [Amended 7-14-1969 by
Ord. No. 7-14-69B; 3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 3-11-74A]
Within the R-3 One-Family Dwelling District, the following regulations shall
apply:
69.24.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory uses,
shall cover not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
69.24.6.Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article X.
69.25.1. Permitted uses:
1. One-family detached dwelling.
2. Public school or private school having a curriculum similar to that
ordinarily given in a public school, including religious instruction in
parochial schools.
3. Church and similar place of worship.
4. Convent, monastery, rectory or parish house to be occupied by not
more than 10 persons.
5. Temporary building and use for construction purposes, not to
exceed a period of one year.
6. Farm.
7. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of permitted uses,
including:
a. Home occupation.
b. Private garage.
c. Fences and walls.
i. Ornamental fence, not exceeding eight feet in height,
provided that any ornamental fence located within any
required front yard may not exceed four feet in height.
[Amended 4-9-1979 by Ord. No. 4-9-79A; 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 8-13-18B]
ii. Privacy fence or ornamental wall, not exceeding eight feet
in height, provided that no privacy fence is permitted in
any required front yard or side yard facing a street or a
corner lot, and provided further that any ornamental wall
located within any required front yard or side yard facing a
street may not exceed three feet six inches in height.
[Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 5-12-80A]
69.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.25
1:797
iii. Retaining wall, provided that when located within five feet
of any lot line, the exposed portion thereof is constructed
or faced with a material other than standard structural
cinder block or concrete block.
iv. Swimming pool fence, provided that said fence shall be not
less than four feet nor more than eight feet in height and
shall be so constructed as not to have any openings, walls
or gaps larger than two inches in any dimension, except
for doors and gates. If the fence is a picket fence, the
horizontal dimensions maintained between pickets shall
not exceed four inches.
d. Off-street parking and loading facility.
e. Private swimming pool on the same lot, when meeting the yard
depth and width requirements of the district for principal
buildings and when the swimming pool or the property on
which it is located is adequately fenced to prevent free access
of small children and meets all health and sanitary
requirements.
f. Signs as required herein.
g. Such permitted accessory uses as listed in the definition of
"accessory use" and which are incidental to the residential use.
8. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord.
5-8-89F]
69.25.2. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or
altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling: not to exceed 35 feet, except as
provided in the supplementary regulations hereof.
2. Church or similar place or worship: 45 feet for the principal
building and 75 feet for steeples or towers.
3. Accessory building: 20 feet.
4. Any other permitted building: not to exceed 30 feet.
69.25.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 8,710 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 60 feet.
2. Church and similar place of worship: 1 1/2 acres and a width at the
building line of not less than 200 feet.
3. Public or private school.
69.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.25
1:798
69.26. R-4 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
Within the R-4 Multiple-Family Dwelling District, the following regulations
shall apply:
a. Elementary school: five acres plus one acre for every onehundred-
student design capacity.
b. Junior high school: eight acres plus one acre for every onehundred-
student design capacity.
c. High school: 12 acres plus one acre for every one-hundredstudent
design capacity.
69.25.4. Yard areas. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in
connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 35 feet.
a. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located
within the front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to,
firewood, automobile parts and machinery and any material or
articles typically found inside the primary building. This does
not apply to the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered
under Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
2. Side yard: on each side, not less than 10 feet. The combined total
for side yards for corner lots shall be not less than 45 feet. The side
yard on each side of a lot of record which is less than 60 feet in
width shall have a width of 15% of the width of the lot but shall be
not less than six feet. For a church or similar place of worship, not
less than 40 feet on each side of a principal building.
3. Rear yard: not less than 35 feet or 20% of the depth of the lot,
whichever is larger, but it need not exceed 45 feet.
4. When a use in an R-3 District, other than a one-family dwelling,
abuts upon an R District, there shall be provided, in addition to the
above yard requirement, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.25.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory uses,
shall cover not more than 30% of the area of the lot.
69.25.6.Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article X.
69.26.1. Permitted uses.
1. Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-1 District.
2. Two-family dwelling.
69.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.26
1:799
3. Multiple-family dwelling, not to exceed 24 dwelling units or
apartments per building.
4. Fraternity or sorority, except those the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
5. Personal care boarding home. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
5-8-89G]
6. Day-care facility. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
7. Housing for seniors. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15A]
69.26.2. Height. As permitted in the R-1 District, except that multiple-family
dwellings shall not exceed 35 feet. [Amended 6-8-1970 by Ord. No.
6-8-70A]
69.26.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling, convent, monastery, rectory or
parish house: 8,710 square feet and a width at the building line of
not less than 60 feet.
2. Two-family dwelling: 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit and a
width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.
3. Multiple-family dwelling: The minimum size of lot for multiplefamily
dwelling development is one acre and the minimum lot width
at the building line shall be 100 feet. Not more than 20 units per
acre are permitted in any land development. [Amended
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
4. Church and similar place of worship: as required in the R-1 District.
5. Public or private school: as required in the R-1 District.
69.26.4. Yard areas. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in
connection with such building, structure or enlargement. Where
abutting an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District there shall be provided, in addition
to the yard requirements, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
[Amended 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 11-13-72A; 10-15-1991 by
Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
1. Front yard: not less than 35 feet, except for a multiple-family
dwelling, which shall be not less than 50 feet.
a. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located
within the front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to,
firewood, automobile parts and machinery and any material or
articles typically found inside the primary building. This does
not apply to the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered
69.26 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.26
1:800
69.27. R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District.
Within the R-5 Multiple-Family Dwelling District, the following regulations
shall apply:
under Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
2. Side yard: For one-family detached dwelling or two-family dwelling,
not less than 10 feet on each side of two sides for an interior lot,
and not less than 45 feet combined total side yards for a corner lot.
For multiple-family dwelling, not less than a horizontal distance
equal to the height of the building, but not less than 10 feet for
each of two sides for an interior lot and not less than 60 feet
combined total of side yards for a corner lot. Church and similar
places of worship, not less than 40 feet on each side of the principal
building.
3. Rear yard: not less than 30 feet, except for a multiple-family
dwelling, which shall be not less than 50 feet.
69.26.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory uses,
shall cover not more than 15% of the area of the lot. [Amended
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.26.6.Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as required or
permitted under Article X.
69.26.7. The fronts of all buildings and sides, when the side or sides face a
street of a residential district, shall be faced with brick, stone or other
suitable materials as approved by the Planning Commission. [Added
8-13-1973 by Ord. No. 8-13-73C]
69.27.1. Permitted uses.
1. Any use and accessory use permitted in the R-4 District.
2. Multistory multifamily dwellings.
69.27.2. Height. As permitted in the R-4 District throughout, except that
multistory multiple-family dwellings are permitted, but shall not exceed
75 feet. [Amended 7-14-1969 by Ord. No. 7-14-69B; 4-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.27.3. Lot area. As required in the R-4 District, except that the minimum
size of a lot for multistory multiple-family dwelling development is two
acres and the minimum lot width at the building line shall be 150 feet.
Not more than 25 units per acre are permitted in any land development.
[Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.27.4. Yard areas. As required or permitted in the R-4 District, except that
multi-story multiple-family dwellings shall provide and maintain a front
69.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.27
1:801
69.28. R-T Townhouse Dwelling District. [Added 7-9-1973 by Ord.
No. 7-9-73A; amended 2-10-1975 by Ord. No. 2-10-75A]
Within the R-T Townhouse Dwelling District, the following regulations shall
apply:
yard, side yard and rear yard of a horizontal dimension not less that the
height of the building or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
1. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located within the
front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to, firewood,
automobile parts and machinery and any material or articles
typically found inside the primary building. This does not apply to
the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered under Article X,
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. [Added 9-13-1999
by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.27.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory
buildings, shall cover not more than 15% of the area of the lot, nor shall
any building area exceed 26, 140 square feet. [Amended 4-13-1998
by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.27.6.Off-street parking facilities and loading facilities shall be provided
as required of permitted under Article X.
69.27.7. The fronts of all buildings and sides, when the side or sides face a
street of a residential district, shall be faced with brick, stone or other
suitable materials as approved by the Planning Commission. [Added
8-13-1973 by Ord. No. 8-13-73C]
69.28.1. Permitted uses.
1. One-family detached dwelling.
2. Two-family dwelling.
3. Townhouse dwelling.
4. Public school or private school having a curriculum similar to that
ordinarily given in a public school, including religious instruction in
parochial schools.
5. Church and similar place of worship.
6. Convent, monastery, rectory or parish house to be occupied by not
more than 10 persons.
7. Personal care boarding home. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
5-8-89G]
8. Day-care facility. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
9. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses
and including:
69.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.28
1:802
a. Private garages.
b. Fences.
i. Ornamental fence, not exceeding eight feet in height,
provided that any ornamental fence located within any
required front yard may not exceed four feet in height.
[Amended 4-9-1979 by Ord. No. 4-9-79A; 8-13-2018
by Ord. No. 8-13-18B]
ii. Privacy fence or ornamental wall, not exceeding eight feet
in height, provided that no privacy fence is permitted in
any required front yard or side yard facing a street or a
corner lot, and provided further that any ornamental wall
located within any required front yard or side yard facing a
street may not exceed three feet six inches in height.
[Amended 5-12-1980 by Ord. No. 5-12-80A]
iii. Retaining wall, provided that when located within five feet
of any lot line, the exposed portion thereof is constructed
or faced with a material other than standard structural
cinder block or concrete block.
iv. Pool fence, provided that said fence shall be not less than
four feet nor more than eight feet in height and shall be so
constructed as not to have any openings, walls or gaps
larger than two inches in any dimension, except for doors
and gates. If the fence is a picket fence, the horizontal
dimensions maintained between pickets shall not exceed
four inches.
c. Street parking and loading facility.
d. Private swimming pool on the same lot, when meeting the yard
depth and width requirements of the district for principal
buildings and when the swimming pool or the property on
which it is located is adequately fenced to prevent free access
of small children and meets all health and sanitary
requirements.
e. Signs as required herein.
f. Such permitted accessory uses as listed in the definition of
"accessory use" and which are incidental to the residential use.
10. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 5-8-89F]
69.28.2. Height: not to exceed 35 feet.
69.28.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
69.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.28
1:803
1. One-family detached dwelling: 8,710 square feet per dwelling unit
and a width at the building line of not less than 60 feet.
2. Two-family dwelling: 14,520 square feet per dwelling unit and a
width at the building line of not less than 80 feet.
3. Townhouse dwelling: One acre, and a minimum lot width of 150
feet at the building line.
69.28.4. Yard area. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in
connection with such buildings, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 35 feet except for townhouse dwellings,
which shall be not less than 25 feet.
a. No outdoor storage of material is permitted to be located
within the front yard area. This includes, but is not limited to,
firewood, automobile parts and machinery and any material or
articles typically found inside the primary building. This does
not apply to the off-street parking of vehicles which is covered
under Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
[Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
2. Side yard: not less than 10 feet on each side of two sides for an
interior lot, and not less than 35 feet combined total of side yard for
corner lot.
3. Rear yard: not less than 30 feet.
4. For developments of more than one building the following yards
shall apply:
Type of Yard
Distance
(feet)
Side to side 20
Rear to side 40
Rear to rear 60
Side to front 35
Front to front 50
Front to rear 55
69.28.5. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory uses,
shall cover not more than 15% of the area of the lot. [Amended
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.28.6.Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as permitted
in Article X.
69.28 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.28
1:804
69.28.7. Density control. Density shall not exceed eight dwelling units per
acre.
69.28.8. A townhouse building shall not exceed 150 feet in length and shall
have a break in continuity (offset) at intervals of at least every 70 feet.
The breaks in continuity shall not be less than five feet. For townhouse
structures not exceeding 70 feet, there shall be at least one break in
continuity.
69.28.9. Where any development except single-family abuts an R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District, there shall be provided, in addition to the yard
requirements imposed by this section, a buffer of not less than 20 feet.
[Added 1-14-1980 by Ord. No. 1-14-80B; amended 10-15-1991 by
Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
69.28.10. The front, side or rear of a townhouse building that faces an R-1,
R-2 or R-3 single-family zoning district shall be faced with brick, stone
or other suitable material, as approved by the Planning Commission.
[Added 1-14-1980 by Ord. No. 1-14-80B]
69.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.28
1:805

ARTICLE VI
Provisions Governing Commercial Districts
69.29. C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. [Amended 5-11-1987
by Ord. No. 5-11-87C]
Within the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, the following regulations
shall apply:
69.29.1. Permitted uses.
1. Uses with size limitations. The following uses are permitted if the
gross floor area of individual uses does not exceed those specified:
a. Retail uses, excluding restaurants, adult bookstores and
discount retail businesses, not to exceed 4,000 square feet per
business. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
b. Food stores not to exceed 5,000 square feet per business.
c. Financial institutions not to exceed 3,000 square feet per
business.
d. Business or professional offices, services, or health service
offices not to exceed 4,000 square feet per business.
[Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
e. Self-service laundry facilities and dry cleaning shops not to
exceed 3,000 square feet per business. No self-service laundry
facility and dry cleaning shop shall service clothes or materials
not from retail trade and no wholesale cleaning or processing
shall occur on the premises.
f. Repair shop not to exceed 3,000 square feet. No repair shop
shall repair or service buildings or motor vehicles or parts
thereof on the premises.
g. Barber and beauty shop not to exceed 2,000 square feet per
business.
h. Educational studios not exceeding 3,000 square feet per
business.
2. Shopping center use. Shopping centers are permitted with all of
the following limitations:
a. Only those uses in the above section shall be permitted.
b. Unless otherwise expressly allowed the size limitations in the
above section shall apply.
c. Within a shopping center one food store use may occupy up to
either 30,000 square feet and one additional retail use,
including a food store, may occupy up to 20,000 square feet; or
69.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.29
1:807
one 40,000 square feet food store. Said uses of the 30,000
and 20,000 square feet stores may not be internally
interconnected. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B; 1-8-2001 by Ord. No. 1-8-01B]
d. As a condition to site plan approval, the developer shall submit
for review and approval by the Planning Commission a traffic
impact study analyzing the impact of the shopping center on
surrounding streets and intersections within 3,000 feet of the
site or within such lesser area as the Director of Community
Development may, in his sole, reasonable discretion,
determine. The traffic impact study shall be completed and
paid for by the developer.
e. Any recommended traffic improvements required due to the
development of the shopping center shall be shown on the site
plan submitted for approval and the costs of these
improvements shall be paid for by the developer unless, upon
the developer's request, the Council, in its sole discretion,
determines otherwise.
3. Uses permitted without size limitations. In addition to the above
uses, the following uses are permitted without the size limitations
set forth above:
a. Churches.
b. Living quarters above the ground floor.
c. Personal care boarding home. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
5-8-89G]
d. Day-care facility. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
e. Fire station. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
f. Recreational uses. [Added 9-13-1993 by Ord. No.
9-13-93A]
g. Conditional uses as regulated under this ordinance.
h. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses
and including:
i. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
ii. Fence or ornamental wall not over six feet in height.
iii. Sign as regulated herein.
iv. Cultivation of plants, noncommercial, where used for
landscaping or buffer areas.
69.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.29
1:808
v. Outdoor sales of merchandise or products that are
normally available for purchase within a completely
enclosed building located on the same location or premise
on which the activities are being conducted. Said sales
shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 49
on temporary outdoor sales. [Added 8-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 8-13-90B]
69.29.2. Conditions of use. [Amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
1. All activities as permitted in the C-1 District shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building, with the exception of the
accessory uses listed above.
2. Hours of operations shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. daily, including the operation of all external and internal
lighted signs and displays. An exception may be granted for
lighting essential for security purposes.
69.29.3. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged shall not exceed 25 feet. [Amended 6-8-1970 by
Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
69.29.4. Yard area and lot area. No building shall be hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and
maintained in connection with such building structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
2. Side yard: not less than 50 feet where abutting a street or alley;
none required for an interior lot, except that where abutting upon
an R District, there shall be provided a side yard equal to 1/2 the
required front yard in such abutting R District, plus a buffer area of
not less than 20 feet. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No.
10-15-91B]
3. Rear yard: not less than 25 feet. A one-story accessory building may
be located within a required rear yard except for the five feet
adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley line, but not upon
any required buffer area, for the storage of motor vehicles, the
loading or unloading of vehicles under a roof or the storage of stock
and merchandise customarily associated with the principal use.
Where abutting an R District, there shall be provided, in addition to
the rear yard requirement, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
Where upper floor dwelling units or living quarters are used for
habitation, there shall be a minimum of 2,700 square feet of lot
area per dwelling unit, of which 300 square feet shall be usable
yard space. [Amended 6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 6-8-70A;
10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
69.29.5.Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted under Article X.
69.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.29
1:809
69.30. C-2 General Commercial District. [Amended 5-11-1987 by
Ord. No. 5-11-87C]
Within the C-2 General Commercial District, the following regulations shall
apply:
69.29.6. Development design. [Added 8-13-1973 by Ord. No. 8-13-73C;
amended 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
1. Buildings shall respect the surrounding community in terms of
scale, mass, use of materials and architectural ornamentation, roof
shape and covering, window size, shape and spacing. Where
appropriate, buildings should be of varied types in varied
groupings, located adjacent to public streets or right-of-way and
allow for pedestrian movement. The development of buildings and
structures is encouraged to follow the design guidelines adopted by
the Municipal Council by resolution and maintained in the offices of
the Department of Community Services.
2. The front, sides and rear of all buildings, when the front, rear or
sides face a residential district or street shall be faced with brick,
stone or other suitable material as approved by the Planning
Commission.
3. Trash receptacles, including dumpsters, shall be screened from
view.
4. All mechanical and electrical equipment is to be located in a
manner or situation so as to best buffer the noise generated by the
equipment from the neighboring property. Equipment shall be
sound buffered to prevent a sound level, as measured by a standard
audiometer, greater than 50 decibels (dBA) at the property line of
the property in which the proposed development is located. All
measurement of the noise is to be conducted once per year upon
the request of the municipality. The cost of conducting such
measurements is to be borne by the owner.
5. When abutting an R District, a fence of six feet in height is to be
located along the entire length of the buffer area. The type and
location of fence shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
6. Detailed development plans in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District shall be submitted for the review, recommendation and
approval of first the Planning Commission followed by the approval
of the Municipal Council.
69.30.1. Permitted uses.
1. Permitted uses without size limitations. The following uses are
permitted without size limitations unless otherwise specified in this
ordinance:
69.29 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.30
1:810
a. All uses in C-1 without size limitations per business and where
no manufacturing or assembly exists as a principal use.
b. Minor automotive repair.
c. Public or semipublic buildings, including theaters and clubs.
d. Places of assembly, including theaters and clubs.
e. Restaurants and taverns.
f. Funeral homes.
g. Amusement establishments.
h. Bus terminal.
i. Repair shop.
j. Gasoline service station.
k. Recreational uses. [Added 9-13-1993 by Ord. No.
9-13-93A]
l. Conditional uses as regulated elsewhere in this ordinance.
m. Cemetery. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
n. Hospital. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
o. Institute of higher learning. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
5-8-89G]
p. Special education school. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No.
5-8-89G]
q. Parking lot. [Added 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
r. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
and including:
i. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
ii. Fence or ornamental wall not over six feet in height.
iii. Sign as regulated herein.
iv. Cultivation of plants, noncommercial, where used for
landscaping or buffer areas.
v. Outdoor patio use accessory to a restaurant use, provided
that the following provisions are met:
69.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.30
1:811
The outdoor area shall be clearly delineated on the lot and
separated from any required parking areas by a physical
barrier.
The outdoor area shall not encroach upon or be in any
required yard areas.
The area shall not exceed 200 square feet or 10% of the
total floor area devoted to food and beverage service use,
exclusive of kitchen and multipurpose banquet/meeting
rooms, whichever is greater. Only food and beverage
service use areas located on the same floor as the outdoor
patio may be used for this tabulation.
No part of any patio shall be within 200 feet of an R-1, R-2
or R-3 zoned property.
The outdoor area shall be screened with landscaping or
other screening material from view from properties in
R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones.
69.30.2. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged shall not exceed 40 feet. [Amended 6-8-1970 by
Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
69.30.3. Yard areas. As required or permitted in the C-1 District.
69.30.4. Conditions of use.
1. All activities, except for accessory uses, service stations, outdoor
plant sales and propagation areas of landscaping materials (such as
peat moss and bark chips) shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building. In addition, all outdoor sales of bulk landscaping
materials shall be completely screened from view and all outdoor
plant sales, propagation areas and sale of bulk landscaping
materials shall not be located within the first 25 feet of any yard
abutting a street. [Added by Ord. No. 6-9-86B]
2. A C-2 District shall comprise an area of not less than two acres.
3. A plan of landscape development is required, which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least five feet in width
along all streets with the exception of approved entrances, which
area shall be planted and maintained, or ornamental wall or fence
in lieu thereof, to serve as a border for the parking, loading or
service area. A buffer area shall be maintained wherever the
proposed business abuts an R-District. The location, arrangement,
size and effect of all outdoor advertising or other signs and lighting
proposed to be erected shall be shown.
4. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
Department of Health, State Highway Department and similar
organizations, shall be obtained before applying for a building or
occupancy permit.
69.30 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.30
1:812
69.31. C-3 Professional-Service District. [Amended by Ord. No.
11-13-72A; by Ord. No. 3-12-73B; by Ord. No. 8-13-73C; by Ord. No.
1-14-74A]
Within the C-3 Professional-Service District, the following regulations shall
apply:
5. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted under Article IX.
6. The fronts of all buildings and sides, when the side or sides face a
street of a residential district, shall be faced with brick, stone or
other suitable materials as approved by the Planning Commission.
[Added by Ord. No. 8-13-73C]
69.31.1. Permitted uses.
1. Bank, financial institution, savings and loan association: branch,
main office or drive-in.
2. Club or fraternal organization, including an outdoor patio use
subject to all the conditions listed under C-2. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1-10-83C]
3. Hotel or motor hotel, when the principal vehicular entrance thereto
is within 1,320 feet of a federally designated highway.
4. Library.
5. Medical or dental clinic.
6. Offices of business, governmental, charitable, professional,
financial or institutional organizations or firms, including offices of
industrial or commercial concerns, the plants or outlets of which
are not permitted in this district.
7. Post office.
8. Theater, indoor.
9. Cemetery. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
10. Hospital. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
11. Day care facility. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
12. Personal care boarding home. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
13. Institute of higher learning. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
14. Special education school. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
15. Fire station. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
16. Recreational uses. [Added by Ord. No. 9-13-93A]
69.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.31
1:813
17. Health services offices. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
18. Accessory building or use customarily incidental to the above uses
and including:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities.
b. Fence or ornamental wall not over six feet in height.
c. Signs as regulated herein.
d. Cultivation of plants, noncommercial, where used for
landscaping or buffer areas.
19. The following uses are permitted when the area of the use
constitutes no more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
structure, and that there is no exterior evidence of such use, and
when located wholly within a principal building permitted above,
provided that the use is located on the ground floor only.
[Amended 4-10-1978 by Ord. No. 4-10-78B]
a. Art, book and stationery store.
b. Bakery shop, retail sales shop, which does not include the
baking or manufacturing of baked goods on the premises.
c. Barbershop or beauty shop.
d. Candy or ice cream store.
e. Drugstore.
f. Florist shop, conservatory for retail trade on the premises only,
which does not include greenhouse or outdoor planting beds
used for the growing, nursing, sale or display of nursery or
horticultural stock or material.
g. Drugstore.
h. Gift store.
i. Hobby shop or camera shop.
j. Newsstand.
k. Restaurant, tearoom or cafe, when the establishment is not of
the drive-in type and when located within hotels or motels only.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-11-83A]
l. Shoe repair or watch repair shop.
m. Tobacco shop.
69.31 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.31
1:814
69.32. C-4 Office-Commercial District. [Added by Ord. No.
6-13-83E]
Within the C-4 Office-Commercial District, the following regulations shall
apply:
n. Similar type convenience service uses not specifically listed
herein when authorized by Municipal Council after review and
recommendations from the Planning Commission.
20. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Amended by Ord. No.
5-8-89F]
69.31.2. No building shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged to
exceed the heights or to provide and maintain yards less than the
dimensions herein prescribed.
69.31.3. Height and yard areas.
a. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged shall not exceed 75 feet.
b. Yard areas. Front yards shall be not less than 50 feet, side and rear
yards not less than 35 feet, and where abutting an R District, there
shall be a buffer area of a minimum of 20 feet or such larger area as
the Planning Commission feels may be appropriate in the premises.
[Amended by Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
69.31.4. Lot area. The minimum lot size shall be one acre.
69.31.5. Conditions of use:
1. All activities, except for accessory uses, shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
2. A plan of landscape development is required, which shall include,
among other considerations, an area of at least five feet in width
along all streets, with the exception of approved entrances, which
area shall be planted and maintained with trees, shrubs or other
landscape materials, or ornamental wall or fence in lieu thereof, to
serve as a border for the parking, loading or service area. The
location, arrangement, size and effect of all outdoor advertising or
other signs and lighting proposed to be erected shall be shown.
3. Any other authority approval required, when applicable, such as
the Department of Health, State Highway Department and similar
organizations, shall be obtained before applying for a building or
occupancy permit.
4. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted under Article X.
69.32.1. Permitted uses:
69.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.32
1:815
1. Branch Main Office or Drive-in of a Bank, Financial Institution,
Savings Institution, etc.
2. Medical or Dental clinic.
3. Offices of business, governmental, charitable, professional,
financial or institutional organizations or firms, including the
offices of industrial or commercial concerns, the plants or outlets of
which are not permitted in this District.
4. Living quarters above ground floor.
5. Cemetery. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
6. Hospital. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
7. Day care facility. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
8. Personal care boarding home. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
9. Fire station. [Added by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
10. Health services offices. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
11. Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the above
uses, and including:
a. Off-street parking and loading facilities as regulated herein;
b. Fence or ornamental wall not exceeding six feet in height;
c. Signs as regulated herein.
12. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Amended by Ord. No.
5-8-89F]
69.32.2. No building shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged to
exceed the height, or to provide and maintain yards less than the
dimensions herein prescribed.
1. Heights and yard areas:
a. Height - The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected,
altered or enlarged, shall not exceed 35 feet.
b. Yard areas - Front yard - 50 feet minimum.
Side yard — 20 feet minimum
Rear yard — 20 feet minimum
c. Where abutting an R District, there shall be a buffer area of a
minimum of 20 feet planted or improved in accordance with
recommendations of the Planning Commission. [Amended by
Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
69.32 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.32
1:816
69.32.3. Conditions of use:
1. All activities, except for accessory use, shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
2. Plan of landscape development is required which shall include,
among other considerations, an area at least five feet in width
along all streets with the exception of approved entrances.
69.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.32
1:817

ARTICLE VII
Provisions Governing Manufacturing and Light Industrial Districts
69.33. M Manufacturing, Light Industrial District.
Within the M Manufacturing, Light Industrial District, the following
regulations apply:
69.33.1. Permitted uses. A light industrial use is one which creates a
minimum amount of nuisance outside the plant; is conducted entirely
within enclosed buildings; does not use the open area around such
buildings for storage of raw materials or manufactured products unless
screened from public view, or for any other industrial purpose other
than transporting goods between buildings; and which is not noxious or
offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, fumes, gas, odors,
noises, vibrations or lights, such as welding equipment, beyond the
confines of the building.
1. Animal hospital.
2. Appliance and equipment repair and service.
3. Automobile repair, major.
4. Bakery.
5. Bottling works.
6. Building-material yards or establishment.
7. Cabinet-making establishments and carpenter shops.
8. Clothing factory.
9. Contractors' yard.
10. Dairy.
11. Dry-cleaning plant.
12. Dyeing plant.
13. Feed yard.
14. Fruit canning and packing establishment.
15. Ice plant.
16. Laundry.
17. Machine shop.
18. Milk distribution station.
19. Optical goods factory.
69.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.33
1:819
20. Paper-box factory.
21. Pencil factory.
22. Printing, publication and engraving plant.
23. Research and development organization.
24. Sheet-metal shop.
25. Steel fabrication.
26. Storage firm.
27. Trucking terminal.
28. Welding shop.
29. Wholesale business.
30. Any other compatible-type manufacturing, light industrial.
31. Accessory use or building customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses and as regulated by this Ordinance.
32. Restaurant, when establishment is not of the drive-in type where
patrons are served in an automobile, not including the dispensing
of hard beverages. [Added by Ord. No. 8-12-68A]
33. Office or facilities of a nonprofit organization. [Added by Ord. No.
8-11-69B]
34. Gasoline services facility. [Added by Ord. No. 12-13-71B;
amended by Ord. No. 12-11-78C]
35. Greenhouse, nursery. [Added by Ord. No. 6-9-86B]
36. Parking Lot. [Added by Ord. No. 5-11-89G]
37. Fire Station. [Added by Ord. No. 5-11-98G]
38. Recreational Uses. [Added by Ord. No. 9-13-93A]
39. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Amended by No. 5-8-89F]
69.33.2. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or
altered shall be as follows: 45 feet. [Amended by Ord. No. 7-10-69A]
69.33.3. Yard areas. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged
unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection
with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: If no off-street parking or loading occurs within the
yard area, not less than 25 feet. If off-street parking or loading
occurs within the yard area, not less than 50 feet.
69.33 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.33
1:820
2. Rear yard: When abutting a street, same as front yard; when not
abutting a street, not less than 15 feet when no off-street parking
occurs within such yard and not less than 40 feet when off-street
parking occurs within such yard. For a lot which abuts an R
District, there shall be provided, in addition to any yard areas
specified herein, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet. [Amended
by Ord. No. 4-8-68A; by Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
3. Side yard: When abutting a street, same as front yard. For an
interior lot, the side yard shall be not less than six feet. For a lot
which abuts an R-District, there shall be provided, in addition to the
yard width specified herein, a buffer area of not less than 20 feet.
[Amended by Ord. No. 4-8-68A; by Ord. No. 6-8-70A; by Ord.
No. 11-8-82D; by Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
4. Railroad siding frontage: no yards are required for these portions
of lots which abut railroad sidings.
69.33.4.Off-street parking and loading facilities. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required under Article IX herein.
69.33.5. Planting areas. Landscape development in an area of at least five
feet in width along all streets, with the exception of approved
entrances, which border uses in the M District shall be planted and
maintained with grass or other suitable ground cover and shrubbery
not less than two feet in height nor exceeding three feet in height to
serve as a screen for parking and storage areas. An ornamental fence or
wall may be used in lieu of landscaping. [Amended by Ord. No.
4-8-68A; by Ord. No. 10-15-91B]
69.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.33
1:821

ARTICLE VIII
Provisions Governing Conservation District
[Added 10-8-1979 by Ord. No. 10-8-79B]
69.34. Conservation District. [Amended 5-9-1989 by Ord. No.
5-9-89G]
Within the CD Conservation District, the following regulations apply:
69.34.1. Permitted uses:
1. Farm.
2. One-family detached dwelling.
3. Temporary building and use for construction purposes, not to
exceed a period of one year.
4. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
5. Conditional uses as regulated herein. [Amended 5-8-1989 by
Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.34.2. Height. The maximum height of buildings hereafter erected or
altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling: height not to exceed 35 feet, except
as provided under supplementary regulations.
2. Any other permitted building: height not to exceed 50 feet.
3. Accessory building: height not to exceed 25 feet.
69.34.3. Lot area. The minimum lot area for every building hereafter
erected or altered shall be as follows:
1. One-family detached dwelling: three acres.
2. Public or private recreation: one acre.
69.34.4. Yard area. No building or structure shall be hereafter erected or
enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in
connection with such building, structure or enlargement:
1. Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
2. Side yard: not less than 50 feet.
3. Rear yard: not less than 50 feet.
4. When a use in a CD District other than a one-family dwelling, abuts
upon an R District, there shall be provided, in addition to the above
yard requirement, an undisturbed buffer area of not less than 50
feet. Within the buffer area no grading is permitted; the area must
remain in its natural state, and trees cannot be removed except for
69.34 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.34
1:823
safety and proper forest management. Any tree removal in the
buffer area must be approved by the Municipal Manager or person
designated by the Manager. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B]
69.34.5.Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for
each permitted use the CD District pursuant to the requirements of the
Parking Article.
69.34 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.34
1:824
ARTICLE IX
Supplementary Regulations
69.35. Additional height, area and yard requirements.107
The district regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement,
as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this
ordinance.
69.35.1. Additional height regulations.
1. Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Any building
other than a multistory multiple-family dwelling may be increased
in height by not more than 10 feet when the side and rear yards are
increased over the yard requirements of the district in which they
are located by not less than 10 feet (but they shall not exceed three
stories in height). [Amended 6-8-1970 by Ord. No. 6-8-70A]
2. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water
towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio towers or necessary
mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height above the
limitations of the district, but not to exceed 15 feet over such
limitations.
69.35.2. Additional area regulations.
1. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced,
and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes
unless the main building on the lot is also being used for dwelling
purposes.
2. More than one industrial, commercial, multiple-family dwelling or
institutional building may be erected upon a single lot or tract, but
the yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the
lot or tract shall not be encroached upon by such buildings, nor
shall there be any change in the intensity of use requirements.
3. Where an open space is more than 50% surrounded by building, the
minimum width of the open space shall be 30 feet for one-story
buildings, 40 feet for two-story buildings and 50 feet for three-story
buildings and multistory buildings.
69.35.3. Additional yard regulations.
1. In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard abuts an
alley, its width may be included as a portion of the rear yard.
107. Editor's Note: The former section on conditional uses was incorporated into Article XXIII
on conditional uses 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F.
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:825
2. Detached structures or accessory buildings which are not part of
the main building must be located at least 10 feet from the side lot
line and at least five feet from the rear lot line and must be located
behind the building line and must be located behind the front face
of the primary structure and not within any required or established
front yard area. Structures commonly referred as "dish-type
antennas" that have dishes exceeding 20 inches in diameter may
not be attached to, mounted on or supported by single-family
dwellings or to buildings accessory to single-family dwelling and
they must be supported by the ground with no part of the antenna
having a height greater than 20 feet above the ground. Dish-type
antennas under 20 inches in diameter may be attached to, mounted
on or supported by single-family dwellings or by buildings
accessory to a single-family dwellings, but shall not have a height
greater than four feet above the highest point of the building roof.
No accessory building or structure, except a fence or wall, may be
located within a required buffer area. [Amended 10-12-1981 by
Ord. No. 10-12-81D; 8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-14-95B;
2-12-1996 Ord. No. 2-12-96C; 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
3. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky,
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and
except for the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses,
cornices and ornamental features projecting not to exceed 12
inches. This requirement shall not prevent the erection of patio or
porch covers or roofs or fences not exceeding six feet in height,
except on that portion of lots within 30 feet of the intersection of
two or more streets.
4. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways
and balconies opening upon fire towers, projecting into a yard not
more than four feet six inches, and the ordinary projections of
chimneys and flues, may be permitted by the Building Inspector.
5. For the purpose of side yard requirements, a two-family dwelling
shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot.
6. An open, unenclosed porch not more than one story in height, or
paved terrace, may project into the required front yard for a
distance not exceeding 10 feet. An enclosed vestibule containing
not more than 40 square feet may project into the required yard for
a distance not to exceed five feet.
7. Terraces, unenclosed porches, platforms and ornamental features,
including patios with covers or roofs, may project into a required
yard at the side or rear of a lot, provided that such projection be
distant not less than two feet from an adjacent property line or 12
feet from a building on an adjacent lot.
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:826
8. When, on the effective date of this ordinance, 40% of a frontage is
developed with two or more buildings, then the depth of the front
yards heretofore established shall be adjusted in the following
manner:
a. When the building furthest from the street provides a front
yard no more than 10 feet greater than the building closest to
the street, then the average depth of the front yard for such
frontage shall be the minimum depth of the front yards for all
buildings in such block.
b. When the above is not the case and the lot is within 100 feet of
an existing building on each side, excluding, however,
buildings on corner lots which front upon the intersecting
street, then the depth of the front yard is determined by a line
drawn from the closest front corners of these two adjacent
buildings.
c. Application of the above regulations shall not be construed to
require a front yard greater than that required by the district
regulations. In all districts, a triangular open space must be
maintained at street corners and at driveway entrances with
the purpose of maintaining visibility for traffic conditions. This
triangular open space shall be maintained between three and
12 feet above the street grade. The street grade is measured at
the intersection of the center lines of intersecting street
pavements or at the intersection of the center lines of the
intersecting driveway and street pavement. The triangular
space is determined by a diagonal line connecting two points
which are 15 feet distant and on each side of such driveway
opening, or point to point of the tangents at the corner of the
lot for corner lots.
d. In Single-Family Dwelling Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3, when 75%
of the frontage of a block on both sides of the street between
two intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and
a cul-de-sac has been developed with main buildings and
accessory buildings with side yards less than those required by
the dwelling district in which said property is situated, then the
side yard requirement for any main buildings or accessory
buildings in said block may be the average side yard of all
parcels of property in said block rather than the side yard set
forth in the dwelling district in which said parcel of property is
situated. In determining the existing side yard of any
developed parcel, in order to compute the average herein
required, the side yard of the main building on any developed
parcel shall be used, except that when an accessory building
exists with a smaller side yard than the main building has, the
side yard shall be taken as being the average between the side
yard of the main building and the side yard of the accessory
building.
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:827
9. An existing building which has side yards less than those required
for the zoning district in which the property is located may be
expanded to the rear, provided that such expansion results in no
further decrease in the side yards and that the expansion is in
compliance with applicable rear yard and percentage of lot
coverage requirements. [Added 9-12-1977 by Ord. No.
9-12-77A; amended 10-12-1981 by Ord. No. 10-12-81E]
10. An existing building which has side and/or front yards less than
those required for the zoning district in which the property is
located may be expanded vertically, provided that such expansion
will comply with the applicable height requirements. [Added
10-12-1981 by Ord. No. 10-12-81E]
11. An existing building which has a front yard less than that required
for the zoning district in which the property is located may be
expanded to the side, provided that such expansion will comply
with the applicable side yard requirements. [Added 9-12-1977 by
Ord. No. 9-12-77A; amended 10-12-1981 by Ord. No.
10-12-81E]
12. Canopies which are accessory to a use wherein motor fuel is
dispensed and intended to provide shelter to persons using the
dispensing pumps may project into the front yard to within five feet
of the front property line or into the yard abutting a street in the
case of corner lots within five feet of the side property line. [Added
8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 8-12-85D]
69.35.4. Additional use regulations.
1. Junk vehicles.
a. Junk vehicles as defined in Ordinance 7-14-75B or those that
are disabled for over 72 hours to the degree that major parts,
such as engines, transmission, wheels and rear axle assemblies
are missing or those that are dismantled must be stored in a
completely enclosed building. This provision shall not apply to
vehicles stored on the premises or property being used as a
legal auto body repair facility. [Added 2-9-1987 by Ord. No.
2-9-87D]
2. Lighting standards. [Added 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 4-13-87D;
amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98D]
a. General.
(1) This ordinance refers to the lighting of various types of
facilities, including parking lots, service stations,
commercial and residential buildings and recreational
facilities, to be constructed in the Municipality of Bethel
Park.
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:828
(2) All design criteria and calculation methods shall follow the
latest Recommended Practice and Standards of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) and Bethel Park Municipal Exterior Lighting
Design Manual.
b. The following are the maximum maintained horizontal
illuminances for parking facilities. These levels are given to
provide the safe movement of traffic, for satisfactory vision for
pedestrians and for guidance of both vehicles and pedestrians.
The low-activity area recommendations are based on the
requirement to maintain security at any time in areas where
there is a low level of nighttime activity. Parking lots shall
conform to these standards.
(1) In outdoor general parking and pedestrian areas with lowactivity
areas, the maximum maintained horizontal level of
illumination shall be 20 lux (2.0 footcandles) and the
minimum level of illumination shall be 2 lux (0.2
footcandles) on the pavement surfaces. The uniformity
ratio between average to minimum illumination levels
shall not exceed 4:1.
(2) In outdoor general parking and pedestrian areas with
medium-activity areas, the maximum maintained
horizontal level of illumination shall be 54 lux (5.0
footcandles) and the minimum level of illumination shall be
6 lux (0.6 footcandles) on the pavement surfaces. The
uniformity ratio between average to minimum illumination
levels shall not exceed 4:1.
(3) In outdoor general parking and pedestrian areas with
high-activity areas, the maximum maintained horizontal
level of illumination shall be 75 lux (7.0 footcandles) and
the minimum level of illumination shall be 10 lux (0.9
footcandles) on the pavement surfaces. The uniformity
ratio between average to minimum illumination levels
shall not exceed 4:1.
(4) In outdoor vehicle use (only) areas with low-activity areas,
the maximum maintained horizontal level of illumination
shall be 10 lux (1.0 footcandles) and the minimum level of
illumination shall be 5 lux (0.5 footcandles) on the
pavement surfaces. The uniformity ratio between average
to minimum illumination levels shall not exceed 3:1.
(5) In outdoor vehicle use (only) areas with medium-activity
areas, the maximum maintained horizontal level of
illumination shall be 32 lux (3.0 footcandles) and the
minimum level of illumination shall be 11 lux (1.0
footcandles) on the pavement surfaces. The uniformity
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:829
ratio between average to minimum illumination levels
shall not exceed 3:1.
(6) In outdoor vehicle use (only) areas with high-activity
areas, the maximum maintained horizontal level of
illumination shall be 44 lux (4.0 footcandles) and the
minimum level of illumination shall be 22 lux (2.0
footcandles) on the pavement surfaces. The uniformity
ratio between average to minimum illumination levels
shall not exceed 3:1.
(7) Lighting of access roads to all parking facilities should
match the local roadway lighting as much as possible. The
average maintained illuminance should be compatible with
local conditions. The average to minimum uniformity ratio
shall not exceed 3:1.
(8) Maximum pole height requirements for parking areas are
as follows: [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3-14-11]
(a) R-1, R-2, R-3 and OS: 12 feet, zero inches.
(b) R-4, R-5, R-T: 16 feet, zero inches.
(c) C-1: 16 feet, zero inches.
(d) C-2, C-3 and C-4: 20 feet, zero inches.
(e) C-2; shopping centers: 50 feet, zero inches.
(f) MLI: 20 feet, zero inches.
(g) CD: 12 feet, zero inches.
(9) Lighting level and pole height. [Amended 3-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 3-14-11]
(a) When a building's property line abuts an R-1, R-2, R-3,
OS or CD District or a property where a single-family
dwelling is built, the maximum pole height shall be 12
feet, zero inches, and no building mounting light shall
be higher than the maximum pole requirements in the
district in which it is located nor higher than any
building on the property.
(b) When a building's property line abuts an R-4, R-5 or RT
Zoning District, the maximum pole height shall be
16 feet, zero inches, and no building mounting light
shall be higher than the maximum pole requirements
in the district in which it is located nor higher than any
building on the property.
(c) Pole height for shopping centers in a C-2 District with
parking areas in excess of 25,000 square feet shall not
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:830
exceed 50 feet, provided that the property does not
abut a residential district. If any portion of the
property abuts a residential district, no pole heights
for the property shall exceed 20 feet.
(d) The lighting shall be designed to avoid light trespass.
The illumination level shall not exceed 0.5 horizontal
footcandle at the property line in which the
development is located.
(e) Where the property lines occur in parking and
pedestrian areas or outdoor vehicle use (only) areas,
the maximum horizontal level of illumination at the
property line shall be no greater than the average of
the maximum illumination levels permitted in the
abutting areas.
(f) The maximum height of a base for a light pole shall not
exceed four feet.
c. Off-street parking facilities.
(1) In Zoning Districts C-1, C-2, C-3 and MLI, the parking
facilities shall conform to the latest IESNA recommended
maintained horizontal illuminances for covered parking
facilities.
(a) Daylight, general parking and pedestrian areas. The
sum of electric lighting and daylight shall provide an
average illumination on the pavement which shall not
exceed 54 lux (5.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio
between average to minimum illumination levels shall
not exceed 4:1.
(b) Daylight, ramps and corners. The sum of electric
lighting and daylight shall provide an average
illumination on the pavement which shall not exceed
110 lux (10.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio
between average to minimum illumination levels shall
not exceed 4:1.
(c) Daylight, entrance areas and stairways. The sum of
electric lighting and daylight shall provide an average
illumination on the pavement which shall not exceed
540 lux (50.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio
between average to minimum illumination levels shall
not exceed 4:1.
(d) Nighttime, general parking and pedestrian areas. The
average illumination on the pavement shall not exceed
54 lux (5.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio between
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:831
average to minimum illumination levels shall not
exceed 4:1.
(e) Nighttime, ramps and corners. The average
illumination on the pavement shall not exceed 54 lux
(5.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio between
average to minimum illumination levels shall not
exceed 4:1.
(f) Nighttime, entrance areas and stairways. The average
illumination on the pavement shall not exceed 54 lux
(5.0 footcandles). The uniformity ratio between
average to minimum illumination levels shall not
exceed 4:1.
(g) In covered parking facilities, vertical illuminances of
objects such as columns and walls should be equal to
the horizontal values. These vertical values shall be
for a location 1.8 meters (six feet, zero inches) above
the pavement.
d. Service station illumination.
(1) Illumination levels shall be defined by its environs. In a
brightly illuminated area, such as a major roadway or
shopping district, it is considered for the purpose of this
ordinance as "bright surrounds." In areas where there is
limited local traffic or the property abuts any R Zoning
District, it is to be considered as "dark surrounds." The
determination of the surrounds shall be the responsibility
of the body approving the land development or the Zoning
Officer.
(a) Service stations with dark surrounds should not
exceed the following levels. Driveways and
approaches should not exceed 15 lux (1.5
footcandles); pump island area, 200 lux (20
footcandles); building faces, 100 lux (10 footcandles);
service area, 30 lux (three footcandles); and landscape
highlights, 20 lux (two footcandles).
(b) Service stations with light surrounds should not
exceed the following levels. Driveways and
approaches should not exceed 50 lux (five
footcandles); pump island area, 300 lux (30
footcandles); building faces, 300 lux (30 footcandles);
service area, 70 lux (seven footcandles); and
landscape highlights, 50 lux (five footcandles).
e. Security lighting.
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:832
(1) Security lighting for any building shall conform to the
latest IESNA recommended maintained horizontal
illuminances for security lighting. The levels are not to be
exceeded for the various applications indicated.
(a) Large open areas: five to 20 lux, (0.5-2.0 footcandles).
The greater the brightness of the surrounding area,
the higher the illuminance required to balance the
brightness in the space.
(b) Perimeter fences: five lux (0.5 footcandles);
illuminance on the ground on either side of the fence.
(c) Buildings: five to 20 lux (0.5-2.0 footcandles); vertical
illuminance on the building facade.
(d) Entrances: 100 lux (10 footcandles); illuminance on
the ground in the inspection area.
(e) Gatehouses: 300 lux (30 footcandles); must be
dimmable to low levels.
(2) The use of motion sensors for the control of security
lighting is encouraged. Infrared mounted sensors may be
utilized to turn on additional active lighting to augment the
normal passive security lighting when activated.
f. Recreational area lighting.
(1) The recommended target illuminances criteria for popular
outdoor sports and recreational areas and activities shall
meet the criteria established in the latest IESNA
Handbook and the Municipal Exterior Lighting Manual.
Lighting for specific recreational criteria shall meet these
target values for the anticipated use. Taraet values shall be
for the intended use; i.e., a baseball field should not be
illuminated for Class I (television or professional play)
when its intended use is for Class IV (recreational).
(2) Mounting heights shall be based on the criteria set forth in
the latest IES Lighting Handbook and the Municipal
Exterior Lighting Manual.
g. Procedure.
(1) When a developer proposes to change the current
configuration of an existing property or create a new
structure as part of a land development, the applicant shall
submit a plot plan. It shall be drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned, showing the placement of all exterior
luminaires and proposed illumination levels and control
equipment before any permits or approval is issued. Postconstruction
measurements of illumination levels shall be
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:833
performed at the developer's expense. All violations of
approved plans shall be corrected within 30 days of
notification of violation. The light readings shall be
attested to by a lighting consultant which is approved by
the municipality or by a licensed professional engineer.
(2) The topographical drawing shall indicate the proposed
maintained illumination level utilizing either the Isolux
(Isofootcandle) or Point Method. A chart indicating the
mounting height, maximum, average and minimum
illumination levels, dirt depreciation and light loss factors
used and the average to minimum illumination ratio shall
be included. Parking lot and service station designs shall
also provide the type of pavement used. In addition, the
developer shall also submit the luminaire catalog number
and technical performance data for review.
(3) The municipality may require a topographical section of
the site to indicate illumination patterns on sharp grades
or special terrain conditions.
h. Lighting Design Manual.
(1) The municipality of Bethel Park Lighting Design Manual
illustrates the design concepts, calculation methods and
design criteria required by this ordinance.
i. Fees for review costs. Based upon the scope of the work for
review and determination of the complexity of the development
project, the municipality may require the submitted material to
be reviewed by an illumination consultant selected by the
municipality. In such cases, the applicant required to submit
the lighting data shall be required to pay for the cost of the
consultant review. No permits for construction or occupancy of
the site shall be issued until said consultant fees are paid.
3. Landscaping buffer area standards. [Added 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 10-15-91B]
a. It is the intent that all required buffer areas serve as a visual
and acoustic screen between commercial/multifamily uses and
single-family residential areas. All buffer areas shall be at least
20 feet in width and shall be planted with evergreen trees at
least five feet in height at eight foot intervals. Said evergreen
trees shall be tree species that will grow to a maturity height of
at least 20 feet and shall be a species that is suitable for the
climate and soil type of the site. The Community Development
Director shall approve the tree species selected before a
building permit is issued. All ground areas beneath and
between the trees shall be either planted with a suitable
ground cover or covered with decorative mulch or stones.
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:834
b. No structures (except fences and walls), buildings, parking
lots, parking spaces, driveways, roads, streets or signs may be
erected in the buffer area.
c. When a development abutting a residential zone is required to
have a buffer area and the lot on which the development is
located or is proposed has a portion zoned single-family
residential, then the portion zoned single-family residential,
then the portion zoned single-family residential may be
considered in meeting the requirements for a buffer area.
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
4. Structures used in playing basketball.
a. Structures used in playing basketball, including, but not
limited to, backboards and poles may be located in municipal
rights-of-way along only the last 50 properties of those local
streets intended to serve and provide access to the properties
abutting thereon and not connecting with other streets in such
a manner as to allow or promote through traffic. In addition,
the structure shall not obstruct the use of the right-of-way in
any way. All allowable structures must be at least 10 feet from
any side lot line, rear lot line and a projection of the side lot
line in the right-of-way. This ten-foot setback shall be waived
when a written agreement is in effect between two property
owners allowing the basketball structure to exist within the
ten-foot setback area. A building permit, as provided for
elsewhere in this code, shall be required to construct a
basketball structure in any right-of-way or easement area.
[Added 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 11-8-93C; amended
10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 10-14-96D; 1-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 1-13-97A]
5. Snow fences. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
a. Snow fences are permitted in any yard area from November 1
through May 1.
6. Non-tower wireless communications facilities. [Added 1-11-1999
by Ord. No. 1-11-99B; amended 2-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2-9-2009C; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
a. General and specific requirements for non-tower wireless
communications facilities.
(1) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower
WCF:
(a) Permitted in all zones as an accessory use subject to
regulations. Non-tower WCF are permitted in all
zones as an accessory use subject to the restrictions
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:835
and conditions prescribed below and subject to
applicable permitting by the municipality.
(b) Nonconforming wireless support structures. Nontower
WCF shall be permitted to co-locate upon
nonconforming tower-based WCF and other
nonconforming structures. Co-location of WCF upon
existing tower-based WCF is encouraged even if the
tower-based WCF is nonconforming as to use within a
zoning district.
(c) Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance
with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the
most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical
Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any WCF
shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance
and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the
municipality.
(d) Wind. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind according to the
standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/
TIA-222, as amended).
(e) Aviation safety. Non-tower WCF shall comply with all
federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety, as well as all applicable provisions of
Section 69.45 of the Bethel Park Zoning Code (Airport
District Overlay).
(f) Public safety communications. Non-tower WCF shall
not interfere with public safety communications or the
reception of broadband, television, radio or other
communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
(g) Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall
not, by itself or in conjunction with other WCFs,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but
not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:836
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure
to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
(h) Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice
to the municipality of its intent to discontinue use and
the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused
or abandoned WCF or portions of WCF shall be
removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within two months of
the cessation of operations at the site unless a
time extension is approved by the municipality.
[2] If the WCF or accessory facility is not removed
within two months of the cessation of operations
at a site, or within any longer period approved by
the municipality, the WCF and/or associated
facilities and equipment may be removed by the
municipality and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the WCF.
(i) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the
WBCA. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a non-tower WCF is filed with the
municipality, the municipality shall notify the WCF
applicant in writing of any information that may be
required to complete such application. Within 60
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the
municipality shall make its final decision on whether
to approve the application and shall advise the WCF
applicant in writing of such decision. If additional
information was requested by the municipality to
complete an application, the time required by the
WCF applicant to provide the information shall not be
counted toward the municipality's sixty-day review
period. The timing requirements in this section shall
only apply to proposed facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act.108
(j) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a nontower
WCF shall provide the municipality with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence
covering the non-tower WCF.
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:837
(k) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
non-tower WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the municipality,
its elected and appointed officials, employees and
agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its
officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out
of, but not limited to, the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the non-tower
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the municipality in which it is claimed that personal
injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a non-tower WCF. The
obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to
pay judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages,
reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(l) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the
following maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited
only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure
the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the
safety and security of the municipality's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing
less than the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all collocated nontower
WCF that do not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure to which they
are attached and fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act:109
(a) Permit required. WCF applicants proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF shall
obtain a building permit from the municipality. In
order to be considered for such permit, the WCF
applicant must submit a permit application to the
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:838
municipality in accordance with applicable permit
policies and procedures.
(b) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related
equipment greater than three cubic feet shall not be
located within 50 feet of a lot in residential use or
zoned residential.
(c) Permit fees. The municipality may assess appropriate
and reasonable permit fees directly related to the
municipality's actual costs in reviewing and
processing the application for approval of a non-tower
WCF or $1,000, whichever is less.
(3) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF
that do substantially change the wireless support
structure to which they are attached, or that otherwise do
not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act:110
(a) Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF
shall be located on single-family detached residences,
single-family attached residences, or any residential
accessory structure.
(b) Permit required. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new non-tower WCF, or the
modification of an existing non-tower WCF, shall first
obtain authorization from the municipality. New
constructions, modifications, and replacements that
do fall under the WBCA shall be not be subject to the
conditional use process. The permit application shall
demonstrate that the proposed facility complies with
all applicable provisions in the Bethel Park Zoning
Ordinance. The Zoning Officer and Code Official shall
have the authority to approve installation of non-tower
WCF.
(c) Historic buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located
upon any property, or on a building or structure that is
listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers
of Historic Places, or is listed on the official historic
structures and/or historic districts list maintained by
the municipality, or has been designated by the
municipality to be of historical significance.
(d) Retention of experts. The municipality may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
municipality in reviewing and evaluating the
application for approval of the WCF and, once
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:839
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these WCF
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the
WCF shall reimburse the municipality for all costs
of the municipality's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these
activities.
(e) Permit fees. The municipality shall assess appropriate
and reasonable permit fees directly related to the
municipality's actual costs in reviewing and
processing the application for approval of a non-tower
WCF, as well as related inspection, monitoring and
related costs.
(f) Development regulations. Non-tower WCF shall be colocated
on existing wireless support structures, such
as existing buildings or tower-based WCF, subject to
the following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure
and mounted WCF shall not exceed 15 feet above
the maximum height permitted in the underlying
zoning district, unless the WCF applicant applies
for, and subsequently obtains, a variance, with the
exception of non-tower WCFs attached to hightension
utility poles, towers or structures, where
the height may not exceed the height of the
existing utility pole, tower or structure. Nontower
WCFs attached to an existing building or
structure shall not protrude horizontally more
than three feet and shall be of such type and scale
so as to match and blend in with the building.
[2] In accordance with industry standards, all nontower
WCF applicants must submit
documentation to the municipality justifying the
total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of
such justification on an individual basis.
[3] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate the
related equipment in a separate building, the
building shall comply with the minimum
requirements for the applicable zoning district.
[4] Noncommercial usage exemption. Bethel Park
residents utilizing satellite dishes and antennae
for the purpose of maintaining television, phone,
and/or internet connections at their respective
residences shall be exempt from the regulations
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:840
enumerated in this section of the Zoning
Ordinance.
[5] A security fence shall surround any separate
communications equipment building and shall be
subject to the fencing design regulations set forth
in the Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance. Vehicular
access to the communications equipment building
shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular
circulations on the site for the principal use.
(g) Design regulations. Non-tower WCF shall employ
stealth technology and be treated to match the
wireless support structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the WCF applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the municipality.
(h) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] The removal and replacement of non-tower WCF
and/or accessory equipment for the purpose of
upgrading or repairing the WCF is permitted, so
long as such repair or upgrade does not
substantially change the overall size of the WCF
or the numbers of antennae.
[2] Any material modification to a WCF shall require
notice to be provided to the municipality, and
possible demolition permit approval to the
original permit or authorization.
(i) Inspection. The municipality reserves the right to
inspect any WCF to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other
provisions found within the Municipal Code or state or
federal law. The municipality and/or its agents shall
have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to
the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(4) Regulations applicable to all non-tower WCF located in the
public rights-of-way. In addition to the non-tower WCF
provisions listed in this section, the following regulations
shall apply to non-tower WCF located in the public rightsof-
way:
(a) Co-location. Non-tower WCF in the ROW shall be
located or co-located on existing poles, such as
existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not
technologically feasible, the WCF applicant shall
locate its non-tower WCF on existing poles or
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:841
freestanding structures that do not already act as
wireless support structures with the municipality's
approval.
(b) Design requirements:
[1] WCF installations located above the surface grade
in the public ROW including, but not limited to,
those on streetlights and joint utility poles, shall
consist of equipment components that are no
more than six feet in height and that are
compatible in scale and proportion to the
structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
[2] Antennae and related equipment shall be treated
to match the supporting structure and may be
required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be
visually compatible with the support structure
upon which they are mounted. The base of such
WCF shall be landscaped so as to screen the
foundation and base and any communications
building from abutting properties.
(c) Time, place and manner. The municipality shall
determine the time, place and manner of construction,
maintenance, repair and/or removal of all non-tower
WCF in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time,
place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the municipality and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(d) Equipment location. Non-tower WCFs and related
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards
to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined
by the municipality. In addition:
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment shall not be
located in any intersection areas of exclusion, as
designated by the Bethel Park Municipal Zoning
Code, in order to avoid visual impairment of
drivers and pedestrians.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot
be placed underground shall be screened, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:842
landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the municipality.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be
screened to blend in with the surrounding area to
the satisfaction of the municipality.
[4] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or
any related equipment shall be removed at the
sole expense of the owner.
[5] Any proposed underground vault related to nontower
WCF shall be reviewed and approved by the
municipality.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the municipality, or such
longer period as the municipality determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
WCF when the municipality, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or
installation of any municipal or other public
improvement in the right-of-way;
[2] The operations of the municipality or other
governmental entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a
utility easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the municipality.
7. Specific standards for chickens. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No.
9-10-18]
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
(1) CHICKEN RUN — An enclosed area in which chickens are
allowed to walk and run about. A securely fenced yard may
also be permitted. Chickens are only permitted to access
the chicken run during daylight hours.
(2) CHICKEN COOP — A structure for sheltering of female
(pullets or hens) chickens. An existing shed or garage may
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.35
1:843
be used for this purpose, provided that it meets the
standards for chicken coops set forth in this article. A
new and permanent chicken coop shall be considered an
accessory structure and shall require a separate permit.
(3) RESIDENTIAL CHICKEN PERMIT — A permit issued
under the provisions of this article for the keeping of
chickens as accessory to the primary residential use of a
property.
b. The keeping of chickens shall be permitted only in the R-1, R-2
and R-3 Zoning Districts as a use accessory to a dwelling.
c. Number. The number of chickens authorized shall comply with
the following:
(1) For the first 3,000 square feet of a lot, up to four chickens.
(2) For each additional 1,000 square feet of a lot, one
additional chicken up to a maximum of 15.
d. No roosters may be kept or harbored within the Municipality.
e. All chickens must be contained within the owner's property
boundary.
f. All feed must be kept in a verminproof, airtight container.
g. No hens or chicks may be slaughtered in the Municipality.
h. Chickens shall be kept for personal use only. The selling of
chickens, chicken manure, chicken eggs or the breeding of
chickens for commercial purposes is prohibited.
i. Coop. A chicken coop is required for the keeping of any
number of chickens. Any coop or enclosure for the chickens
must be covered, predator-proof and thoroughly ventilated and
be of a sufficient size to admit free movement of the chickens.
Chicken coops shall be kept clean.
(1) Any chicken coop must be located a minimum of 10 feet
from any side lot line and at least 10 feet from any rear lot
line and cannot be located in any front yard.
(2) Chicken coops shall be at least three square feet in size for
one chicken plus a minimum of two additional square feet
per additional chicken.
(3) All chickens must be kept in a chicken coop or chicken run
at all times. The chickens shall be secured within the coop
during nondaylight hours.
j. Waste storing and removal. Anyone keeping and raising
chickens pursuant to this article must safely dispose of all
69.35 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.35
1:844
69.36. Traffic impact requirements. [Added 10-14-1996 by Ord. No.
10-14-96B; amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3-14-11]
waste products through on-site composting. A manure
management plan will be required as part of the permit
application and may be subject to the review of the Allegheny
County Conservation District. The manure management plan
shall include actions to be taken to reduce the attraction of
predators and rodents and to prevent the infestation of insects
and parasites. Under no circumstances shall chicken manure
be placed into the sanitary sewer system.
k. Permits.
(1) A residential chicken permit is required in order to keep or
harbor any chickens within the Municipality. An
application for a permit shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Officer on such forms or in such format as
established by the Municipality, and shall be accompanied
by the prescribed permit fee in the amount established
from time to time by resolution of Municipal Council.
69.36.1. Traffic study requirements.
Any land development or subdivision or change in use which will
generate, on the average, 100 new or additional trips, entering and
exiting, during a single peak hour or greater than 3,000 average
weekday trips, entering and exiting, shall be required to have a traffic
impact study completed as part of the development. The estimated
number of trips shall be determined by an analysis of similar uses
through data collected by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or
through studies of similar uses acceptable by the Municipality.
The Municipality may also require a traffic study for developments or
changes in uses generating fewer than 100 additional vehicles during
peak hours in cases where known traffic deficiencies exist in the area
of the proposed development or change in use.
The additional trips criterion is applicable if a change in use is proposed
and the current use is generating trips.
If access is requested onto a state highway, the traffic study shall be
coordinated and reviewed jointly with the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) in accordance with its current policies. A
traffic impact assessment shall be performed in accordance with the
current PennDOT policy, a copy of which is available in the Municipal
offices, if approved by PennDOT and the Municipality. The Municipality
may waive the study requirement for an individual development or
change in use, where said development or change in use was
incorporated as part of a previous traffic impact study.
69.35 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36
1:845
If the development plan is located in the Oxford Drive Transportation
Overlay District, section or any other transportation overlay district,
a traffic impact study will not be required if the number of projected
trips does not exceed the number of trips assigned to the parcel when
the district was created. If the projected number of trips exceeds the
assigned number of trips, the study area shall include all intersections
in the overlay district.
69.36.2. Traffic study scope.
Prior to beginning a traffic impact study, the applicant shall submit a
proposed scope of services to the Municipal Planner for review and
approval. This scope shall be submitted in accordance with the current
scoping form, a copy of which is available in the Municipal offices,
utilized by PennDOT. It shall also be reviewed and approved by
PennDOT concurrently with the Municipality if access is being
requested onto a state highway. The traffic study shall include the
following, in addition to the information required in the scoping form, if
appropriate as determined by the Municipality:
1. A brief description of the proposed project in terms of land use and
magnitude.
2. An inventory and analysis of existing roadway and traffic conditions
in the site environs, including:
a. Roadway network and traffic control.
b. Existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and average
daily traffic (ADT). If existing data is used, it must have been
collected within the last three years of the date of the traffic
study submission. The submission shall also include crash data
for the last five years at all study intersections.
c. Planned roadway improvements and developments by others.
These can only be assumed in the traffic study under future
conditions if the improvements are funded and the
development has an issued highway occupancy permit from
PennDOT or a final land development approval from the
Municipality.
d. Intersection levels of service reported by approach, movement
and overall.
e. Other measures of roadway adequacy, i.e., lane widths, traffic
signal warrants, vehicle delay studies, etc.
3. Projected site-generated traffic volumes in terms of:
a. Peak hours and ADT (by development phase if required). If
alternative mode enhancements are proposed, such as
pedestrian, bicycle or transit improvements, a reduction in
projected trips maybe considered in accordance with the
69.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36
1:846
current PennDOT policy. These reductions must be approved,
in all cases, by the Municipality and PennDOT if access is on a
state highway.
b. Approach/departure distribution, including method of
determination.
c. Site traffic volumes on roadway.
4. An analysis of future traffic conditions, including:
a. Future design year or years shall be five years beyond the
anticipated opening of the development. If the project has
phasing it shall be five years beyond the anticipated
completion of the last phase. Also to be reported shall be
combined traffic volumes (site traffic plus future roadway
traffic). All conditions shall be as agreed upon in the scoping
form.
b. Intersection levels of service reported by approach movement
and overall. For signalized intersections, all level of service
analysis scenarios must be based upon optimized traffic signal
timings.
c. A pavement analysis of roadways which are projected to
experience significant increases in ADT volumes off-site.
d. Other measures of roadway adequacy, i.e., lane width, traffic
signal warrants; vehicle delay studies, etc.
e. When access is onto a state road, the analysis of future
conditions shall be consistent with PennDOT current policy
requirements.
5. A description of future levels of service and their compliance with
standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and
driveways. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic
capacity defined as follows. All reference to levels of service (LOS)
shall be as defined by the current edition of the Highway Capacity
Manual, Special Report 209, published by the Transportation
Research Board or other methods as required by the Municipal
Traffic Engineer.
a. Traffic capacity LOS shall be based upon a future design year.
b. New signalized or unsignalized intersections or driveways
which intersect streets shall be designed for LOS D or better
for each traffic movement unless otherwise specified by the
Municipality.
c. Existing signalized or unsignalized intersections impacted by
development traffic shall maintain the same level of service as
is currently reported; however, an overall intersection increase
69.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36
1:847
in delay of 10 seconds is acceptable. If this cannot be met,
mitigation must be developed. However, if mitigation is not
feasible, then the following applies:
[1] The municipality, may allow a marginal LOS degradation of
not less than a D with municipal concurrence, if
recommended by the township traffic engineer and
PennDOT, if access is onto a state highway.
[2] The municipality may approve an alternative
transportation plan (ATP), in accordance with the
PennDOT current policy, if a drop in LOS is not feasible, to
be mitigated. The ATP must be approved by the municipal
council. The ATP may include projects identified by the
municipal Comprehensive Plan or the metropolitan
planning organization transportation improvement plan.
[3] The developer may apply for a design waiver for the LOS
per the current PennDOT policy, if access is onto a state
highway. If access is onto a municipal roadway the LOS
waiver does not apply:
d. Streets shall be designed for a minimum LOS D.
6. A description and analysis of the proposed access plan and site
plan, including:
a. Access plan including analysis of required sight distances
using PennDOT current criteria and description of access
roadway, location, geometric conditions and traffic control.
b. On-site circulation plan showing parking locations and
dimension, loading access, circulation roadway and traffic
control.
7. Traffic circulation mitigating action plan shall include:
a. Project features relative to site access and on-site circulation
which could be modified to maximize positive impact or
minimize negative impact.
b. Off-site improvement plan depicting required roadway and
signal installation and signing improvements to meet the
minimum level of service requirements. This shall include
construction cost estimates and conceptual engineering plans.
69.36.3. Fees for review costs.
69.36 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36
1:848
69.36A. Project improvement program and assessment plan for
Oxford Drive Transportation District. [Added 3-8-1999 by Ord. No.
3-8-99B]
Based upon the scope of work for review and determination of the
complexity of the development project, the municipality may require
the traffic impact study to be reviewed by a traffic consultant selected
by the Municipality. In such a case, the applicant required to submit
the traffic study shall be required to pay for the cost of the consultant
review. No permits for construction or occupancy of a site shall be
issued until said consultant fees are paid.
69.36A.1. Incorporation of preambles. The preambles set forth above are
hereby incorporated by reference into the body of this ordinance as
operative sections and as an expression of Bethel Park's legislative
intent.111
69.36A.2. Legislative intent. The Bethel Park Council hereby declares its
intent, on the basis of the following legislative findings of fact herein, to
construct and finance a project (hereinafter called "the project")
comprising all of the elements of Bethel Park's Multiyear
Transportation Improvement Program as shown in Exhibit A hereto,112
and, further, the Council of Bethel Park finds as follows:
1. The Municipality of Bethel Park is in the path of growth.
2. Within the district defined in Section 69.36A.4 hereof and Exhibit A
hereto, Bethel Park had the recent construction of approximately
165,000 square feet of institutional, commercial and office space.
3. Inadequate transportation facilities have hampered the
development of the district area.
4. The land within the district is substantially built out and will be
fully developed and built out for the uses permitted under Bethel
Park's Zoning Ordinance within 10 years.
5. Transportation facilities are not available within the district to
support current and future institutional, retail and commercial
growth and development of the district.
6. Federal aid and available state, County and local funding
capabilities cannot meet the transportation needs of the district.
7. Balanced growth of Bethel Park, including institutional,
commercial and commercial uses, is imperative if the general tax
base of Bethel Park and the Bethel Park School District, which
serves Bethel Park, is to provide sufficient revenues for the proper
exercise of Bethel Park and School District functions.
111. Editor's Note: For said preamble, consult Ord. No. 3-8-99B on file in the municipal offices.
112. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Municipal offices.
69.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:849
8. Balanced growth will not be possible without the construction of
the project.
9. The studies prepared by Trans Associates (including Exhibit A
hereto) and David E. Wooster and Associates provide a reasonable
analysis and recommendation upon which, among other things,
Bethel Park has been able to properly base its determination of the
proper boundaries of the district.
10. In addition to the studies, Bethel Park used the experience of its
Council members as long-time residents of the area, the
recommendations of Bethel Park Planning Commission, the
location of streams, wetlands and other natural and man-made
features and the severe topography of certain areas to determine
all properties having a substantial relationship to the proposed
projects.
11. The studies utilize sound engineering assumptions which
established a rational cost allocation among parcel groups
benefitted.
12. The project's construction costs could change if different
engineering assumptions were used but would result in essentially
the same cost allocation among the benefitted properties.
13. The studies were not utilized as the sole basis for the action to be
taken hereby but as a guide to assist Bethel Park in arriving at the
proper district boundaries.
14. All property within the district will be benefitted by the project in
direct proportion to the assessment imposed thereon hereby and as
set forth in Exhibit A hereto.
15. The assessment formulas established in Section 69.36A.6 hereof
and Exhibit A hereto are fair and reasonable and each benefitted
property within the district will be subject to a fair and reasonable
assessment upon imposition of the assessments as provided herein.
16. The project is not for the purpose of maintaining or repairing an
existing facility or facilities but represents the complete
construction, reconstruction, acquisition, installation, widening or
relocation of transportation infrastructure to remedy existing
deficiencies and provide for the projected growth of traffic to the
year 2015.
17. All of the project provides new traffic capacity or will prevent
roads, currently safe but congested, from becoming substandard
and safety hazards due to projected traffic growth.
18. The life of the improvements in the project shall exceed 20 years
from the date of the original studies (1995).
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:850
19. All of the project represents transportation elements specifically
authorized by the Transportation Partnership Act (TPA).113
20. The district contains 14 parcels of land.
21. All landowners within the district will be notified of the thirty-day
appeal period established in Section 69.36A.12 hereof.
22. The financing of local share cost of transportation projects within
designated areas of Bethel Park pursuant to the powers granted by
the Transportation Partnership Act, 53 P.S. § 1621 et seq., is
desirable and necessary.
23. Bethel Park must issue long-term tax-exempt general obligation
debt to finance the local share cost of the multi-year transportation
improvement program (MYP) adopted by the Council.
24. Long-term general obligation debt issued by Bethel Park may
become self liquidating in whole or in part because of the special
assessments and liens authorized by the TPA.
25. The assessments and liens authorized by the TPA must be free from
legal challenge if Bethel Park is to rely on them as a dependable
source of revenue.
26. The issuance of general obligation debt requires the expenditure of
substantial funds which would be unrecoverable if successful
challenges occurred after the issuance of the same.
27. A reduction in one property owner's assessment might increase all
other property owners' assessments which could exceed the
assessment limits set by the notice requirements of TPA.
28. A method for challenging the district, assessments or any other
substantive provision of the district is required.
29. The time to challenge any substantive aspect of the financing for
the district must be limited and should expire prior to the issuance
of public debt or the expenditure of substantial unrecoverable
funds.
30. An appeals process should be instituted which must limit repetitive
and time-consuming appeals by multiple property owners.
31. The appeals process should be inexpensive and open to all property
owners who will be assessed regardless of the size of the
assessment.
32. The appeals process should be structured so as not to overburden
the courts with multiple and repetitive appeals.
113. Editor's Note See 53 P.S. § 1621 et seq.
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:851
33. The time for an aggrieved person to appeal should be restricted so
that any such appeals can be consolidated and heard by the court in
an expeditious fashion.
34. The issuance of general obligation debt independent of the district
but consistent with the MYP, pursuant to the Debt Ordinance and
the advancement of a portion or all of the same to the district after
the formation of the district will result in a savings in long-term
interest and debt issuance charges and shall result in lower special
benefit assessments to all benefitted users.
69.36A.3. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below wherever they appear in this ordinance:
1. ASSESSMENTS — The assessments imposed by this ordinance
upon the individual benefitted users under the TPA commensurate
with either:
a. The assessed valuation of the property for real estate taxation
purposes for tax year 1995; or
b. The percentage of project cost assigned to such benefitted
users hereby or by later assignment, reassignment or transfer
of such as appropriate by project element.
2. BENEFITTED USER — As the context demands, either:
a. Any assessable parcel of land in the district now existing or
which may come into existence in the future by virtue of
vacation of rights-of-way, acquisition of real property by Bethel
Park, subdivision or consolidation of land; or
b. The owner or controller thereof.
3. BILLING or BILLINGS — The process and the invoices used therein
for the collection of all or part of the installments of the
assessments from the benefitted users.
4. COMPLETION BONDS — Any bonds or notes issued by Bethel Park
to complete the project.
5. DEBT ORDINANCE — A separate, independent legislative
enactment under the authority of the Local Government Unit Debt
Act, 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.,114 which will supply funds for the local
share costs.
6. DISTRICT — The Oxford Drive Transportation District, the specific
boundaries of which are set forth in Section 69.36A.4 hereof.
7. FISCAL YEAR — Any year commencing on January 1 and ending on
the next succeeding December 31.
114. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:852
8. LIENS — The municipal liens or notice thereof filed by Bethel Park
in the Allegheny County Prothonotary's Office to secure the
assessment.
9. FINANCING — Bethel Park's Highway Improvement General
Obligation Bond, Series 1999, including, without limitation,
interest earned thereon, as raised pursuant to the Debt Ordinance
once such proceeds are deposited into the Construction Fund as
established in Section 69.36A.7 hereof.
10. CLOSING — The event of issuance and delivery of the financing
method and the time of occurrence of such event.
11. OPERATIONAL YEAR — Any year commencing on an January 1 and
ending on the next succeeding December 31.
12. PROJECT — The project described in the MYP consisting of seven
project elements.
13. REFUNDING BONDS — Any bonds or notes issued by Bethel Park
to refund bonds, completion bonds or refunding bonds, including
the payment of financing costs and funding of necessary reserves.
14. SALE (OF THE FINANCING) — In the case of an issuance of a note
or bond, shall mean the event of Bethel Park entering into a binding
contract with the purchaser of the note or bond, for the issuance of
the note or bond, and the time of occurrence of such event.
15. TRIPS — The peak-hour traffic generation assigned to specific
properties hereby and from time to time by Bethel Park as the basis
for the assessments.
16. ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the
Municipality of Bethel Park.
69.36A.4. Establishment of district boundaries. There is hereby established,
pursuant to the requirements of the TPA the Oxford Drive
Transportation District, a transportation development district within
the meaning of the TPA, and the area to be included in the district is
hereby designated as follows:
1. All land identified by Allegheny County block and lot number on the
list included within Exhibit A attached hereto and as shown in the
aggregate on the map (hereinafter "District Map") included within
Exhibit A which is made a part hereof.115
2. The roadways and associated rights-of-way of the public roads
listed on the map attached to Exhibit A, which is attached hereto
and incorporated herein.116
115. Editor's Note: Exhibit A and the District Map are on file in the municipal offices.
116. Editor's Note: Exhibit A and the District Map are on file in the municipal offices.
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:853
3. Any and all land not described above which is now or hereinafter
acquired by Bethel Park or the County of Allegheny, whether by
deed, gift, dedication, eminent domain or otherwise, for the
purpose of constructing the project, including any rights-of-way
incident to such acquisition, except that such land shall not become
part of the district until acquired by the appropriate government
unit having ownership of the project element or pertinent part
thereof for which such land is acquired; provided, however, nothing
in this subsection shall increase any property owner's maximum
assessment as set forth in the hearing notice and no property
owner may be added to the district without his or her consent, it
being the sole purpose of this subsection to allow minor
adjustments in district boundaries to accommodate right-of-way
adjustments caused by changes in project element design.
69.36A.5. Project improvement program.
1. Establishment of program. There is hereby established Bethel
Park's 1999 Project Improvement Program (hereinafter the
"project improvement program") for the district, consisting of the
implementation of the project together with all financing,
assessment, collection and operational activities necessary or
desirable to execute such implementation. Local share financing
for the project improvement program is provided for in the Debt
Ordinance.
2. Timing of project elements. The construction of project elements 1
through 7, inclusive, shall be done as quickly as possible given r-ow,
design and permitting constraints.
69.36A.6. Assessment plan.
1. Establishment of assessment plan. Bethel Park hereby establishes
the 1999 Oxford Drive Transportation District Assessment Plan
(hereinafter "assessment plan") for imposing fair and reasonable
assessments on each benefitted property in the district, as
authorized by the TPA at 53 P.S. § 1623 as described herein, and
hereby imposes the assessments so described upon the benefitted
users. The assessments imposed hereby are determined, pursuant
to the financial plan, evidence educed at the hearing required by
the TPA and the studies developed by Bethel Park and its
consultants and staff. All findings of the financial plan and the
studies and Exhibit A are adopted hereby as findings of Bethel Park
as if fully set forth in Section 69.36A.2 hereof.
2. For the existing deficiencies portion of the assessment plan, each
benefitted user shall be deemed to have the total number of trips
which are set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part
hereof (hereinafter "original assignment").117
117. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the municipal offices.
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:854
3. For the new capacity portion of the assessment plan, the Project
Improvement Program shall create, and Bethel Park hereby
creates, the capacity in the district to handle 762 units of p.m.
peak-hour traffic, as that term is used in the studies and Exhibit A
hereto. Each benefitted parcel of land within the district is hereby
assigned the additional traffic which shall be generated by them as
such are set forth and assigned in Exhibit A hereto.
4. Assessments are hereby imposed against each benefitted parcel of
land in the district as set forth in Exhibit A.
5. The maximum annual assessment for each benefitted user is set
forth in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof.
6. For the purpose of determining assessments, the costs of project
elements are aggregated as set forth in Exhibit A. For any project
element, funds may be transferred among these project element
categories, including construction, fees and design, utilities, r-o-w,
and construction supervision. Subject to the limitations of this
section concerning billings, as hereinafter defined, any cost savings
in any one of the project elements set forth in Exhibit A may be
expended on any other project element; provided, however, that no
assessment may be based upon costs higher than the aggregated
total of the then completed portions of the project elements set
forth in Exhibit A.
7. The total capital assessment per property is determined by:
a. In the case of project elements 1 through 4, inclusive: taking
the ratio of assessed valuation for real estate taxation purposes
for that property to the total outstanding commercial property
assessed valuation in the district or subdistrict as appropriate.
b. In the case of project elements 5 through 7, inclusive, by taking
percentages of each project cost assigned to that property as
shown in Exhibit A.
8. The maximum annual cost per property is determined by the
capital assessment and then multiplying that result by the
maximum annual cost per capital dollar as shown in Exhibit A.
9. The gross maximum assessment against any property in the district
shall be as shown as the "maximum twenty-year assessment" of
Exhibit A.
10. Assessments shall be collectable in annual installments (or more
frequently at Bethel Park's discretion) from each property as set
forth in the column marked "Annual Cost" of Exhibit A hereof.
11. Assessments shall not be due unless and until billed by Bethel Park.
Notice of collection of assessments (hereinafter "billings") shall be
deposited in the U.S. mail, first-class postage prepaid, pursuant to
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:855
the schedule, and the amounts so billed shall be immediately due.
Bethel Park shall not grant a discount to any property owner for
making an early payment of billed assessments unless otherwise
required by law. Bethel Park shall impose interest and a 10%
penalty on the late payment of any billing to the fullest extent
and at the maximum interest rate provided by law. The Solicitor
of Bethel Park, on behalf of Bethel Park, is hereby authorized
and directed pursuant to the TPA, the Municipal Lien Law, 53
P.S. § 7101 et seq., and any other Pennsylvania statute to enter
promptly in the Prothonotary's office a municipal lien (hereinafter
"liens") in the form hereinafter described, or a notice thereof to
secure all of the assessments then imposed but not fully paid. Upon
the written request of any landowner whose assessment is prepaid,
Bethel Park shall provide written proof of assessment payment.
From time to time and in the same manner as for real estate taxes,
Bethel Park may issue a "no past due billings" letter and may
charge a fee therefor in accordance with its regulations.
12. The assessments pertaining to any particular parcel shall be
prepayable prior to the sale at a prepayment price shown in the
column marked "Annual Cost" of Exhibit A. After the sale, no
assessment shall be prepayable under any circumstances
whatsoever except at the full amount thereof or, upon the approval
of Bethel Park Council at its sole discretion, at such lesser amount
as determined by the underwriter which would defease that
property owner's past unpaid and future capital obligations,
including, without limitation, any penalty and interest due thereon.
69.36A.7. District accounts.
1. There shall be established by Bethel Park such separate accounts
as it deems necessary for the use and operation of the district and
the implementation of the project improvement program.
2. Bethel Park shall not comingle funds in these accounts with any
other accounts created by Bethel Park. Any interest earned in any
fund shall remain in the fund and be expended for proper fund
purposes. Bethel Park shall deposit in such separate account or
accounts from time to time sufficient proceeds from the sale of the
note or bond which, when coupled with account interest, will meet
the local share obligations under the MYP. Should additional
construction funding be available from other sources not requiring
assessments for repayment, or should project costs be lower than
budgeted, Bethel Park may withdraw from the construction
account such debt ordinance proceeds and interest thereon as are
no longer required for completion of the project. No assessments
shall thereafter be levied on such withdrawn proceeds. Any moneys
deposited in any surplus fund account shall only be used for the
expenditures set forth in Section 69.36A.10(3) hereof.
69.36A.8. Assessments and liens.
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:856
1. In the event that a court reduces or eliminates an assessment on a
property, the assessment per dollar of real estate assessment
valuation or percentage of project cost, as appropriate, shall be
automatically revised upward (not to exceed the maximum
assessment per dollar of real estate assessment valuation or
percentage of project cost as appropriate included in the hearing
notice) to cover any deficiency created by court order.
2. The liens, individually and collectively, shall be of such form and
substance as shall be specified by regulation and shall be enforced
by Bethel Park in the manner set forth in the regulations, but shall
nevertheless be always at least in the full amount of the
corresponding unpaid assessments and shall provide for any
reductions thereof made pursuant to reductions of assessments to
be implemented by endorsements or other attachments thereto
that do not affect the effective dates of such liens.
3. Any and all moneys paid to Bethel Park pursuant to the
assessments shall be immediately deposited into one of the
separate accounts established for such pursuant to this ordinance.
69.36A.9. District expenses. Bethel Park may buy equipment and supplies
and retain agents or employees to draft exhibits or legislation, provide
expert advice (including but not limited to legal and engineering
advice) and calculate, levy, collect, impose or enforce the assessments.
Bethel Park may charge the reasonable and actual cost of the foregoing
as a project cost up to the limits of funds designated as "Fees, Design,
and Administration" in Exhibit A.118
69.36A.10. Reallocations and refunds.
1. Reallocation of percentage of project cost upon subdivision.
Promptly upon subdivision of any assessed parcel by a benefitted
user, Bethel Park may in its sole discretion assign the percentage of
project cost assigned to the original parcel to the resulting parcels
and, moreover, retain the original assessment and Lien on such
original parcel against the resulting parcels jointly; provided,
however, that Bethel Park, upon the request of a benefitted user
corresponding to such a subdivided lot who has constructed
improvements thereon and received an occupancy permit therefor,
which improvement generates at least 80% of the total percentage
of Project cost assigned to such subdivided lot, shall release that lot
from joint liability and shall lower the original assessment and Lien
by the amount of the assessment now severally assigned to that
developed lot.
2. Refund payments. Should funds remain in the construction fund
after both all of the note(s) and/or bonds are fully paid and all cost
overruns previously paid by Bethel Park are reimbursed, Bethel
118. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the municipal offices.
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:857
Park shall refund to all benefitted users on a prorated basis any
such surplus funds. The proration shall be based upon a percentage
refund calculated by using as the numerator the total amount of
assessments actually paid by the benefitted user and the sum of the
total assessments paid by all benefitted users as the denominator.
Refunds shall be made at the end of each calendar year in which
Bethel Park Council determines that a surplus is available. Should
any Benefitted User owe any assessment or other financial
obligation to Bethel Park, any refund shall first be applied to that
obligation. Refunds shall only be made to the owner of record as
determined by the owner listed in the Allegheny County Assessor's
office as of the year and date in which the Council determines a
surplus is available for refund.
3. Registration for notice of refunds. Should any benefitted user
selling his or her property desire notice that a refund is being
made, such person must notify Bethel Park by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of that fact in a form established by Bethel Park
regulation containing no less than a proper mailing address for
such refund notice and a release from liability should a refund
notice not be sent. Bethel Park shall thereafter, if and when a
refund is made, send a notice of said refund and the amount thereof
to the address listed. Bethel Park shall not be responsible for the
allocation of any refund among property owners for any reason
whatsoever or be liable for any damages should notice not be sent.
69.36A.11. Regulations.
1. From time to time, Bethel Park may by resolution of Bethel Park
Council establish, amend, modify and revoke reasonable
regulations and forms governing:
a. The collection, payment, crediting and refund of assessments;
and
b. The assignment, reassignment and transfer of trips; and
c. The reallocation of percentage of project cost to parcels upon
subdivision, consolidation or sale of any parcel within the
district; and
d. The treatment of any parcel that shall lie both within and
outside the district.
e. The filling of liens and/or notices thereof against any parcel
within the district, the issuance of "no past due billings" letters
and fees therefor.
f. Funds, subaccounts and the uses of proceeds.
g. Any other matter or procedure necessary for the orderly
administration of the MYP or the district.
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:858
2. No such regulation shall modify an assessment on a property within
the district except as otherwise permitted and provided herein, nor
shall any such regulation grant an exception, exclusion or
preference to any property within the district or otherwise be
contrary to the provisions of the TPA, this ordinance or the debt
ordinance.
69.36A.12. Appeals process.
1. Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by the adoption by the
Council of this ordinance, a final multi-year transportation
improvement program and financial plan, a final benefit formula
and a final district boundary map (hereinafter "documents") shall
have the right to challenge the validity of any of the documents or
any assessment to be levied against said person's property by an
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board of the Municipality of Bethel
Park. Such challenges may include but shall not be limited to any
constitutional issues relating to the validity of the Transportation
Partnership Act, the designation of district boundaries and the
determination of benefitted properties, the reasonableness of the
multi-year transportation improvement program and financial plan
and the assessment formula as it applies to individual properties
notwithstanding the overall validity of assessments on other
properties.
2. Exclusive remedy. The appeals rights set forth in Subsection
69.36A.12(1) of this section shall be the exclusive means to
challenge the validity of any of the documents or of any substantive
provision of the TPA or the Oxford Drive Transportation District;
provided, however, that nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed
to abridge or restrict the rights of property owners, as set forth in
TPA Section 3(e), 53 P.S. § 1623(e), to file a written protest against
this ordinance or to file a procedural challenge to the enactment of
this ordinance pursuant to Bethel Park's Home Rule Charter.
Nothing in this ordinance shall modify or affect any protest waiver
previously executed by any benefitted user, nor shall this ordinance
be deemed a release from any provision of any protest waiver
whatsoever.
3. Notice to property owners and advertisement of right of appeal.
Within 10 days after the adoption of the documents by Bethel Park,
the Bethel Park Manager is hereby authorized and directed both to
advertise the rights of appeal set forth in Subsection 69.36A.12(1)
above and to mail a copy of the documents plus a revised notice of
proposed assessment, if appropriate, to all benefitted property
owners by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the person and
address listed in the Allegheny County real property assessment
records. The mailing to property owners shall inform the property
owner that he or she has the appeal rights set forth in Subsection
69.36A.12(1) of this section. The notice of appeal rights
(hereinafter "appeals notice") shall be advertised twice not sooner
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36A
1:859
than two weeks apart in a newspaper of general circulation in
Bethel Park. The appeals notice shall include a map showing the
boundaries of the final district, a listing of all properties within the
district by Allegheny County block and lot number with a statement
of the annual and gross assessment which may be levied, including
the maximum term of the financing thereof. The appeals notice
shall be the official notice of the appeal process, and the failure
of any property owner to receive written notice as set forth herein
shall not toll the time for appeal nor be grounds for an appeal nunc
pro tunc.
4. Time for appeal. The time for appeal shall run for a period of 30
days from the date the appeals notice is first advertised. No appeals
may be filed thereafter.
5. Rules and regulations governing appeal. No appeals shall be heard
until the expiration of the thirty-day appeal period. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall schedule all hearings in the most expeditious
fashion to allow the earliest possible resolution. The Zoning
Hearing Board may, on its own motion, consolidate appeals or
portions of appeals which raise similar issues. Notice of any
hearing on an appeal shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation one time at least two weeks prior to the hearing.
Without restricting the right of an appellant to prosecute his or her
case as he or she sees fit, if an appellant is challenging the
assessment formula as it applies to his or her property and or use,
the appellant must include, at the time the challenge is filed, a
traffic report in accordance with the methodology outlined in the
Bethel Park Manager's regulations adopted as part of the Oxford
Drive Transportation District Overlay Ordinance and the Bethel
Park Traffic Study Ordinance, of the Bethel Park Code,
incorporated herein as if fully set forth below. The Bethel Park
Manager may extend the time for the filing of the traffic report
upon just cause shown. The Zoning Hearing Board may establish
additional rules and regulations governing the conduct of appeals
as it deems appropriate. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear such
appeals and issue such decisions containing findings of fact,
conclusions of law and a decision invalidating any or all of the
documents, and may confirm, reduce or eliminate assessments
based upon the standards of benefit established by the United
States and commonwealth Constitutions and the general case law
of the commonwealth for benefit assessments. All appeals will be
governed by the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
Decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be appealable to court
in accordance with the Judicial Code, 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.,
and the Local Agency Law. The Zoning Hearing Board may, on the
request of any party, issue subpoenas under the authority of Bethel
Park Council and in like manner. Bethel Park shall make its
employees and consultants available at any hearing upon the
reasonable request of any appellant.
69.36A BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36A
1:860
69.36B. Columbariums. [Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 11-8-10D]
6. Intervention. In all appeals, Bethel Park shall be deemed an
adverse party with or without the appearance of its Solicitor in the
proceeding and shall have the right to appeal the decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board to Court. Any other property owner within
the Oxford Drive Transportation District who would have a right to
appeal under the terms of this ordinance shall have the right to
intervene in any appeal and participate at the hearing by appearing
at the hearing and entering a written notice of appearance. The
Board may prescribe rules governing intervention by property
owners.
7. Filing fees. The Zoning Hearing Board may charge a reasonable fee
with respect to any hearing which may include only the
stenographer's appearance fee, notice and advertising cost and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing.
8. Zoning Hearing Board expenses. Upon approval by Bethel Park
Council of a budget proposed by the Board, which budget may be
modified by Bethel Park Council prior to approval, the Zoning
Hearing Board may retain its own Solicitor to advise it concerning
any appeals it may hear.
9. Preservation of legislative powers. Nothing in this ordinance shall
grant any person the right to appeal any aspect of the formation of
a Transportation District or the determination of policy which
would be deemed a legislative act under the laws of the
commonwealth.
10. Standing. This ordinance does not confer standing upon anyone to
file an appeal who would not have had standing to file an appeal to
court should this exclusive appeal process not have been
established.
69.36A.13. Duration of district. Notwithstanding the payment of all of the
bonds or expenses of the district, including, without limitation, the
nonassessable local share cost overruns, the district and the controls
established herein shall last for 20 years from the date the last project
element is completed.
69.36B.1. Use. The Municipality of Bethel Park hereby declares that a
columbarium may be permitted as an accessory use where said use
meets the following conditions:
1. Allowance of a columbarium as a permitted accessory use
associated with permitted churches and similar places of worship.
a. The religious institution establishing such a columbarium shall
ensure that the columbarium is perpetually kept and
maintained in a safe and attractive manner. If the religious
institution relocates, the religious institution shall relocate all
69.36A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36B
1:861
of the urns and remains placed in the columbarium which were
placed therein during its use by the religious institution.
b. Columbarium structures shall not significantly change the
exterior appearance of the site visible from public rights-ofway
and adjacent properties. Columbarium structures shall be
constructed with minimum impact to surrounding areas.
c. Columbarium structures or area of interment shall not
constitute a significant portion of the site.
d. The religious institution establishing the columbarium shall
provide to the Municipality prior to issuance of a building
permit or zoning certificate a copy of the appropriate registry
or permits as issued by the Pennsylvania State Real Estate
Commission or from other applicable state agencies or
commissions.
2. Allowance of a columbarium as a permitted accessory use to a
permitted cemetery.
a. The person or persons, whether being an institution,
organization, group or religious organization establishing such
a columbarium within the cemetery shall ensure that the
columbarium is perpetually kept and maintained in a safe and
attractive manner. If there is cause for relocation, the
institution, organization, group or religious organization
establishing such a columbarium within the cemetery shall
relocate all of the urns and remains placed in the columbarium
which were placed therein during its use by the institution,
organization, group or religious organization.
b. Columbarium structures shall not significantly change the
exterior appearance of the site visible from public rights-ofway
and adjacent properties. Columbarium structures shall be
constructed with minimum impact to surrounding areas.
c. Columbarium structures or area of interment shall not
constitute a significant portion of the site.
d. The persons or persons establishing the columbarium shall
provide to the Municipality prior to issuance of a building
permit or zoning certificate a copy of the appropriate registry
or permits as issued by the Pennsylvania State Real Estate
Commission or from other applicable state agencies or
commissions.
69.36B.2. Height. Columbarium structures shall not exceed eight feet in
height. If it is located within, or contained within the principal building,
then it is not to exceed the height in which the principal building is
located.
69.36B BETHEL PARK CODE 69.36B
1:862
69.36B.3. Yard area:
1. Not permitted in front yard areas, with the exception of corner lots.
Within corner lots, it cannot be located in front of the front face of
the building.
2. Other yard areas: same setbacks as for an accessory building
within the district in which it is located.
69.36B.4. Size limitations. The size of the columbarium shall be limited to
the following size limitations: If contained within a building, the size is
limited to not more than 10% of the gross floor area size of the first floor
of the principal building. If a freestanding structure, the size is limited
to an area no greater than 1,000 square feet.
69.36B GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.36B
1:863

ARTICLE X
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Amended 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 8-11-86B]
69.37. General provisions. [Amended 8-11-1986 by Ord. No.
8-11-86D]
69.37.1. Procedure. [Amended 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
1. When a developer proposes to change the current configuration of
an existing parking lot or create a new parking lot as part of a land
development, the applicant shall submit a plot plan, certified by a
surveyor, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any offstreet
parking and loading facilities before any permits or approval
is issued. Where no building permit is required, an artisan permit
shall be obtained before proceeding with the improvement of the
parking lot.
69.37.2. Extent of control.
1. The off-street parking and loading requirements of this ordinance
apply as follows:
a. All buildings and structures erected or added to and all land
uses initiated after the effective date of this ordinance shall
provide accessory off-street parking or loading facilities as
required for the use thereof.
b. When a building or structure erected or enlarged prior to or
after the effective date of this ordinance shall undergo a
decrease in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity, number of employees or other units of
measurement specifically set forth hereafter for the required
off-street parking or loading facilities and further, when said
decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total offstreet
parking or loading spaces through application of the
provisions of this ordinance thereto, off-street parking and
loading facilities may be so decreased only when the facilities
remaining would be at least equal to or exceed all off-street
parking or loading requirements resulting from application of
the provisions of this article to the entire building or structure
as modified. This includes surfacing requirements.
c. All parking areas established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, but not in conformance with all provisions of the
Parking Article, are allowed to continue as previously laid out.
Any change or alteration to existing parking areas shall require
that portion to be altered to be in accordance with all
provisions of the Parking Article. Accessory off-street parking
and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance may not be reduced in number unless the remaining
69.37 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.37
1:865
69.38. Design and maintenance.
off-street parking equals or exceeds all provisions of the
Parking Article for equivalent new construction of the current
use and building size.
d. Any change in use or in size of an existing building that would
require a greater number of off-street parking spaces than the
previous use or size shall provide additional off-street parking
in accordance with the Parking Article. If the number of
additional required parking spaces results in more than a
twenty-five-percent increase in the total number of parking
spaces currently provided on the lot or requires the addition of
at least three more spaces, whichever is greater, then all
existing parking is also required to equal or exceed all
provisions of the Parking Article including surfacing.
e. Parking number requirements for expansion of existing
buildings or uses or for an additional structure on a developed
lot shall be determined by combining the requirements for all
existing uses and all new development using current
requirements this Zoning Ordinance.
f. Commercial vehicle parking is limited by the following
provision: There is to be no overnight parking and/or storage of
non-business-related vehicles. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 9-13-99B]
69.38.1. Parking space; description. An off-street parking space is an area to
be used for the storage or parking of passenger automobiles or
commercial vehicles, which is accessible from private driveways or
aisles laid out in accordance with the standards in this section.
69.38.2. Design. Off-street parking spaces shall be designed in accordance
with the following minimum standards: [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 4-13-98B]
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
Space Size
(feet)
45 12 9 x 18
60 18 9 x 18
90 24 9.5 x 18
69.38.3. Downsized and nonstandard parking stalls. [Amended 10-9-2017
by Ord. No. 10-9-17C]
1. Employee parking. Downsized parking stalls measuring nine feet
by 18 feet are permitted for employee parking in lots with 10 or
more parking spaces. When a lot incorporates a mix of employee
and nonemployee spaces, nonemployee spaces must be marked for
69.37 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.38
1:866
visitors, and the number of employee spaces shall not exceed 50%
of the total number required for that land use.
2. Tandem parking, or a space where one automobile parks behind
another so that one automobile must be moved before the other can
be accessed, is permitted in certain circumstances as set forth
herein. Handicapped-accessible parking spaces shall not be used
for tandem parking spaces. Tandem parking spaces may be
permitted if all of the following conditions are met:
a. Tandem parking spaces shall not be allowed for new
commercial construction. Tandem parking spaces shall be
allowed for existing commercial buildings or existing buildings
subject to a change of use.
b. Tandem parking spaces shall be reserved for use by employees.
Such spaces shall be identified or designated for employee
parking through the use of signage or pavement markings.
c. At least 50% of the required parking spaces shall be single,
nontandem spaces. For example, where a lot is required to
have 10 parking spaces, at least five of the spaces shall be
single, nontandem spaces.
3. Parallel parking spaces. Parallel parking spaces must have a
minimum width of nine feet and a minimum depth of 24 feet.
Maneuvering aisles adjacent to parallel spaces must have a
minimum width of 12 feet.
69.38.4. Measurement of space. When determination of the number of
required off-street parking spaces results in requirements of a
fractional space, any fraction up to and including 1/2 may be
disregarded, and fractions over 1/2 shall be interpreted as one parking
space.
69.38.5. Access.
1. Parking facilities shall be designed according to the following
requirements for vehicular access to a street or alley unless
regulated otherwise by the state or County: [Amended 4-13-1998
by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
Dimension
Requirements
(feet)
Minimum (two-way) 24
Minimum (one-way) 12
Maximum 35 (except in M District where the width
may be 50 feet if needed for truck access)
2. Townhouse streets widths. All streets upon which townhouses and
two-family dwellings abut shall be required to have a thirty-foot
69.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.38
1:867
cartway width in accordance with the Bethel Park Subdivision
Ordinance. [Added 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 12-8-86H]
69.38.6. Signs. No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any
residential district, except for directional signs which are limited to two
per each point of approval ingress and egress. All signs in other parking
areas shall conform to Article XVI herein.
69.38.7. Striping. All parking spaces in paved areas shall be properly
marked by durable white or yellow paint in stripes a minimum of four
inches wide and extending the length of the parking space. Striping
must be maintained to keep parking lot designations identifiable.
69.38.8. Required setbacks. No parking space or portion thereof established
on a lot shall be located within a front yard or side yard if abutting a
street, except in the C and MLI Districts. In the C District, an off-street
parking area may be installed and maintained in any yard area abutting
a street, provided that such parking areas do not occupy the first five
feet of any yard area abutting a street. In the MLI District, parking may
be installed and maintained in any front yard area without a setback if
the abutting street does not serve as an ingress and egress to a
residential zoned area. Otherwise, in the MLI district off-street parking
area may be installed and maintained in any yard area abutting a street,
provided that such parking areas do not occupy the first five feet of any
yard area abutting a street. Parking may never be located within the
right-of-way area. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
69.38.9. Surfacing. All outdoor off-street parking areas, except those
accessory to single-family dwellings and within the rear lots in the
Manufacturing Light Industrial District, shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete or similar material that is in conformance with standard
construction specifications of the Municipality. Parking areas in the rear
lots of the Manufacturing Light Industrial District shall be, at a
minimum, a dust-free slag or stone surface parking area. [Amended
10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 10-9-17C]
69.38.10. Stormwater. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities shall be
installed in order to ensure that stormwater does not flow onto abutting
property or abutting walkways in such a way or quantity that
pedestrians using the walkways would be detrimentally affected or
inconvenienced. The Municipal Engineer shall approve all such
facilities.
69.38.11. Planting strip and walls. Whenever a parking lot abuts onto a
public street, walkway or alley, a grass or landscaped planting strip
shall be installed from the improved cartway to the parking lot. The
portion of the planting strip between the property line and the cartway
is considered temporary in nature and may be removed by the
Municipality should cartway widening or reconstruction take place. In
addition, any retaining walls or other walls to be built between the
69.38 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.38
1:868
street and parking lot area shall be constructed subject to the approval
of Municipal Engineer. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
1. As a minimum, landscaping shall include either:
a. Grass only; or
b. Decorative cover material (such as rocks, wood chips) with live
ornamental ground cover with shrubs or trees planted at
spacings not more than twice the width of the maximum width
of the shrub or tree at maturity.
2. Landscaping strips comprised of just dirt, rocks or wood chips
without any plant materials shall not be considered an acceptable
planting strip.
69.38.12. Curbs. All outdoor hard surfaced off-street parking areas shall be
curbed unless sheet drainage of surface water can be achieved in a
fashion satisfactory to the Municipal Engineer.
69.38.13. Landscaping. All off-street parking areas of 6,000 square feet or
more shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission. A minimum of 4% of the total parking areas shall be so
landscaped.
1. All parking areas should be effectively landscaped with trees and
shrubs, which can reasonably be expected to survive, to reduce
glare and reflected heat, delineate driving lanes, separate parking
on adjoining properties and provide a buffer with neighboring
properties. All planting not surviving for three planting seasons
must be replaced, in kind, or with plantings which are expected to
be more durable. The replacement of in kind must be approved by
the Zoning Officer. [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98A]
2. In a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District the following
requirements shall apply: [Added 9-14-1998 by Ord. No.
9-14-98A]
a. All off-street parking areas of 6,000 square feet or more shall
be landscaped and designed by a professional landscape
architect or nurseryman to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission. A minimum of 15% of the total parking area shall
be so landscaped.
b. Parking areas shall be required to maintain a minimum tenfoot-
wide landscaped strip adjacent: to a street or way
containing one deciduous tree and 10 shrubs for every 35 feet
of linear frontage. Parking areas that are screened from the
street or way by the building(s) are permitted and encouraged.
69.38.14. Wheelstops. Wheelstops shall be provided along boundaries
adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, curbs or landscaped areas.
69.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.38
1:869
69.38.15. Dead-end aisles. Dead-end aisles in off-street parking areas shall
be designed according to the following minimum standards:
Dimension Requirement
Depth of turnaround
area
13
Width of turnaround area 25
69.38.16. Shopping cart returns. One shopping cart return is required for
every 10,000 square feet of floor area in retail stores regularly using
shopping carts. Shopping cart returns shall measure 9.5 feet by 18 feet,
with fencing or similar containment on three sides, and shall be
identified by an above-grade sign. [Amended 10-9-2017 by Ord. No.
10-9-17C]
69.38.17. Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped accessible parking
spaces must be provided for in all commercial, institutional,
recreational and all other uses; excluding one-family dwelling and twofamily
dwellings used for residential use. Handicapped accessible
parking spaces must be marked in accordance with state regulations
and are to measure 18 feet in length and have a width that is in
compliance with current ICC\ANSI A117.1 (American National
Standards for Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities)
standards. The number of spaces is to be provided in accordance with
the following table: [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3-14-11]
Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 or fraction thereof
over 1,000
69.38.18. Fire lanes. All commercial buildings over 10,000 square feet in
office and retail space are required to have a thirty-foot aisle at the
front of the building, inclusive of the required driveway aisle width. The
aisle side adjacent to the building must be designated as a fire lane with
no parking allowed.
69.38 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.38
1:870
69.39. Access control. [Added 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 8-10-87C]
69.38.19. Dumpsters. All dumpster bins must be screened from view as seen
from any public street or highway.
69.38.20. Shared parking requirements. In order to accommodate the usage
of the same parking spaces for two or more different land uses
requiring different principal hours of use, a lower number of the
required parking spaces may be permitted. Subsequent changes in land
uses within the mixed-use development shall require a new occupancy
permit and proof that sufficient parking will be available. The following
provisions apply to shared parking: [Amended 10-9-2017 by Ord. No.
10-9-17C]
1. The required parking for mixed uses shall be computed as follows:
a. Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each
land use as though it were a separate use.
b. Using the table below, determine the number of spaces needed
by use for each of the four time periods by multiplying each use
by the corresponding percentage of use for that time period.
c. Calculate the total number of spaces needed for each time
period.
d. The time period with the highest use is the number of parking
spaces required.
Calculating Parking for Mixed-Use Developments
Weekdays Weekend
Daytime Evening Daytime Evening
Office/industrial 100% 10% 10% 5%
Retail 60% 90% 100% 70%
Hotel 75% 100% 75% 100%
Restaurant 75% 100% 10% 100%
Entertainment/
recreational
40% 100% 80% 100%
e. To apply for usage of the shared parking requirement, a table
must be submitted showing the breakdown by use into the
above five categories of gross floor area. Uses that do not fit
into any of the categories shown in the previous table cannot
be applied to this provision. The amount of required parking
must then be tabulated by use and time period. The time period
requiring the highest number of parking must then be
indicated.
69.39.1. State and County roads. All development accessing onto state or
County roads must obtain the required permits before a building permit
69.38 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.39
1:871
is issued. The developer shall submit evidence of such permits as part
of his building permit application.
69.39.2. Municipal roads. All uses accessing a municipal road shall meet the
following standards before any permit allowing its construction or use
is issued:
1. General rule. All driveways shall be located, designed and
maintained in such a manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent
with the design, maintenance and drainage of the street.
2. General location restrictions. Access driveways shall be permitted
at locations in which:
a. Sight distance is adequate to safely allow each permitted
movement to be made into or out of the access driveway;
b. The free movement of normal street traffic is not impaired;
c. The driveway will not create a hazard as determined by the
Municipal Engineer using sound engineering principles;
d. The driveway will not create an area of undue traffic
congestion on the street.
3. Specific location restrictions. Specific location restrictions shall
include the following:
a. Access driveways shall not be located at interchanges, ramp
areas or locations that would interfere with the placement and
proper functioning of highway signs, signals, detectors,
lighting or other devices that affect traffic control.
b. If the location of a driveway is near a signalized intersection,
the Municipal Engineer may require that the developer provide
new or relocated detectors, signal heads, controller and the
like for the control of traffic movements from the driveway. No
permit shall be issued until the developer accepts this
requirement in writing and posts adequate security.
c. The Municipal Engineer may restrict access to a property
which abuts two or more intersecting streets to only that street
which can more safely accommodate the property's traffic.
d. The Municipal Engineer may require the developer to locate an
access driveway directly across from a highway, local road or
access driveway on the opposite side of the roadway if it is
determined that offset driveways will not permit left turns to
be made safely or that access across the roadway from one
access to the other will create a safety hazard.
69.39 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.39
1:872
4. Number of driveways. The number and location of entrances which
may be granted will be based on anticipated usage, interior and
exterior traffic patterns.
The Municipal Engineer may require a developer to submit a traffic
study by a licensed professional addressing these issues.
a. Only one continuous driveway with a maximum of two curb
cuts will be permitted for residential property, and not more
than two driveways will be permitted for a nonresidential
property. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
b. If the property frontage on any single street exceeds 400 feet,
the Council may authorize an additional driveway, upon the
recommendation of the Municipal Engineer.
c. Regardless of frontage, a property may be restricted to a single
entrance/exit driveway, served by an internal collector road
separated from the traveled way.
5. Approaches to driveways. Driveway approaches shall conform to
the following standards:
a. The location and angle of an access driveway approach in
relation to the highway intersection shall be such that a vehicle
entering or leaving the driveway may do so in an orderly and
safe manner and with a minimum of interference to highway
traffic.
b. Where the access driveway approach and street pavement
meet, flaring of the approach shall allow for at least a fifteenfoot
radius for all commercial uses.
6. Driveway design.
a. Angle of access driveway approach shall meet the following
standards:
b. Access driveway approaches used for two-way operation shall
be positioned at right angles, that is, 90°, to the street or as
near thereto as the Municipal Engineer determines site
conditions permit.
c. When two access driveways are constructed on the same
property frontage and used for one-way operation, each of
these driveways may be placed at an angle less than a right
angle, but not less than 45° to the street.
7. Driveways adjacent to intersections. Driveways serving properties
located adjacent to a street intersection shall be subject to the
following:
69.39 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.39
1:873
a. There shall be a minimum ten-foot tangent distance between
the intersecting street radius and the radius of the first
permitted driveway.
b. The distance from the edge of the pavement of the intersecting
street to the radius of the first permitted driveway shall be a
minimum of 20 feet on curbed streets and 30 feet on uncurbed
streets.
c. Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection may be waived only if the
intersecting highway radius extends along the property
frontage to the extent that compliance is physically impossible.
8. Multiple driveways. Multiple driveways serving the same property
must be separated by a minimum distance of 15 feet measured
along the right-of-way line and 20 feet measured along the
shoulder, ditch line or curb.
9. Stop sight distance. Conditions for sight distance for other than
single-family houses shall be as follows:
a. Access driveways shall be located at a point within the
property limits which provides at least the minimum sight
distance listed in the following tables:
Safe Sight Distance for Passenger Cars and Single-Unit
Trucks Exiting From Driveways Onto Two-Lane Roads*
Posted Speed
(mph)
Safe Sight
Distance — Left
(feet)
Safe Sight
Distance — Right
(feet)
25 250 195
25 250 195
35 440 350
45 635 570
55 845 875
* Measured from a vehicle 10 feet back of the pavement
edge
69.39 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.39
1:874
69.40. Schedule of off-street parking requirements. [Amended
12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 12-18-86H; 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 5-11-87B;
4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B; 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89G;
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15A;
10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 10-9-17C]
Safe Sight Distance For Passenger Cars and Single-Unit
Trucks Entering Driveways by Left Turns*
Safe Sight Distance
(feet)
Posted Speed Limit
(mph) 2-Lane 4-Lane
25 90 205
35 300 320
45 445 470
55 610 645
* Measured from the point where a left-turning vehicle
stops to a vehicle in the outside lane.
10. Waiver of requirements. Upon the written request of a developer,
the Municipal Council may waive, after receipt of the
recommendation of the Municipal Engineer, any of the above
requirements when:
a. Topographical features and lot configuration are prohibitive to
designing access control meeting these regulations; and
b. Safe access can still be achieved as determined by Council.
69.40.1. The following minimum requirements shall be provided:
1. Residential dwellings:
a. Housing for seniors: one space for each dwelling unit.
b. Multiple-family dwellings: 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit.
c. One-family dwelling: one space for each dwelling unit.
d. Townhouses and two-family dwellings: two spaces for each
dwelling unit. Each space shall be located on the lot within 70
feet of the unit being served by the space.
2. Group quarters:
a. Dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses: Parking
requirements shall be based upon a parking study of similar
uses prepared by a traffic engineer and acceptable to the
69.39 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.40
1:875
Planning Commission, Council or the Subdivision Officer
approving the parking requirement.
b. Motels and hotels: one parking space for every living unit. This
requirement is in addition to the parking space requirements
for restaurants and lounges as set forth in this chapter.
c. Nursing homes and rest homes: 0.5 parking space for each bed
intended for patients.
d. Personal care boarding home: two spaces, plus one additional
space for every five residents.
3. Recreational and open space:
a. Bowling alleys: 3.5 parking spaces for each bowling lane.
b. Recreation centers and other recreation amusement facilities:
Parking requirements shall be based upon a parking study of
similar uses prepared by a traffic engineer and acceptable to
the Planning Commission, Council or the Subdivision Officer
approving the parking requirement.
c. Swimming pools and skating rinks: one parking space per 60
square feet of water or skating area.
d. Tennis courts: two parking spaces per court.
4. Industrial, storage, warehouses, and distribution facilities:
a. Industrial plants and facilities: one parking space per 2,300
square feet of gross floor space.
b. Transportation terminals: one parking space for every 60
square feet of waiting room space.
c. Warehouses, freight terminals and trucking terminals: one
parking space for every 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
5. Commercial:
a. Barbershops, beauty shops, tanning salons, dog grooming,
tattoo parlors and other beauty-related facilities: 1.5 parking
spaces for every one station. A station is the area where the
primary service of the business is administered.
b. Day-care facility: two spaces, plus one space per every eight
students as per state capacity guideline at the facility. A
reduction of up to two spaces may be given if the facility has a
dedicated drop-off drive lane or area.
c. Drive-in facilities (if principal use): Parking requirements shall
be based upon a parking study of similar uses acceptable to the
69.40 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.40
1:876
Planning Commission, Council or the Subdivision Officer
approving the parking requirement.
d. Educational studios: Parking requirements shall be based upon
a parking study of similar uses acceptable to the Planning
Commission, Council or the Subdivision Officer approving the
parking requirement.
e. Indoor retail business (if not listed elsewhere): one space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
f. Nurseries: one parking space for every 700 square feet of
gross floor area and outdoor sales area.
g. Office buildings, banks, post offices, businesses and
professional services: one space for every 350 square feet of
gross floor area.
h. Repair shops, plumbing shops, electrical shops and other
service establishments: one parking space for every 500
square feet of gross floor area.
i. Restaurants, carry-out: six parking spaces, plus one space for
each 250 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 1,000
square feet. No additional parking beyond six spaces is
required for locations containing less than 1,000 square feet.
j. Restaurant, high-turnover: one space per four seats.
k. Restaurants, low-turnover: one parking space for every 75
square feet of gross floor area dedicated for customer seating.
l. Service stations: two parking spaces for each gas island and/or
car wash station, plus 1.5 parking spaces for each grease rack
or similar facility and one space for every 300 square feet of
floor area devoted to retail sales or office area. The parking
space to meet the island or car wash requirement may be
provided at the island and/or stacking aisle for the car wash.
6. Civic or public:
a. Assembly halls, theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, arenas and
similar places of public assembly: one parking space for every
three fixed seats and one space per 25 square feet of movable
seating area.
b. Churches: same as required space for assembly halls.
c. Clubhouses and meeting places of veterans, businesses and
civic, fraternal, labor and similar organizations: same as
required spaces for assembly halls, plus one space for every
350 square feet of gross floor area remaining.
69.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.40
1:877
d. Funeral homes and undertaking establishments: one space for
every 60 square feet of floor area in the parlors of the
establishments, plus one space for every 350 square feet of
remaining gross floor area.
e. Libraries, museums and similar establishments: one parking
space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area.
f. Public and semipublic buildings (unless listed elsewhere):
required parking spaces for largest assembly hall or one
parking space for every 375 square feet of gross floor area.
7. Educational/institutional:
a. Elementary schools: one parking space for every four seats
available in the principal place of assembly on one space for
each instructional room, whichever is greater.
b. Middle and senior high schools: one space for every 3.5 seats
available at maximum capacity in the assembly hall of greatest
capacity on the school grounds or campus or two spaces for
each instructional room, whichever is greater.
c. Universities, colleges, academies and similar institutions of
higher learning: one parking space for every five seats
available in the principal place of assembly or two parking
spaces for every instructional room, whichever is greater.
8. Health service:
a. Hospitals: two parking spaces for every bed intended for
patients.
b. Large medical centers: Parking requirements shall be based
upon a parking study of similar uses prepared by a traffic
engineer and acceptable to the Planning Commission, Council
or the Subdivision Officer approving the parking requirement.
c. Medical and dental clinics: one space for each 225 square feet
of gross floor area.
d. Specialty medical center: Parking requirements shall be based
upon a parking study of similar uses prepared by a traffic
engineer and acceptable to the Planning Commission, Council
or the Subdivision Officer approving the parking modification,
provided that additional land area is available to provide for
medical use parking on the complete building.
9. Miscellaneous:
a. Any use which does not have a specific parking requirement in
this ordinance: Parking requirements shall be based upon a
parking study of similar uses prepared by a traffic engineer
69.40 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.40
1:878
69.41. Location of parking areas.
and acceptable to the Planning Commission, Council or the
Subdivision Officer approving the parking requirement.
69.41.1. All required off-street automobile parking facilities shall be located
on the same lot with the use they are required to serve. Exceptions to
this provision are permitted when there is allowable shared off-site
parking available. Off-site parking and multiple uses on multiple sites
may establish joint use of one or more parking facilities. Shared parking
is the shared use of an on-site, common parking facility between various
uses. In addition, sharing parking between different uses that operate
during different hours of the day and night may allow reductions in the
total number of parking spaces that would normally be required of any
development without sharing. Shared off-site parking may be
permitted, provided the following conditions exist: [Amended
10-9-2017 by Ord. No. 10-9-17C]
1. Maximum distance from the main entrance to the location of
designated shared parking: 600 feet for patrons; 1,500 feet for
employee parking.
2. Information required to allow shared parking shall include the
following:
a. A site plan identifying the property locations, proposed parking
counts and distance of the parking utilizing traditional walking
patterns.
b. The schedule of parking for all properties in the shared parking
arrangement. The schedule is to be in conformance provisions
of the schedule of off-street parking requirements (Section
69.40) and with the section defining the shared parking
requirements (Section 69.38.20) in the Code.
c. A shared parking agreement for joint uses of off-street parking
facilities between the property owners of all properties
contained with the shared parking arrangement.
d. A directional sign is required on premises indicating the
location of the additional parking.
3. If the conditions are not met and/or the shared parking
arrangement between property owners is discontinued, this will
constitute a violation of zoning regulations for any use approved
expressly with shared parking. The applicant must then provide
written notification of the change to the Municipality and, within 60
days of the change of conditions, provide a remedy satisfactory to
the Municipality and consistent with the Code.
69.40 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.41
1:879
69.42. Additional residential parking regulations. [Amended
8-14-1995 by Ord. No. 8-14-95A]
69.41.2. No parking space contained in whole or in part within a building
shall be counted in determining the number of off-street parking spaces
provided to meet: the requirements of this ordinance except when:
1. The indoor parking spaces are for residential use only;
2. The building is used exclusively for off-street parking; or
3. The portion of the building used for off-street parking is separate
and distinct from any other uses occurring in that building.
69.42.1. Additional residential parking regulations. Off-street parking
facilities accessory to a residential use may be used only for the parking
of passenger automobiles, recreational vehicles as regulated herein,
and commercial vehicles with a Class 4 or less registered gross or
combination weight in pounds (i.e. 11,000 pounds or less), as provided
by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162,
No. 81, 75 Pa. C.S. § 1916, when such automobiles or vehicles are
owned or normally operated by the occupants of the residential
dwelling structure constituting the principal use of that property. The
use of residentially zoned property, either private or public, for the
parking of commercial vehicles with a Class 5 or greater registered
gross or combination weight in pounds (i.e. 9001 pounds or more) as
provided by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, Act of June 17, 1976,
P.L. 162, No. 81, Pa. C.S. § 1916 or tow trucks, construction equipment
such as pavers, rollers, compressors, welders, backhoes, highlifts or
trailers designed, constructed or intended to be used for the transport
of such equipment, is prohibited.
69.42.1.1. No vehicles shall be parked in the front yard of a residential
use except in a residential parking area. In no event shall vehicles
be parked on grassy or open areas not designated for off-street
parking or storage of such residential vehicles, when located in the
front yard. Parking in the grassy or open areas of a front yard is
permitted for temporary reasons, such as during loading,
unloading, resurfacing or sealing of the residential parking area or
making of other residential improvements. [Added 8-14-2017 by
Ord. No. 8-14-17]
69.42.1.2. All residential parking areas established prior to the effective
date of this amendment which are not in conformance with the
provisions of this section are allowed to continue as previously laid
out. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 8-14-17]
69.42.1.3. Exceptions to residential parking regulations. The
restrictions set forth in Section 69.42.1.1 of the Code shall not
apply to the following residential properties: [Added 8-14-2017
by Ord. No. 8-14-17]
69.41 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.42
1:880
1. Residential properties that abut existing streets that provide a
cartway of 20 feet or less so that emergency vehicles may pass
safely.
2. Residential properties that do not have an existing private
driveway due to physical constraints to the property, such as a
steep hillside.
3. Residential properties that have existing private driveways
with slopes exceeding 5%, limiting the ability to park in
inclement weather.
4. Residential properties with one-day temporary parking permits
for special events or while the property owner is resurfacing an
existing driveway.
69.42.1.4. No exceptions are permitted until a parking permit or a
temporary special event parking permit has been issued by the
Zoning Officer. This permit requirement does not apply to
resurfacing an existing driveway. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No.
8-14-17]
69.42.1.5. The Municipality may invoke a snow emergency parking
restriction in which no vehicles shall be parked on the street during
the snowstorm or ice/snow mix event. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 8-14-17]
69.42.2. Recreational vehicles may be parked on private property of the
owner of such vehicle only under the following conditions:
69.42.1. A recreational vehicle may be parked for a continuous period
not exceeding 72 hours consistent with the definition of
recreational vehicle parking.
69.42.2. A recreational vehicle must be parked on the owner's property
and behind the property line. It must be parked in such a manner so
as not to restrict visibility of traffic using any adjacent public street.
A recreational vehicle's wheels must at all times be blocked or
otherwise rendered immobile so as to prevent any movement of the
vehicle while it is in a stopped position.
69.42.3. Any recreational vehicle stored for periods exceeding 72
continuous hours shall be parked in a garage or behind the building
line. If the recreational vehicle is stored in a rear or side yard, it
shall never be closer than 30 feet to a front property line nor closer
than 7-1/2 feet a side or rear property line. Where the property on
which the vehicle is stored is a corner lot, the distance of all parts
of the vehicle from both streets shall be 30 feet or the distance
between the street and the building line, whichever distance is
greater.
69.42.3. Recreational vehicle parking is limited by the following regulations:
69.42 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.42
1:881
69.43. Design, maintenance and schedule of off-street loading
space.
69.42.1. Under no circumstances shall any recreational vehicle be
parked on any public street in violation of existing federal, state or
local laws.
69.42.2. No recreational vehicle shall be used for purposes of habitation
while parked or stored on an owner's property within the
Municipality.
69.42.3. No vehicle over 30 feet in length shall be stored on private
property located in the Municipality.
69.42.4. Not more than one recreational vehicle may be parked or
stored on a private lot in the Municipality unless that vehicle is
parked in a garage.
69.43.1. Design.
1. Loading space: Description. An off-street loading space shall be a
hard-surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or
public way, used principally for the standing, loading or unloading
of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets and alleys. A loading
space shall be of adequate size to suit the specific use, exclusive of
access aisles and maneuvering space.
2. Location. No permitted or required loading space shall be closer
than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by building walls or an ornamental fence or
wall or by combination thereof not less than six feet in height. No
permitted or required loading space shall be located within 25 feet
of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. Loading
space open to the sky may be located in any required yards.
3. Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with
a compacted base surfaced with an all-weather dustless material of
adequate thickness to support the weight of a fully loaded vehicle.
69.42 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.43
1:882
ARTICLE XI
Floodplain Districts
[Added by Ord. No. 6-8-81A]119
69.44. Permitted uses.
69.44.1.Within the Floodway (FW) District, Floodway Fringe (FF) District
and General Floodplain (FA) District, the following regulations shall
apply:
1. Floodway (FW) District permitted uses. The following uses and
activities are permitted in the Floodway (FW) District, provided
that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying
district and do not involve the erection of permanent buildings or
structures.
a. Agricultural uses.
b. Recreation and open space.
c. Public utilities such as transmission lines, etc.
d. Water-related uses such as marine, dock, pier, etc.
e. Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials when in
compliance with Bethel Park Grading Ordinance.
f. No development shall be permitted except where the effects of
such development on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
2. Floodway Fringe (FF) District permitted uses. In the Floodway
Fringe (FF) District, the use of land shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations of the underlying district, provided
that all structures are built above the regulatory flood elevation
and are floodproofed in accordance with other applicable codes.
3. General Floodplain (FA) District permitted uses. In the General
Floodplain (FA) District, the use of land shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations of the underlying district, provided
that all structures are built above the regulatory flood elevation
and are floodproofed in accordance with other applicable codes.
4. Prohibited uses, obstructions or activities. The following uses,
obstructions or activities are prohibited if located partially or
entirely within any Floodway (FW), Floodway Fringe (FF) or
General Floodplain (FA) District:
119. Editor's Note: Former Article X, Community Unit Plan, as amended, was repealed by Ord.
No. 2-9-76C.
69.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.44
1:883
a. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used,
or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
i. Hospitals.
ii. Nursing homes.
iii. Jails or prisons.
b. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile
home park or mobile home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision.
c. Any new or substantially improved structure which:
i. Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or,
ii. Will be used for any activity or use requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 55 gallons or 15
pounds of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or,
iii. Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount
of radioactive substances.
The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous for purposes of this section:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon Disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
69.44 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.44
1:884
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances not
otherwise regulated. [Added by Ord. No. 5-13-85A]
5. Variances.
a. No variances shall be granted for any of the provisions of
subsection . above. [Added by Ord. No. 5-13-85A]
69.44 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.44
1:885

ARTICLE XII
Airport District Overlay
[Added 3-12-2012 by Ord. No. 3-12-12B120]
69.45. Purpose.
69.45A. Relation to other zone districts.
69.45B. Definitions.
69.45.1. The purpose of this ordinance is to create an Airport District
Overlay that considers safety issues within the Municipality of Bethel
Park ("Municipality") as it relates to the proximity to the Allegheny
County Airport ("Airport") located in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania;"
regulates and restricts the heights of constructed structures and
objects of natural growth; creates appropriate zones, establishing the
boundaries thereof and providing for changes in the restrictions and
boundaries of such zones; creates the permitting process for use within
said zones; and provides for enforcement, assessment of violation
penalties, an appeals process, and judicial review.
69.45A.1. The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of
any underlying zoning district. Where identified, the Airport District
Overlay shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction
in addition to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
69.45B.1. The following words and phrases, when used in this portion of the
ordinance, shall have the meanings given to them in this section, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
1. AIRPORT — Allegheny County Airport, located in West Mifflin,
Pennsylvania, located at 40° 21' 15.84" N, 79° 55' 48.6" W;
International Air Transport Association airport code (IATA): AGC;
International Civil Aviation Organization airport code (ICAO):
KAGC.
2. AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable
landing area measured in feet above sea level. The airport
elevation of the Allegheny County Airport ("Airport") is 1,250 feet.
3. AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or manmade,
or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for
flight or aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise
hazardous as defined in 14 CFR Part 77 and 74 Pa C.S.A. § 5102.
4. AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which
an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. XII, Airport
Hazard District, adopted 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 12-14-81C.
69.45 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.45B
1:887
for in this ordinance and Act 164 of 1984 (Pennsylvania laws
relating to aviation).121
5. APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface
longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and
extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of the runway
based on the planned approach. The inner edge of the approach
surface is the same width as the primary surface and expands
uniformly depending on the planned approach. The approach
surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the approach
surface.
6. CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at
a slope of 20 feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet. The conical surface zone, as shown on
Figure 1, is based on the conical surface.
7. DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
8. FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
9. HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all
zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the Zoning Map, the
datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
10. HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet
above the established airport elevation that is constructed by
swinging arcs of various radii from the center of the end of the
primary surface and then connecting the adjacent arc by tangent
lines. The radius of each arc is based on the planned approach. The
horizontal surface zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the
horizontal surface.
11. LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed
for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater
than 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight and jet-powered
aircraft.
12. NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of
natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance or an amendment thereto.
13. NON-PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation
equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision-instrument
approach procedure has been approved or planned.
121. Editor's Note: See 74 P.S. § 5101, et seq.
69.45B BETHEL PARK CODE 69.45B
1:888
69.45C. Establishment of airport zones.
14. OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including
a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this
ordinance.
15. PRECISION-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument
landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also
means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned
and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
16. PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of
paved runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation
of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the nearest point on the runway center line. The primary surface
zone, as shown on Figure 1, is derived from the primary surface.
17. RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and
takeoff of aircraft along its length.
18. STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed
or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings,
towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead
transmission lines.
19. TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that
extends outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface
to the horizontal surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one
foot vertically. The transitional surface zone, as shown on Figure 1,
is derived from the transitional surface.
20. TREE — Any object of natural growth.
21. UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended
to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum
gross weight or less.
22. VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of
aircraft using visual approach procedures.
69.45C.1. There are hereby created and established certain zones within the
Airport District Overlay Ordinance, defined in Section 69.45B and
depicted on Figure 1 and illustrated on the Airport Hazard Area Map,
hereby adopted as part of this ordinance, which include:
1. Approach surface zone.
2. Conical surface zone.
3. Horizontal surface zone.
69.45B GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.45C
1:889
69.45D. Permit applications.
69.45E. Variances.
4. Primary surface zone.
5. Transitional surface zone.
69.45D.1. As regulated by Act 164 and defined by 14 CFR Part 77.13(a) (as
amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect a new structure,
to add to an existing structure, or to erect and maintain any object
(natural or man-made), in the vicinity of the airport shall first notify the
Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by submitting PENNDOT Form
AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of the proposal at least 30 days
prior to commencement thereof. The Department's BOA response must
be included with this permit application for it to be considered
complete. If the Department's BOA returns a determination of no
penetration of airspace, the permit request should be considered in
compliance with the intent of this overlay ordinance. If the
Department's BOA returns a determination of a penetration of airspace,
the permit shall be denied, and the project sponsor may seek a variance
from such regulations as outlined in Section 69.45E.
69.45D.2.No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to
replace parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase
the height of an existing structure.
69.45D.3.No notice or review under this section is required for any of the
following construction or alteration:
1. Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a
permanent and substantial character or by natural terrain or
topographic features of equal or greater height and would be
located in the congested area of the Municipality where it is
evident beyond all reasonable doubt that the structure so shielded
will not adversely affect safety in air navigation.
2. Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height, except one that
would increase the height of another antenna structure.
3. Any air navigation facility, airport visual approach or landing aid,
aircraft arresting device, or meteorological device, of a type
approved by the Administrator, or an appropriate military service
on military airports, the location and height of which is fixed by
functional purpose.
4. Any construction or alteration for which notice is required by any
other FAA regulation.
69.45E.1. Any request for a variance shall include documentation in
compliance with 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1, as
amended or replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance
69.45C BETHEL PARK CODE 69.45E
1:890
69.45F. Use restrictions.
69.45G. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
will depend on the determinations made by the FAA and the
Department's BOA as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable air space.
In particular, the request for a variance shall consider which of the
following categories the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
1. No objection: The subject construction is determined not to exceed
obstruction standards and marking/lighting is not required to
mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a variance
shall be granted.
2. Conditional determination: The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon
implementation of mitigating measures as described in Section
69.45H, Obstruction marking and lighting.
3. Objectionable: The proposed construction/alteration is determined
to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied,
and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the
applicant.
69.45E.2. Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will
result in unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air
navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with
the intent of this ordinance.
69.45F.1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no use
shall be made of land or water within the Airport District Overlay in
such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational
signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make
it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards,
or otherwise endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the airport.
69.45G.1. The regulations prescribed by this ordinance shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or
alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as
of the effective date of this ordinance or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of a nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be
structurally altered or permitted to grow higher, so as to increase the
nonconformity, and a nonconforming use, once substantially abated,
may only be reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
69.45E GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.45H
1:891
69.45H. Obstruction marking and lighting.
69.45I. Violations and penalties.
69.45J. Appeals.
69.45K. Conflicting regulations.
69.45L. Severability.
69.45H.1. Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance may be conditioned according to the process described in
Section 69.45E to require the owner of the structure or object of
natural growth in question to permit the municipality, at its own
expense, or require the person requesting the permit or variance, to
install, operate, and maintain such marking or lighting as deemed
necessary to assure both ground and air safety.
69.45I.1. This ordinance is subject to the provisions regarding penalties as
outlined in Article XXII, Enforcement, Violation and Penalties, Section
69.72, Enforcement, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Municipality.
69.45J.1. All appeals shall be in conformance with the procedures and
requirements found in Article XX, Zoning Hearing Board, Section 69.65,
of the Zoning Ordinance of the Municipality.
69.45K.1. Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this ordinance and any other regulation
applicable to the same area, the more-stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
69.45L.1. If any of the provisions of this ordinance or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance are held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application; and to this end,
the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
69.45H BETHEL PARK CODE 69.45L
1:892
ARTICLE XIII
Highway Overlay Zone
[Added by Ord. No. 6-9-86A; amended by Ord. No. 7-10-89B]
69.46. Regulations.
69.46.1.Within the Highway Overlay Zone (HO) all the requirements of the
underlying zoning districts shall be met in addition to the requirements
of this section. The following requirements apply to the Highway
Overlay Zone and shall be required of all development requiring site
plan approval within this zone:
1. Access Area. Access to the street must be at least 125 feet from any
public street intersection. No more than two access points are
permitted per road from any lot or parcel onto Library Road,
McMurray Road, Baptist Road, South Park Road, Fort Couch Road
and Bethel Church Road.
2. Minimum Frontage. If the underlying district is General
Commercial (C-2), a minimum lot width of 175 feet is required for
commercial development. All other areas within the Highway
Overlay Zone are required to have a minimum lot width of 100 feet
for commercial development.
69.46 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.46
1:893

ARTICLE XIV
Open Space Overlay District
[Adopted by Ord. No. 6-10-96B]
69.47. General provisions.
69.48. Single family open space development requirements.
Purpose
It is the intent of Open Space Developments to encourage flexibility in
the development and design of single-family dwellings in the Residential
districts whereby single-family dwellings are permitted on smaller lots and
smaller yards than required in the underlying Zoning district. However, the
overall density of development shall not exceed the single-family dwelling
density required in the zoning district. The remaining open space shall be
designed to preserve the natural features of the development area including
streams, wetlands, slopes, floodplains, and wooded areas.
69.47.1.Within the Open Space Overlay District (OS) all the permitted uses
of the underlying district are permitted if the applicable requirements
are meet. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying district,
Open Space Developments are permitted in accordance with all
applicable requirements.
69.48.1. General provisions:
The following standards apply to all dwellings that are built under the
open space development requirements:
1. District in which use may be permitted: All R Districts.
2. Minimum acreage of development area including areas with
standard size lots: 5 acres.
3. Maximum density per acre shall be determined by the underlying
district. The following maximum density shall apply for each type of
underlying residential zone (including any conventional lots
proposed): R-1: 2/acre; R-2: 3/acre; all other R: 4/acre.
4. Minimum undeveloped open space area in the development area:
An area equal to 50% of the total disturbed area. Disturbed areas
include all areas that are graded and/or include removal of natural
vegetation.
5. Maximum density within a cluster area: 8 units/acre.
6. Maximum number single family units per cluster area: eight.
7. Minimum building setback from public right-of-ways: 15 feet.
69.47 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.48
1:895
8. Minimum building separation between single family homes in one
cluster area and single family homes in other cluster areas when a
private street separates the clusters: 80 feet.
9. Minimum building separation between single family homes in one
cluster area and single family homes in other cluster areas when no
private street separates the units: 35 feet.
10. Minimum setback between single family clustered residences and
property line of single family residences not clustered and abutting
an open space plan: same as front yard setback requirement for the
residential zone where the open space development is located.
11. Minimum distance between single-family dwellings within a cluster
area: the average of the distances between the most distant points
and the closest points can not be less than 20 feet. In no case can
the distance be less than 7 1/2 feet.
12. Maximum impervious surface area within cluster area: 50%.
13. Minimum private roads and driveways widths: 20 feet for two-way
private drives within a cluster area; 10 feet for one-way private
drives within a cluster area 24 feet for private roads between
clusters.
14. Minimum paving radius for private culs-de-sac: 40 feet.
15. Minimum parking requirement: 3 spaces per unit (one space may
be in an auxiliary parking lot).
16. Standard for minimum lot sizes within cluster area: Lots shall be of
within 20% of the average size within a cluster area. Lots within a
cluster area must be either recorded under the condominium Act or
recorded through a Municipal subdivision which includes adequate
protection to assure that all aspects of joint ownership and shared
maintenance in the Condominium Act are provided for by a
homeowners' association. Documents for a homeowners'
association must be reviewed and approved by the Municipal
Council after review by the Municipal Solicitor.
17. Perimeter Buffer Zone Requirement: A buffer zone of undisturbed
area is required between all areas developed for an open space
plan development and abutting residential zoned areas outside of
the development area. Said buffer zone shall be equal to the front
yard setback for the residential zone where the open space
development is located. The buffer zone may be included as part of
the open space requirement and is considered the setback
requirement between houses in the plan and the perimeter
boundary of the plan.
18. Road Frontage Buffer Zone Requirement: A buffer zone of
undisturbed area is required along all existing roadways abutting
69.48 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.48
1:896
the open space plan. Said buffer zone shall be equal to the front
yard setback for the residential zone where the open space plan is
located. The buffer zone may be included as part of the open space
requirement for the plan.
19. Other Zoning and Subdivision Requirements: All Zoning and
Subdivisions requirements that do not conflict with the
requirements for an open space plan are applicable to an open
space plan.
20. Adjustments of buildings: All buildings must be constructed at the
location shown on the approval plan. Minor location adjustments
may be approved by the Zoning Officer if the overall layout of units
is not substantially changed and the changes meet all applicable
Zoning and Subdivision requirements.
69.48.2. The following requirements pertain to the open space area:
1. The open space area shall include and protect all streams,
wetlands, floodplains, and slopes exceeding 25%. Said areas shall
be shown on the development plan.
2. The open space shall be accessible upon development to all lot
owners in the development area.
3. When appropriate, as determined by the Municipal Council,
walking trails are required to be constructed by the developer to
provide access to and through the any open space areas larger than
one acre.
4. At least one contiguous open space area shall exceed 10% of the
total acreage of all cluster areas.
5. Notice, acceptable to the Municipal Council and reviewed by the
Municipal Solicitor, shall be provided to all purchasers of lots in the
subdivision plan that certain acreage has been reduced in lot area
below that normally required and that open space within the
subdivision has been provided to enhance the development and
that such open space may not be used for any other purpose and
may not be subdivided at a future date. Such restrictions shall also
be noted on the any recorded plan(s) associated with the cluster
development.
6. Open space must remain primarily in its natural state and can not
include tree removal except for safety and proper forest
management and limited recreation development. Conservation
easements must be shown on the plan for all open space areas. Any
tree removal in the open space area must be approved by the
Municipal Manager, or person designated by Manager.
7. The open space area shall remain in either joint ownership of the
lot owners in the subdivision plan or may be under singular
69.48 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.48
1:897
ownership(s) with rights granted for access to all lot owners in the
subdivision plan. The owner of the open space shall be responsible
for maintenance of the open space area.
8. If the open space is under joint ownership, documentation of the
arrangements for joint ownership must be approved by the
Municipal Council after review by the Municipal Solicitor. Said
arrangements must provide adequate security that the open space
will be properly maintained and controlled.
69.48 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.48
1:898
ARTICLE XV
Oxford Drive Transportation Overlay District
[Added 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 3-8-99C]
69.49. General provisions.
69.49.1.Within the Oxford Drive Transportation Overlay District all of the
permitted uses of the underlying zoning district are permitted if the
applicable requirements are met in addition to all requirements of this
ordinance and Ordinance No. 3-8-99B (Oxford Drive Transportation
District Ordinance122). Where the provisions of such ordinances are
more restrictive, the requirements of such ordinances shall apply.
69.49.2. Any land development proposed within the Oxford Drive
Transportation District shall be subject to and conditioned upon past
and future timely compliance with all requirements (including but not
limited to the prompt payment of assessments) contained in Ordinance
No. 3-8-99B (Oxford Drive Transportation District Ordinance123). Any
land development proposed within the Oxford Drive Transportation
District which is additional to that projected for a parcel of land under
the assumptions of Ordinance No. 3-8-99B (Oxford Drive
Transportation District Ordinance124) shall be required to be the subject
of a traffic impact study pursuant to Ordinance No. 3-8-99B as
incorporated in Article IX, Section 69.36A et seq. of the Official
Municipality of Bethel Park Code. Should such traffic impact study
indicate that such additional land development will have an adverse
impact upon traffic conditions within the Oxford Drive Transportation
District, as such is measured by the criteria set forth in Section 69.36A
et seq. of the Official Municipality of Bethel Park Code, then the
landowner/applicant shall, at its cost, be required to mitigate such
adverse impact via a traffic impact mitigation action plan acceptable to
the municipality.
122. Editor's Note: See Section 69.36A.
123. Editor's Note: See Section 69.36A.
124. Editor's Note: See Section 69.36A.
69.49 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.49
1:899

ARTICLE XVI
Signs
[Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 7-13-92B]
69.50. R and CD Districts.
69.50.1. In R and CD Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and
the following regulations shall apply:
1. One identification sign for a multifamily dwelling or a home
occupation: when for multifamily dwellings, not to exceed 12
square feet; when for a home occupation, not to exceed 1 1/2
square feet. Identification signs for multiple-family dwellings may
be permitted off-site, provided that all other requirements of this
ordinance are adhered to.
2. One bulletin board per street for church or similar place of
worship, each not to exceed 30 square feet.
3. One temporary unlighted real estate sign per lot allowed during
time of sale, not to exceed 30 square feet. One temporary
contractor's sign per site allowed during construction, not to
exceed 30 square feet.
4. In connection with a parking facility, directional signs not to exceed
eight square feet each.
5. In connection with a residential subdivision plan, one identification
sign per entrance, not to exceed 40 square feet each and only if
constructed with brick and/or wood exteriors. The sign may be
floodlighted from below; the average illumination levels are not to
exceed 200 lux (20 footcandles) on the face of the sign. Special
precautions (barn doors, mats or templates) shall be taken to
ensure that no stray light goes beyond the sign face. No other
illuminated signs are allowed in R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R, OS and CD
Districts. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
6. Billboards are specifically prohibited in any R District.
7. All signs in any R District shall be nonflashing and nonanimated.
Those not attached to a building shall be set back at least five feet
from a lot or street line; and no signs shall project above the roof or
be mounted on a building above the eave line of a roof.
8. One identification sign per street for a school, each not to exceed
30 feet. [Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 4-13-98B]
9. One freestanding identification sign for each lot, for personal-care
boarding homes, assisted-living-care facilities, and day-care
facilities, not to exceed 30 square feet. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 9-13-99B]
69.50 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.50
1:901
69.51. C-1, C-3 and C-4 Districts.
10. One wall-mounted identification sign for each principal building for
personal-care boarding homes, assisted-living-care facilities, and
day-care facilities, not to exceed 30 square feet. [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
11. One temporary promotional sign per lot, such as A-frame, and/or
securely fashioned hard signs, but not including banners, are
permitted for churches or similar place of worship for a period not
exceeding seven days in any one calendar month. Said signs shall
not exceed 20 square feet in area and shall be secured. Any lighting
of said sign must be done so in accordance with the provisions of
lighting of signs as addressed in the Zoning Ordinance. [Added
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.51.1. In C-1, C-3 and C4 Districts, the following signs shall be permitted
and the following regulations shall apply:
1. Any sign permitted in an R District.
2. One business identification sign per business per wall, mounted or
attached to the building, not to exceed an area equal to 10% of the
gross area of each business elevation facing the front yard area.
When a business has no elevation facing the front yard area, a sign
mounted or attached to the building shall be permitted not to
exceed 10% of the gross area of the smallest exterior elevation or
10% of the gross area of the smallest interior wall elevation,
whichever is larger.
3. One freestanding business identification sign for each lot on which
a building is located. The area of a freestanding sign permitted by
this provision shall not exceed 40 square feet, which shall include
the area of any informational sign which is part of or attached to
such freestanding sign or pole supporting such sign or support.
[Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
4. One freestanding sign for a group of three or more businesses, not
to exceed 60 square feet in area.
5. No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed per lot, except
that a group of three or more businesses on a corner lot may erect
one freestanding sign for each street frontage. Each sign is not to
exceed 60 square feet.
6. All signs shall be nonflashing and nonanimated; if illuminated, they
shall utilize reflected or refracted light in such a manner as to
affect not detrimentally any property in any R District. The
illuminated signs shall meet the following lighting criteria:
[Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
69.50 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.51
1:902
69.52. C-2 and M Districts.
a. Lighted facades and fascia signs, maximum: 35 candelas per
square foot.
b. Freestanding signs, maximum 50 candelas per square foot.
c. Floodlighted signs: may only be illuminated from the top of the
sign and have a maximum of 50 candelas per square foot.
7. A freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height. No sign
mounted on a building shall project above the ridgeline of a sloping
roof nor above the eave line of a flat roof.
8. Pricing and informational signs such as menu boards, drive-in
service, hours, services, etc., are permitted for each lot upon which
a building is located, provided that the following standards are met:
[Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
a. No more than one sign is located on each lot.
b. Each sign does not exceed 20 square feet in area.
c. No sign exceeds six feet in height as measured from grade
level.
d. Signs permitted by this provision may be either attached to a
building or freestanding, in which case they must be located in
such a position as not to interfere or restrict vehicular
circulation or visibility. This provision excludes portable or
movable signs, such as A-frame signs.
9. Temporary promotional signs, such as banners, flags, etc.,
permitted for a period not to exceed two thirty-day periods in any
one calendar year. Said signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in
area and shall be secured at all corners to a permanent structure
located on the property. A temporary portable sign may be erected
for up to 30 days of operation for a new business.
69.52.1. In C-2 and M Districts, the following signs shall be permitted and
the following regulations shall apply:
1. Any sign permitted in R, C-1, C-3 and C-4 Districts.
2. One freestanding business identification sign for each lot on which
a building is located. The area of a freestanding sign permitted by
this provision shall not exceed 60 square feet for the first 5,000
square feet of first floor building area. An additional 3 1/2 square
feet of sign area shall be permitted for every additional 1,000
square feet of first floor building area beyond the first 5,000 square
feet of first floor building area. Said sign area shall include the area
of any informational sign which is part of or attached to such
69.51 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.52
1:903
69.53. Additional and general regulations.
freestanding sign or pole supporting such sign or support.
[Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
3. All signs in any C-2 or M District shall be nonflashing and
nonanimated; if illuminated, they shall utilize reflected or refracted
light in such a manner as to affect not detrimentally any property in
any R District. The illuminated signs shall meet the following
lighting criteria: [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 11-9-98E]
a. Lighted facades and fascia signs; maximum: 40 candelas per
square foot.
b. Freestanding signs; maximum: 75 candelas per square foot.
c. Floodlighted signs: shall only be illuminated from the top of the
sign and have a maximum of 100 candelas per square foot.
69.53.1. A freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 feet in height. No sign
mounted on a building shall project above the ridge line of a sloping
roof nor above the eave line of a flat roof.
69.53.2. Where a sign is permitted by any provision of this article, it shall be
construed to permit a double-faced sign. Each face of a double-faced
sign may equal the maximum size permitted for the particular type of
sign under this article.
69.53.3. All billboards will be required to receive a sign permit. Prior to
issuance of a permit for a billboard, proper Municipal approval must be
obtained as prescribed by other sections of the Municipal Code. A sign
permit shall be required for any other sign, except traffic signs or
devices, which are in excess of six square feet. [Amended 4-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 4-9-07]
69.53.4. The requirements of this article shall not be held to prohibit the
erection of a marquee or a canopy, provided that it bears no sign other
than an identification sign which does not project above or below the
marquee or canopy nor exceed 12 inches in vertical dimension nor
exceed a total of 10 square feet. [Amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No.
9-13-99B]
69.53.5. No sign, temporary or permanent, may be erected or displayed
upon public property or within rights-of-way, including upon utility
poles and trees upon such property, except for signs erected and
maintained by a governmental or utility agency.
69.53.6. No provision of this article permits any type of portable or movable
signs such as A-frame or trailer signs except as provided for in this
chapter.
69.53.7. Any sign overhanging an area of vehicular travel or parking shall
have a minimum height clearance of 12 feet above grade.
69.52 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.53
1:904
69.53.8. A triangular open space free of signs must be maintained at street
corners and at driveway entrances for the purpose of maintaining
vehicular visibility. Said triangular space is determined by a diagonal
line connecting two points which are 15 feet distant and on each side
from the driveway opening or street corner.
69.53 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.53
1:905

ARTICLE XVII
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
69.54. Continuance. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-10-78D; by Ord. No.
4-10-89E]
69.55. Discontinuance of use. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-10-78D]
69.56. Alterations. [Amended by Ord. No. 4-10-78D]
69.54.1. The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the effective date
of this Ordinance may be continued to the same use although such use
does not conform to the provisions hereof or may be changed to a
conforming use. Any change in use of a nonconforming principal or
accessory use to a different nonconforming use is permitted only if in
accordance with the provisions specified in section on Change in Use of
Nonconforming Use in the Conditional Uses Article. The change in a
permitted use where the number of parking spaces is legally
nonconforming to another permitted use without meeting the parking
requirements shall be deemed a change of the nonconforming use
subject to the requirements of this section. Whenever the use of a
building or lot becomes nonconforming through a change in the Zoning
Ordinance or district boundaries, such use may be continued, and it
may be changed to another nonconforming use in accordance with the
provisions specified in section on Change in Use of a Nonconforming
Use. If a nonconforming use is sold, or if there is a change in tenancy,
the new owner or tenant may continue the current use upon transfer of
the occupancy permit to the new owner or tenant, but may not change
to another nonconforming use except in accordance with the provisions
of section on Change in Use of a Nonconforming Use. The Zoning
Officer may require the new owner or tenant to submit reasonable
documentation proving the use is a continuation.
69.55.1. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part
thereof has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months,
such use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be
reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in
conformity with the regulations of the district. Where no enclosed
building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period
of six months shall constitute abandonment, and any new use must be in
conformity.
69.56.1. Any building or premises devoted to a use not permitted in the
district in which it is located, may be enlarged, extended or altered so
long as the enlarged building does not exceed by more than 25% the
established gross floor area of the original nonconforming use.
Nonconforming setbacks shall not be further extended. [Amended
9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 9-13-99B]
69.54 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.57
1:907
69.57. Provision for reconstruction. [Amended by Ord. No.
4-10-78D]
69.58. Construction in progress.
69.59. Historical landmarks.
69.57.1. Any building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is
damaged by fire, flood, wind or other act of God shall be allowed to be
repaired or reconstructed to the extent of the original building size and
location.
69.58.1. No building or structure designed or intended to be utilized for a
nonconforming use shall be constructed or allowed unless construction
is already underway at the time of the enactment or subsequent
amendment of this Ordinance and is being diligently prosecuted so that
such building or structure will be completed within 18 months from the
time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance. All
outstanding building permits for construction, which do not meet these
requirements are hereby rendered null and void.
69.59.1. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any building or
structure which is designated by the Planning Commission, with
concurrence of Council, to be a historical landmark.
69.57 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.59
1:908
ARTICLE XVIII
Administration
69.60. Building permit.
69.61. Certificates of use, occupancy and compliance. [Amended
12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 12-8-80C]
69.60.1. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally
altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the Code Official. No
such building permit shall be issued for any building where said
construction, addition or alteration or use thereof would be in violation
of any of the provisions of this ordinance, except upon written order of
the Zoning Hearing Board.
69.60.2. There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits
two copies of a layout or plot plan, drawn to scale, by registered
engineer or surveyor, showing actual dimension of the lot, the exact size
and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings and such
other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this ordinance.
69.60.3. One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be returned when
approved by the Code Official, together with such permit, to the
applicant.
69.61.1. No building or structure hereinafter constructed, erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied or used, nor shall any existing use
of a building, structure or land be changed, until a temporary
occupancy certificate or a certificate of use, occupancy and compliance
shall have been issued by the Zoning Officer. Further, no vacant land
shall be used for any purpose other than a farm, as defined herein, until
the issuance of a certificate of use, occupancy and compliance.
[Amended 6-13-1986 by Ord. No. 6-13-1983D]
69.61.2. No nonconforming use shall be maintained without a certificate of
use, occupancy and compliance having been secured from the Zoning
Officer when notified by the Municipal Manager. No nonconforming use
shall be changed or renewed without a certificate of use, occupancy and
compliance having been secured from the Zoning Officer.
69.61.3. In the event that a building permit is required for the construction,
erection or structural alteration of any building or structure, an
application for a certificate of use, occupancy and compliance shall be
made simultaneously with the application for the building permit. The
applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer of the date on which such
construction, erection or structural alteration shall have been
completed in conformity with the provisions of all applicable codes, and
the Code Official shall examine the building or structure involved within
10 days of such completion date. If the Code Official shall find that such
construction, erection or structural alteration has been completed in
69.60 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.61
1:909
69.62. Building and occupancy permits for townhouses. [Added
7-9-1973 by Ord. No. 7-9-73A]
69.62A. Temporary certificates of occupancy. [Added 6-13-1983 by
Ord. No. 6-13-83D]
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, a certificate
of use, occupancy and compliance shall be issued.
69.61.4. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all temporary
certificates of occupancy and all certificates of use, occupancy and
compliance, and copies will be furnished upon request to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
[Amended 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 6-13-83D]
69.61.5. No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, or
repairs to, any building shall be issued until an application has been
made for a certificate of use, occupancy and compliance.
69.61.6. In the event any existing use of a building, structure or land is to be
changed, an application for a certificate of use, occupancy and
compliance shall be made prior to the change of such use. The Code
Official and/or the Zoning Officer shall make such examination and
investigation as is necessary to determine whether such proposed
change in use is in compliance with all applicable codes within 10 days
from the date of the application therefor. If such proposed change in
use is found to be in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance, a certificate of use, occupancy and compliance shall be
issued.
69.61.7. A fee of $50 shall be paid to the Municipality of Bethel Park
simultaneously with the filing of any application for a certificate of use,
occupancy and compliance or for a home occupation. [Amended
2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-12-96B; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No.
11-12-12E]
69.61.8. No certificate of use, occupancy and compliance shall be issued for
a land development until the final as-built plan is recorded. [Added
5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.62.1. Building and occupancy permits for townhouse use shall be issued
by the Code Official, only after approval of a development plan by the
Planning Commission and the Municipal Council.
69.62A.1. The Code Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy
for a building or addition to a building for which a land development
plan approval is required, even though the required improvements have
not been totally completed. This certificate shall expire six months from
the date of issuance or upon issuance of a permanent certificate of
occupancy, whichever shall first occur, and shall be issued only when all
of the following requirements have been met:
69.61 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.62A
1:910
69.63. Fees.
1. The building or addition is in compliance with applicable Building
and Fire Codes.
2. There are no conditions on the site which are a hazard in light of
the use permitted by the temporary certificate of occupancy.
3. There are no violations of this ordinance or other municipal
ordinances on the site.
4. The Code Official determines that the security posted pursuant to
the Bethel Park Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is in
an amount no less than 110% of the current cost of completion of
the uncompleted items. The Code Official may release a portion of
the security so posted if the amount of security exceeds the amount
calculated above. The applicant shall post additional security if the
amount previously posted is insufficient.
5. The development agreement is amended to extend the term one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary occupancy
certificate.
6. The applicant meets whatever reasonable additional conditions the
Code Official imposes which will protect the public interest and
assure completion of all work items within the time period of the
temporary occupancy permit.
7. The applicant establishes a written schedule of work completion in
a form satisfactory to the Code Official.
69.62A.2. A temporary occupancy permit may not be extended for any
reason.
69.62A.3. The Code Official may, by written notice to the applicant, revoke a
temporary occupancy permit upon the violation of one or more of the
conditions set forth in Section 69.62A.1 above. Failure to complete
work items on the schedule set forth in Section 69.62A.1(7) above shall
be grounds for revocation.
69.63.1. The fees set forth in this ordinance shall be paid by any applicant
for any zoning approval, which shall include, without limitation,
occupancy permits, conditional use approval, site plan review and
appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board. No application where a fee is
required shall be complete until the fee is paid in full. No action shall be
taken on any application until the fees are paid in full.
69.63.2. Any one or more of all fees in this ordinance may from time to time
be increased or decreased at the Municipal Council's sole discretion by
a resolution of the Municipal Council.
69.62A GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.63
1:911
69.63.3. The Municipal Manager shall maintain a schedule of fees set
pursuant to Section 69.63.2 above, available for public inspection
during normal working hours.
69.63 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.63
1:912
ARTICLE XIX
Interpretation of Ordinance
69.64. Interpretation.
69.64.1. In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, morals, safety or the general welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or codes,
the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall
govern.
69.64.2. All use and development located in an Overlay Zone shall comply
with all the requirements of the Overlay Zone and the underlying
Zoning District. In case of conflict between provisions in an Overlay
Zone and a Zoning District, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
[Added by Ord. No. 6-9-86A]
69.64 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.64
1:913

ARTICLE XX
Zoning Hearing Board
69.65. Creation, appointment and organization. [Amended
10-12-1981 by Ord. No. 10-12-81C; 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.65.1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five members appointed
by the Municipal Council. The terms of office shall be five years and
shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member of a five-member
Board shall expire each year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be
only for the unexpired portion of the term. Board members may be
removed as prescribed by the MPC.125
69.65.2. The Board shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman, who
shall serve for one year. The Board shall adopt rules necessary to carry
into effect the provisions of this ordinance.
69.65.3. Meetings of the Board shall be held at regular times and at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine.
Such Chairman or, in his absence, the acting Chairman may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records of
its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
All testimony, objections thereto and rulings thereon shall be
transcribed by a reporter employed by the Board for the purpose upon
request.
69.65.4. (Reserved)126
69.65.5. The Municipal Council may appoint, by resolution at least one, but
no more than three, residents of the Municipality to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or
discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a member of
the Board unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to
Subsection 69.65.6 of this ordinance. If an alternate is designated to sit
on the Board by reason of absence or disqualification of a member of
the Board as set forth in Subsection 69.65.6, the alternate as a voting
member shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law
for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings as designated in Subsection
69.65.6, and shall have all the power and duties set forth in this
ordinance and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall not be a
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: Former Section 69.65.4, regarding attendance of Board members, as
amended, was repealed 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 6-10-02C.
69.65 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.65
1:915
69.66. Jurisdiction.
current employee of the Municipality nor shall they currently hold an
elected or appointed position in the Municipality. Alternate members
may be removed in the same manner as prescribed in the Municipalities
Planning Code127 for removal of Board members. [Added 5-11-1998
by Ord. No. 5-11-98A]
69.65.6. The Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed by reason of
absence or disqualification of a member. If a full complement of voting
members is not available because of absence or disqualification of a
member, the Chairman of the Board shall designate alternate members
of the Board, if available, as voting members to obtain a full
complement of voting members. There shall not be more than five
members voting on any specific matter or case. Any alternate member
of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings
involving the matter or case for which the alternate was initially
appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter
or case. Designation of an alternate pursuant to this subsection shall be
made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among all alternates. [Added 5-11-1998 by Ord. No.
5-11-98A]
69.65.7. (Reserved)128
69.65.8. The term of office for alternate members shall be so fixed so that
one alternate member of the possible three alternate members shall
expire each year. [Added 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 5-11-98A]
69.66.1. Jurisdiction. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in all matters
prescribed by the MPC. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
deny the appellant the right to proceed directly to court where
appropriate, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No.
1091.
69.66.2. Functions relating to variances. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear requests for variances as prescribed by the MPC.
69.66.3. Parties appellant before the Board. Appeals to the Board may be
filed only by the parties prescribed by the MPC.
69.66.4. Appeals in Floodplain District. [Added 6-8-1981 by Ord. No.
6-8-81A]
1. In passing upon applications for variances in the Floodplain
District, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider all relevant
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
128. Editor's Note: Former Section 69.65.7, regarding attendance of alternate members of the
Board, as amended, was repealed 6-10-2002 by Ord. No. 6-10-02C.
69.65 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.66
1:916
69.67. Procedure. [Amended 6-10-1974 by Ord. No. 6-10-74A;
12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 12-8-80A; 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 4-12-82C;
10-8-1984 by Ord. No. 10-8-84B; 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
factors and procedures specified in other sections of the Zoning
Ordinance and the following:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments. No special exception or
variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development
or activity that will cause any increase in flood levels in the
Floodway District.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual
owners.
e. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
f. The safety of access to the property in times of flood of
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
g. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
2. The Zoning Hearing Board may refer any application and
accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a
variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for
technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation
to flood heights and velocities and the adequacy of the plans for
protection and other related matters.
3. Variances may be issued only after the Zoning Hearing Board has
determined that the granting of such will not result in unacceptable
or prohibited increases in flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
or victimization of the public or conflict with local laws or
ordinances.
69.67.1. Time limitations. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding
with the Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by an appropriate municipal
officer, agency or body or as otherwise prescribed by the MPC.129
69.66 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.67
1:917
69.67.2. Hearings and decisions. The Board shall conduct hearings and
make decisions in accordance with the requirements of the MPC. A
variance granted pursuant to this section shall expire 12 months from
the date of such grant unless the appropriate permits have been applied
for consistent with such grant. Upon written request of the applicant,
the Zoning Officer may grant an extension of said variance for an
additional 12 months when there have been no changes to the Zoning
Ordinance which would require additional variances for the proposed
development.
69.67.3. Stay of proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding to the Board and
during its pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to
any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of
any agent or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed
unless such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property as
prescribed by the MPC. Petitions to the court to stay shall be as
prescribed by the MPC.
69.67.4. Petition for reconsideration. Petitions may be made to the Board for
reconsideration of an appeal which has been decided by the Board,
provided that such petition is received within 30 days of the original
decision by the Board. The petition for reconsideration shall be verified
and contain adequate information establishing that an essential
element of the original appeal has been changed, thereby warranting
reconsideration, i.e., identity of the applicant, ordinance section relied
upon, or the discovery of new evidence. A fee equal to that of the
original appeal shall be paid with each petition upon filing for
reconsideration. The Board, in its sole discretion, shall decide whether
to allow reconsideration, but in no case shall it reconsider an appeal
where the essential elements of which have not changed since the
Board's prior decision.
69.67.5. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions. All challenges to the
validity of an ordinance or map shall be as prescribed by the MPC.
69.67.6. Appeals to court. All appeals to the court shall be as prescribed by
the MPC and the Judicial Code (42 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.).
69.67.7. Fees. A fee of $250 for single-family residential and a fee of $400
for commercial and all others shall be paid to the Municipality at the
time the application is filed. All fees shall be credited to the general
revenue fund and are not refundable. [Amended 8-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 8-14-89B; 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 10-15-91A; 2-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 2-12-96B; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12E]
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
69.67 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.67
1:918
ARTICLE XXI
Amendments
69.68. Zoning amendment procedure. [Amended 11-13-1972 by
Ord. No. 11-13-72A; 11-14-1983 by Ord. No. 11-14-83G; 5-8-1989 by
Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.69. (Reserved)130
69.68.1. Planning Commission report.
1. The Municipal Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or
on petition, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal, by
ordinance, the boundaries of districts or regulations or restrictions
herein established. Any proposed amendment shall be first
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
recommendation and report. If the Planning and Zoning
Commission makes no report within 45 days, it shall be considered
to have made a report approving the proposed amendment.
2. At least three working days before a Planning Commission meeting,
written notice must be given by any applicant in order to request
that its rezoning application be withdrawn from any Planning
Commission agenda. "Working days" are defined as those days that
the municipal offices are open for regular business. All
postponements of rezonings will be placed on the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission agenda for action. No applicant
may request more than one postponement. Any changes in the
request after filing a rezoning request shall require the filing of a
new application with payment of a new filing fee. [Added
3-12-1989 by Ord. No. 3-12-89B]
69.68.2. Public hearing.
1. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Municipal
Council shall proceed to hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to
public notice required by the MPC. For amendments involving real
property, at least four placards shall be posted in conspicuous
places located within the area affected by the proposed
amendment. Additional placards shall be posted for sites in excess
of one acre at a rate of one additional placard per acre up to a
maximum of 10 placards. All placards shall be posted at least one
week prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, the Municipality
shall submit the proposed amendment to the Allegheny County
Planning Department for recommendation as required by the MPC.
69.68.3. Publication and advertisement of ordinances.
1. Proposed zoning amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of
proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in the MPC.
69.68 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.70
1:919
69.70. Fees. [Amended 6-10-1974 by Ord. No. 6-10-74A; 12-8-1980
by Ord. No. 12-8-80A; 2-13-1984 by Ord. No. 2-13-84F]
69.71. Denial of change.
69.70.1. Fees. Application fees for Zoning Ordinance amendments shall be
as follows: [Amended 2-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2-12-96B;
11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12E]
1. Text change only: $750.
2. Property boundary change: $750.
69.70.2. An additional public hearing fee of $400 shall be paid to the
Municipality at the time of the application. All fees shall be credited to
the general fund and are not refundable if said application is withdrawn
by the applicant or disapproved by Council. [Amended 2-12-1996 by
Ord. No. 2-12-96B; 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12E]
69.70.3. Any application modified by the applicant after formal review by
the Planning Commission shall be considered a new application. This
provision shall not apply to modifications reducing the amount of land
area on an application submitted by a single applicant on property
solely owned by him, provided further that nothing in this section shall
be deemed to limit Council's right to alter, amend or change requested
boundary lines on its own motion.
69.70.4. The fee schedule for zoning-related items contained within this
section of the Code may be changed from time to time by a resolution of
Council. The fees are to be identified within the Bethel Park Code,
Chapter 34, Fees. [Added 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 11-12-12E]
69.71.1. In the event Council refuses to enact an amendment, supplement,
modification or change as requested by petitioner, the petition
requesting amendment, supplement, modification or change may not be
reconsidered by the Council until one year of the date of Councilmanic
action in refusing to enact such requested amendment, supplement,
modification or change.
130. Editor's Note: Former Section 69.69, Adverse reports, as amended 12-9-1985 by Ord. No.
12-9-85A, was repealed 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 12-11-06E.
69.70 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.71
1:920
ARTICLE XXII
Enforcement, Violation and Penalties
69.72. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 8-10-70B; by Ord. No.
4-11-77E; by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]131
69.72.1. Enforcement Notice. If it appears to the Municipality that a
violation of this Ordinance has occurred, the Municipality shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as
prescribed by the MPC.
69.72.2. Causes of Action. The Zoning Officer, or his appointed designee,
may take appropriate action in case of a violation of this Ordinance as
prescribed by the MPC.
69.72.3. Enforcement Remedies. Violators of this Ordinance shall be found
liable pursuant to the provisions in the MPC.
69.72.4. Appeals. The Zoning Officer may, upon an adverse decision of the
District Justice, appeal the decision of the District Justice in accordance
with the Judicial Code (42 PA C.S.A. § 101 et. seq.) and the PA Rules of
Civil Procedure.
131. Editor's Note: Former Violations and Penalties was repealed and incorporated into this
section.
69.72 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.72
1:921

ARTICLE XXIII
Requirements for Conditional Uses
[Amended by Ord. No. 5-8-89G]
69.73. General requirements. [Amended by Ord. No. 5-8-89F]
69.73.1. Establishment of Conditional Uses. The Conditional Uses listed in
Article XVIII and their accessory buildings and uses may be permitted
by the Municipal Council in the district indicated therein, in accordance
with the procedure set forth in this article.
69.73.2. Review and Approval of Conditional Uses. All conditional uses shall
be reviewed and acted upon as major land developments as defined and
prescribed in the Bethel Park Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
69.73.3. Hearing Requirement. The Municipal Council shall conduct a
public hearing pursuant to public notice as required by the MPC. All
costs associated with advertising and conducting the hearing shall be
paid for by the applicant.
69.73.4. Final Action by Council. Following the hearing and upon an
affirmative finding by the Municipal Council that:
1. The proposed Conditional Use will be located in a district where
such use may be permitted, and
2. The requirements set forth in this article for such Conditional Use
will be met, and
3. The Conditional Use is consistent with the spirit, purpose and
intent of this Ordinance, will not substantially and permanently
injure the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will serve
the public convenience and welfare, then the Municipal Council
may approve the conditional use.
69.73.5. Additional Requirements. In granting its approval for a specific use,
the Municipal Council shall impose such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those otherwise specified in this Zoning
Ordinance or incorporated herein by reference, as it may deem
necessary to protect and preserve the appropriate use or development
of adjacent property or properties; to protect and advance the public
welfare; and to promote and foster development of the Municipality in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and the MPC.
69.73.6. Conforming Use. An existing lawful use which is listed herein as a
Conditional Use, and which is located in a district in which such
Conditional Use may be permitted, is a conforming use.
69.73.7. Expansion of Conditional Uses. An expansion of such Conditional
Use involving the enlargement of the buildings, structures and land
69.73 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.73
1:923
69.74. Artificial lake.
area devoted to such use shall be subject to the procedure described in
this section.
69.73.8. Classification of Conditional Uses. If the nature of the Conditional
Use involves more than one of those listed in this article, the applicant
shall apply for a Conditional Use which most closely relates to the
primary use of proposed development. In all situations the most
restrictive regulations of the primary and related Conditional Uses
must be met.
69.73.9. General Standards. In addition to the regulations pertaining to
individual Conditional Uses listed in this article, the following general
standards must be met by all Conditional Uses:
1. Location, use and size of structure, nature and intensity of
operations involved, size of site in relation to use, and location of
site with respect to existing or future streets giving access, are
such that the use will be in harmony with orderly development of
the district.
2. Location, nature and height of buildings, walls, fences and signs
will not discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings or impair their value.
3. The Conditional Use shall not conflict with the Long Range
Development Plan.
4. Operation of the Conditional Use shall not be more objectionable to
nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration, or lights
than would be the operation of any other permitted use in that
district.
5. Necessary provisions have been made to assure that all surface
runoff to adjacent properties does not exceed levels in existence
prior to construction.
6. Solar access of adjacent properties is not obstructed by said use.
7. Glare created by lighting or signs does not impair a driver's vision.
8. Fire, explosion or a safety hazard is not created by allowance of
said use.
9. The traffic entering and leaving the site can be safely handled and
that the existing capacity of surrounding streets are adequate and
meet the increased traffic demands.
69.74.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: CD.
69.74.2. Minimum lot area: two areas.
69.74.3. Minimum yards: same as district.
69.73 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.74
1:924
69.75. Assisted living care. [Amended 4-13-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B]
69.76. Country club, golf club.
69.77. Major community residential facility.
69.74.4. Additional requirements.
1. Six-foot wire mesh or ornamental fence or wall required where
accessible to the public.
2. Buffer area of tight screen planting which shall be maintained at all
times during the use where abutting a residential district.
69.75.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: R-4, R-5 and R-T, C-1, C-2
and C-3.
69.75.2. Minimum lot area: two acres.
69.75.3. Minimum yards.
1. Front: 50 feet each.
2. Side: 50 feet each.
3. Rear: 50 feet each.
69.75.4. Maximum height of building: same as district.
69.76.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: CD.
69.76.2. Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
69.76.3. Minimum yards: same as district.
69.76.4. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
69.76.5. Additional requirements: buffer area of tight screen planting,
which shall be maintained all times during the use where abutting a
residential district.
69.77.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: R-T, R-4, R-5, C-1, C-2 and
C-3.
69.77.2. Minimum lot area: none.
69.77.3. Minimum yards.
1. Front: 35 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet.
3. Rear: 35 feet.
69.77.4. Maximum height of building: same as district.
69.74 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.77
1:925
69.78. Minor community residential facility.
69.77.5. Minimum number of parking spaces: three per dwelling.
69.77.6. Additional requirements.
1. Location requirement: No major community residential facility
shall be established within a radius of 3,500 feet of any one or more
of the following uses:
a. Minor community residential facility.
b. Major community residential facility.
c. Institutional house.
2. Residency requirements: Residents of Bethel Park and surrounding
contiguous municipalities shall be assigned the highest priority
when seeking residents of a community residential facility.
3. Annual report: Operators of community residential facilities shall
prepare an annual report of activities, including a listing of
community complaints or incidents caused by the residents and the
efforts made to resolve or eliminate problems caused by operations
of the facility and shall file this report with the Municipal Council.
Said report shall be due on each anniversary date of the granting of
special use approval.
69.78.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-T,
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and M.
69.78.2. Minimum lot area: same as zoning district.
69.78.3. Minimum yards: same as zoning district in R-1, R-2 and R-3. All
others:
1. Front: 35 feet.
2. Side: 10 feet.
3. Rear: 35 feet.
69.78.4. Maximum height of building: same as district.
69.78.5. Minimum number of parking spaces: two per dwelling.
69.78.6. Additional requirements.
1. Location requirement: No minor community residential facility
shall be established within a radius of 3,500 feet of any one or more
of the following uses:
a. Minor community residential facility.
b. Major community residential facility.
69.77 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.78
1:926
69.79. Institutional house.
69.80. Tower-based wireless communications facilities. [Amended
1-11-1999 by Ord. No. 1-11-1999B; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15B]
c. Institutional house.
2. Residency requirements: Residents of Bethel Park and surrounding
contiguous municipalities shall be assigned the highest priority
when selecting residents of a community residential facility.
3. Annual report: Operators of community residential facilities shall
prepare an annual report of activities, including a listing of
community complaints or incidents caused by the residents and the
efforts made to resolve or eliminate the problems caused by
operation of the facility, and shall file this report with the Municipal
Council. Said report shall be due on each anniversary date of
special use approval.
69.79.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: C-1 and C-2.
69.79.2. Minimum lot area: five acres.
69.79.3. Minimum yards.
1. Front: 100 feet each.
2. Side: 50 feet each.
3. Rear: 50 feet each.
69.79.4. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
69.79.5. Additional requirements.
1. Buffer area of tight screen planting which shall be maintained at all
times during the use where abutting a residential district.
2. Location requirements. No institutional house shall be established
within a radius of 3,500 feet of any one or more of the following
uses:
a. Institutional house.
b. Minor community residential facility.
c. Major community residential facility.
69.80.1. Purposes and findings of fact.
1. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
communications facilities in Bethel Park (referred to herein as the
"municipality"). While the municipality recognizes the importance
69.78 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:927
of wireless communications facilities in providing high-quality
communications service to its residents and businesses, the
municipality also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect
public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such
facilities through the standards set forth in the following
provisions.
2. By enacting these provisions, the municipality intends to:
a. Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
while regulating their location and number so as to ensure the
provision for necessary services;
b. Provide for the managed development of wireless
communications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the
needs of both Bethel Park residents and wireless carriers in
accordance with federal and state laws and regulations;
c. Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction,
installation, maintenance and removal of both tower-based and
non-tower-based wireless communications facilities in the
municipality, including facilities both inside and outside the
public rights-of-way;
d. Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited
to, distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable wifi
and other wireless communications facilities;
e. Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such
facilities through proper design, siting, screening, material,
color and finish and by requiring that competing providers of
wireless communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing
towers;
f. Promote the health, safety and welfare of Bethel Park
residents.
69.80.2. General and specific requirements for all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
1. The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
(a) Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and
removed in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes, including but not
limited to the most recent editions of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:928
responsible workmanlike industry practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based WCF shall at
all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel, so
that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the municipality.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower-based
WCF and the scheduling of the public hearing upon the
application, the WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners
of every property within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The
WCF applicant shall provide proof of the notification to the
municipality.
(c) Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCF are
permitted in certain zoning districts by conditional use and at a
height necessary to satisfy their function in the WCF
applicant's wireless communications system. No WCF
applicant shall have the right under these regulations to erect
a tower to the maximum height specified in this section unless
it proves the necessity for such height. The WCF applicant
shall demonstrate that the antenna/tower/pole for the towerbased
WCF is the minimum height necessary for the service
area.
(1) Prior to Council's approval of a conditional use authorizing
the construction and installation of tower-based WCF, it
shall be incumbent upon the WCF applicant for such
conditional use approval to prove to the reasonable
satisfaction of Council that the WCF applicant cannot
adequately extend or infill its communications system by
the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters, antenna(s)
and other similar equipment installed on existing
structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and
other available tall structures. The WCF applicant shall
further demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF
must be located where it is proposed in order to serve the
WCF applicant's service area and that no other viable
alternative location exists.
(2) The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and equipment, a
description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed
transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range
(megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the
power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and
any relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant
in determining the need for the proposed site and
installation.
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:929
(3) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning aviation safety.
(4) Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property with
another principal use, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to Council that the owner of the property
has granted an easement for the proposed WCF and that
vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
(5) The conditional use application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed towerbased
WCF complies with all applicable provisions in this
section.
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the municipality's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall
issue to the municipality a written certification of the proposed
WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either
the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the
structure. This certification shall be provided during the
conditional hearings or at a minimum be made as a condition
attached to any approval given such that the certification be
provided prior to issuance of any building permits.
(e) Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based
WCF shall employ stealth technology which may include the
tower portion to be painted silver or another color approved by
Council, or shall have a galvanized finish. All tower-based WCF
and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the
existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the
greatest extent possible. Council shall consider whether its
decision upon the subject application will promote the
harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district
involved; encourage compatibility with the character and type
of development existing in the area; benefit neighboring
properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic
character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees
existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and
encourage sound engineering and land development design
and construction principles, practices and techniques.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based
WCF shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved structure
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:930
or building, or sited on land owned and maintained by Bethel
Park. Council may deny an application to construct a new
tower-based WCF if the WCF applicant has not made a good
faith effort to mount the commercial communications
antenna(s) on an existing structure. The WCF applicant shall
demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures,
buildings, and towers within a 1/4 of a mile radius of the site
proposed, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
following reasons:
(1) The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
(3) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function.
(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner of such building, structure, or
tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant
proposing the modification of an existing tower-based WCF,
which increases the overall height of such WCF, shall first
obtain a permit from the municipality. Nonroutine
modifications shall be prohibited without a permit.
(h) Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or
capacity exists with respect to all wireless operators in the
applicable area and that the type of WCF being proposed is the
least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in wireless
coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless
coverage shall be a factor in the municipality's decision on an
application for approval of tower-based WCF.
(i) Additional antennae. As a condition of approval for all towerbased
WCF, the WCF applicant shall provide the municipality
with a written commitment that it will allow other service
providers to co-locate antennae on tower-based WCF where
technically and economically feasible. The owner of a tower-
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:931
based WCF shall not install any additional antennae without
obtaining the prior written approval of the municipality.
(j) Wind. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind in accordance with the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222,
as amended.)
(k) Height. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed at the
minimum functional height. The maximum total height of a
tower-based WCF, which is not located in the public ROW or
the Airport Overlay Zone, shall not exceed 200 feet, as
measured vertically from the ground level to the highest point
on the structure, including antennae and subsequent
alterations. Tower-based WCF in the Airport Overlay Zone
shall not exceed the height limits set forth in Article XII of the
Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance.
(l) Related equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square
feet in area or up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad
not exceeding 10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving
and transmitting equipment may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing commercial communications
antenna(e) space on the tower-based wireless communications
facility.
(m) Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(n) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply:
(1) Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the WCF in order to promote the safety and
security of the municipality's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(o) Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by
itself or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including but not limited to the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:932
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(p) Historic buildings or districts. A tower-based WCF shall not be
located upon a property, and/or on a building or structure that
is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed, or is included in the
official historic structures and/or historic districts list
maintained by the municipality.
(q) Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily
visible location identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other
signage permitted on the WCF shall be those required by the
FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
(r) Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted,
except as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations. The WCF
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of
FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental
authorities and to the municipality Secretary.
(s) Noise. Tower-based WCF shall be operated and maintained so
as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards
under state law and the municipality code, except in
emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator,
where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary
basis only. The noise regulations currently applied to the oil
and gas industry, as enumerated in Section 69.88(15) of the
Municipal Zoning Ordinance, shall also apply to the owners
and/or operators of wireless communications facilities.
(t) Aviation safety. Tower-based WCF shall comply with all federal,
state and municipal laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety, as well as all applicable provisions of Section 69.45 of
the Bethel Park Zoning Code (Airport District Overlay).
(u) Retention of experts. The municipality may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the municipality in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the tower-based
WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the municipality for all costs of the municipality's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(v) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower-based WCF is filed with the
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:933
municipality, the municipality shall notify the WCF applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to complete
such application. All applications for tower-based WCFs shall
be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a fully
completed application for the approval of such tower-based
WCF and the municipality shall advise the WCF applicant in
writing of its decision. If additional information was requested
by the municipality to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information
shall not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review
period.
(w) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCF which
are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause may be repaired and restored at the existing location,
but must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of
this section.
(x) Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the municipality of its intent to discontinue use and
the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or
abandoned WCF or portions of WCF shall be removed as
follows:
(1) All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation
of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the municipality.
(2) If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within
90 days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within
any longer period approved by the municipality, the WCF
and accessory facilities and equipment may be removed by
the municipality and the cost of removal assessed against
the owner of the WCF.
(3) Any unused portions of tower-based WCF, including
antennae, shall be removed within 90 days of the time of
cessation of operations. The municipality must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based WCF previously
removed.
(y) Permit fees. The municipality may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the municipality's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for
approval of a tower-based WCF, as well as related inspection,
monitoring, and related costs.
(z) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:934
FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(aa) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the
municipality with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering the towerbased
WCF. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide the municipality
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each towerbased
WCF.
(bb) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a towerbased
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the municipality, its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times against
any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and
property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, its officers,
agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited
to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or
operates a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or
proceedings against the municipality in which it is claimed that
personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of tower-based WCF. The obligation to
indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be
limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees,
court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
(cc) Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based
WCF shall contain a seal and signature of a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(dd) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the municipality financial security
sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF.
Said financial security shall remain in place until the towerbased
WCF is removed.
69.80.3. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located outside the public rights-of-way:
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:935
1. Development regulations.
a. Tower-based WCF shall not be located in, or within 100 feet of,
an area in which utilities are primarily located underground.
b. Conditional use authorization required. Tower-based WCF are
permitted outside the public rights-of-way in the following
zoning districts by conditional use, subject to the above
prohibition:
(1) C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
(2) C-2 General Commercial District.
(3) C-3 Professional-Service District.
(4) M Manufacturing, Light Industrial District.
c. Lot area requirements. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted
as a sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets
the area requirements set forth in applicable section of the
Bethel Park Zoning Code. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line or
street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the proposed WCF
structure height.
d. Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the WCF.
(2) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable district and shall be the
area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
in height. When abutting an R District, there shall also be
provided a twenty-foot buffer area in addition to any other
setback requirements.
(3) Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property line
or street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the
proposed WCF structure height, unless it is demonstrated
to the reasonable satisfaction of Council that in the event
of failure the WCF is designed to collapse upon itself
within a setback area less than the required minimum
setback without endangering such adjoining uses and their
occupants.
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:936
2. Design regulations.
a. The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
Application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the municipality.
b. To the extent permissible under federal and state law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the municipality.
c. Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennae and comparable antennae for future
users.
d. Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped
with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the manufacturer
and the municipality.
3. Surrounding environs.
a. The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
b. The WCF applicant shall prepare and submit to the
municipality a soil report to the municipality complying with
the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations,
ANSI/EIA-222, as amended, to document and verify the design
specifications of the foundation of the tower-based WCF, and
anchors for guy wires, if used.
4. Fence/screen.
a. A security fence shall completely surround any tower-based
WCF greater than 40 feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any
building housing WCF equipment. Such fence shall be subject
to the fencing design regulations set forth in the Bethel Park
Zoning Ordinance. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
b. Landscaping shall be required to screen as much of a newly
constructed tower-based WCF as possible. Council may permit
any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if,
in the discretion of Council, they achieve the same degree of
screening. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
5. Accessory equipment.
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:937
a. Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using Stealth
Technologies, as described above.
b. All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
6. Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
tower-based WCF. Such access road, turnaround space or parking
space shall be paved asphalt or concrete, designed to
accommodate anticipated loads from vehicles and equipment.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be
made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and
minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF owner shall
present documentation to the municipality that the property owner
has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
7. Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be two off-street parking spaces which meet the criteria
for parking spaces as set forth in the Bethel Park Zoning Code.
8. Inspection. The municipality reserves the right to inspect any
tower-based WCF to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance
and any other provisions found within the Municipal Code or state
or federal law. The municipality and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a WCF is located at any
time, upon reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
69.80.4. The following regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless
communications facilities located in the public rights-of-way.
1. Location and development standards.
a. Tower-based WCF in the public rights-of-way shall not exceed
40 feet in height.
b. Tower-based WCF in the ROW are prohibited within 25 feet of
an area in which all utilities are located underground.
c. Tower-based WCF in the ROW shall not be located in the front
facade area of any structure.
d. Tower-based WCF in the ROW are permitted along principal
arterial, arterial, major collector, local commercial, and local
industrial roads throughout the municipality, regardless of the
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.80
1:938
underlying zoning district, provided that they are not situated
within 50 feet of a residential area in which all utilities are
underground. A map of such permitted roads is kept on file at
the Municipal Zoning Office.
2. Time, place and manner. The municipality shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based WCF in the ROW based on public safety,
traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
municipality and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
3. Equipment location. Tower-based WCF and related equipment shall
be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
municipality. In addition:
a. Ground-mounted related equipment shall not be located in any
intersection areas of exclusion, as designated by the Bethel
Park Municipal Zoning Code, in order to avoid visual
impairment of drivers and pedestrians.
b. Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the municipality.
c. Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the
municipality.
d. Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
e. Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the municipality.
4. Design regulations.
a. The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the WCF
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the municipality.
b. Tower-based WCF in the public ROW shall not exceed 40 feet
in height.
c. To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
69.80 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.80
1:939
69.81. Change in use of a nonconforming use. [Added 4-10-1989 by
Ord. No. 4-10-89E]
a building permit from the municipality, and shall not increase
the overall height of the tower-based WCF to more than 40
feet.
d. Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennae and comparable antennae for future
users.
5. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the municipality, or such longer period as the
municipality determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCF
in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any WCF when the
municipality, consistent with its police powers and applicable
Public Utility Commission regulations, shall determine that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
under the following circumstances:
a. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
municipal or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
b. The operations of the municipality or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
c. Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
d. An emergency as determined by the municipality.
6. Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the municipality's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such
compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
municipality's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the municipality. The owner of each
tower-based WCF shall pay an annual fee to the municipality to
compensate the municipality of no less than $500 for the
municipality's costs incurred in connection with the activities
described above.
69.81.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: all.
69.81.2. Express conditions. Any nonconforming use may be changed to a
similar or more restrictive use. The following criteria shall be
69.80 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.81
1:940
69.82. Commuter parking lot. [Added 11-9-1992 by Ord. No.
11-9-92B]
considered when determining whether a proposed use is similar or
more restrictive than the current use:
1. The applicant demonstrates that the proposed use generates the
same or less traffic, including truck deliveries, than the current use
or other permitted uses within the district as determined by a
traffic study prepared by a Pennsylvania licensed engineer using
the methodology established by the Institute of Traffic Engineers.
2. The proposed use generates the same or less odor, noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, heat or glare than the current use or other permitted
uses within the district.
3. The proposed use generates the same or less need for parking
spaces than the current use or other permitted uses within the
district as determined by a traffic study prepared by a Pennsylvania
licensed engineer using the methodology established by the
Institute of Traffic Engineers.
4. The changes in the exterior appearance of the proposed use are
suitable and compatible to the existing uses in the zoning district
and the abutting properties taking into account such factors as the
scale and size of the buildings, the historical nature of the property
and the district, if any, the color and texture of the building and the
other buildings in the district and accessibility to the building.
5. Outside storage of materials currently existing is not expanded by
the proposed use and the new stored materials are no more
offensive.
6. The proposed use does not have longer hours of operation and that
the proposed hours of operation or a manner of operation will not
harm or cause more inconvenience to the surrounding
neighborhood than the current use or other permitted uses in the
district. The Municipal Council may restrict the hours of operation
of the proposed use in order to eliminate such harm or
inconvenience.
69.82.1. Districts in which use may be permitted where no parking garage is
present: all districts except R-1, R-2 and R-3.
69.82.2. Districts in which use may be permitted where a parking garage is
present: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and MLI.
69.82.3. Minimum lot area: one acre.
69.82.4. Minimum yards for garage construction:
1. Front: 50 feet.
69.81 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.82
1:941
69.83. Recreational uses in CD District. [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord.
No. 5-9-94C]
2. Side: 15 feet.
3. Rear: 15 feet.
69.82.5. Maximum height: same as district.
69.82.6. Additional requirements:
1. A twenty-foot buffer strip is required in addition to any required
yard areas when the parking lot and/or garage abuts an R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-T or R-5 District.
2. Parking stalls must be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in size.
69.83.1. District in which use may be permitted: CD.
69.83.2. Minimum lot area: four acres.
69.83.3. Minimum yard areas:
1. Front: 50 feet.
2. Sides and rear: 30 feet.
69.83.4. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
69.83.5. Additional requirements:
1. The number of parking spaces shall provide for adequate parking
to meet the maximum occupancy as determined by a study of
similar uses. The similar uses used in the study shall be approved
by the municipality in advanced of the study. Said study must be
done by an engineer registered in the State of Pennsylvania and
approved by the municipality as a qualified traffic consultant. The
cost of the study shall be paid for by the applicant.
2. In addition to the yard requirements, a twenty-foot landscaped
buffer strip shall be required when abutting any R District.
3. A traffic study shall be provided by the applicant documenting the
capacity of the existing roadway system to handle the anticipated
traffic generated. An inadequate roadway system shall be grounds
for denial of this conditional use. No public streets shall be
constructed as part of a recreational use that will result in a
through street between residential neighborhoods. If feasible, the
applicant has the option to improve the existing roadway system,
including widening and installation of or upgrading of a traffic
signal system in order to accommodate the anticipated traffic.
4. The proposed recreational use must be limited to indoor recreation
that would serve the general public and would not be unusual to
69.82 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.83
1:942
69.84. Sexually-oriented business. [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord. No.
5-9-94A]
find in a public park or on public land. Such recreational uses
include, but are not limited to, roller and ice skating rinks, indoor
sports courts and swimming pools. Such recreational uses do not
include educational studios, bowling, aerobic and weight lifting
facilities and rifle and archery practice ranges.
5. The proposed security system, including the use of security
personnel, shall provide for the safe operations of the proposed
facility and shall provide for adequate protection to the abutting
property owners and uses.
6. Accessory uses shall be customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal recreation use. Determination of incidental and
subordinate shall be made by:
a. Examining the ratio of floor area of the accessory use versus
the principal use.
b. Examining the anticipated revenue of the accessory use versus
the principal use.
c. Examining the anticipated number of users of the accessory
use versus the principal use.
69.84.1. Purpose and intent: It is the intent of these conditional use
regulations to regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the municipal residents and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued
deleterious effect of such uses on adjacent areas. The provisions of this
conditional use have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of these conditional use regulations to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment
or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of these conditional use provisions to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene materials.
69.84.2. Districts in which use may be permitted: C-2.
69.84.3. Conditions:
1. Sexually-oriented businesses must be located at least 500 feet from
any area zoned residential in either the Municipality of Bethel Park
or in abutting municipalities. [Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord. No.
4-13-98B]
69.83 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.84
1:943
69.85. Recreational uses in residential districts. [Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 5-13-96E]
69.86. Community center. [Added 6-8-1998 by Ord. No. 6-8-98D]
69.87. Outdoor winter recreational uses in residential districts.
[Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2-12-07A]
2. All other requirements set forth for the C-2 District are applicable
to sexually-oriented businesses.
69.85.1. District in which use may be permitted: all R Districts.
69.85.2. Minimum lot area: 30 acres.
69.85.3. Minimum yard areas: 50 feet for all sides.
69.85.4. Maximum height for buildings: same as district.
69.85.5. Additional requirements:
1. Recreational uses are limited to operation of miniature golf
courses, golf driving ranges, practice batting cages, archery ranges
and outside court sports.
2. No retail uses except incidental food and refreshment sales are
included as part of the recreational operation.
69.86.1. District in which may be permitted: all R Districts.
69.86.2. Minimum lot area: minimum of two acres.
69.86.3. Minimum yards: same as district.
69.86.4. Maximum height of buildings: The maximum height of buildings
hereafter erected, altered or enlarged shall not exceed 45 feet in height
for principal building and 75 feet for bell or clock towers or similar
appendages.
69.86.5. Additional requirements.
1. Off-street parking minimum requirement of one space for every 250
square feet of gross floor area.
69.87.1. District in which use may be permitted: all R Districts.
69.87.2. Minimum lot area: 30 acres.
69.87.3. Minimum yard areas: 50 feet for all sides.
69.87.4. Maximum height for buildings: same as district.
69.87.5. Additional requirements:
69.84 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.87
1:944
69.88. Oil and gas development. [Added 9-13-2010 by Ord. No.
9-13-10]
1. Uses are limited to operation of tobogganing, sledding, snow
tubing, snowboarding, skiing, cross country skiing, snow surfing,
acrobatic skiing, ice skating, and ice hockey facilities.
2. No retail uses except incidental food and refreshment sales are
included as part of the recreational operation.
3. All mechanical and electrical equipment is to be located in a
manner or situation so as to best buffer the noise generated by the
equipment from the neighboring property. Equipment shall be
sound buffered to prevent a sound level, as measured by a standard
audiometer, greater than 50 decibels (dBA) at the property line of
the property in which the activity is located. All measurement of the
noise is to be conducted upon the request of the municipality. The
cost of conducting such measurements is to be borne by the owner.
4. Must meet the requirements for lighting for recreational use as
prescribed by other sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
5. All area lighting for recreational purposes must cease at 11:00 p.m.
69.88.1. Purpose: It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section
69.88 to declare oil and gas development a use permitted by conditional
use in all zoning districts of the Municipality. The Municipality of Bethel
Park recognizes that the regulation of oil and gas development is the
primary responsibility of the regulatory agencies of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, but that the Municipality maintains its zoning powers
as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC)132
and through the Municipality of Bethel Park Zoning Ordinance. It is in
the Municipality's best interest to have information concerning oil and
gas exploration, development, and production taking place within the
Municipality and to ensure that certain security and safety measures
related to oil and gas well drilling are in place.
69.88.2. The Municipality of Bethel Park hereby declares that oil and gas
development may be permitted by conditional use in all zoning districts
in the Municipality where said development meets the following
conditions:
1. The operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding
and permitting requirements for Municipality roads that are to be
used by overweight vehicles and equipment for development
activities. For state roads located within the Municipality, the
operator shall provide a copy of the highway occupancy permit for
overweight vehicles to the Municipality.
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
69.87 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.88
1:945
2. The operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that the
Municipality roads utilized remain free of dirt, mud and debris
resulting from development activities and/or shall ensure such
roads are promptly swept or cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur.
3. The operator shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the
safety of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or
adjacent to roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or
school transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during
periods of anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated
with development, the operator will provide flagmen to ensure the
safety of children at or near schools or school bus stops and shall
include adequate signs and/or other warning measures for truck
traffic and vehicular traffic.
4. The operator shall not clear brush or trees by way of burning and
shall chip, grind or remove all tree stumps from properties it clears
for development purposes. However, the operator shall, consistent
with any relevant outdoor burning ordinance(s), laws and
regulations, be permitted to burn any brush, trees, or stumps that
have been removed from the ground and collected into a pile or
piles on the properties where the operator is engaging in
development.
5. Prior to development, the operator shall provide to the
Municipality's Police Department and Fire Company ("first
responders") and to the Municipality Zoning Officer, a copy of its
Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency (PPC) Plan.
6. Before drilling, the Municipality shall ascertain whether the
Municipality's Police and Fire Departments have secured adequate
information to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that
may result due to development activities. First responders shall
have on-site orientation and shall be provided with adequate
awareness information. Upon request from the Municipality, the
operator will, prior to the drilling of an oil and gas well, make
available, with at least 30 days' notice, at its sole cost and expense,
an appropriate site orientation for first responders. Such site
orientation shall be made available immediately after any
substantial modification to the development or well site, or not less
than annually during the period when the operator anticipates
drilling activities in the Municipality.
7. The operator shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that
appropriate dust control measures are in place.
8. Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities is
an important and integral part of oil and gas development, as part
of the planning process the operator shall strive to consider
location of its temporary and permanent operations, where prudent
and possible, so as to minimize interference with Municipality
69.88 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.88
1:946
residents' enjoyment of their property and future Municipality
development activities.
9. Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is essential to
the safety of those involved in the development of oil and gas, the
operator shall take steps, to the extent practicable, to direct site
lighting downward and inward toward the drill site, wellhead, or
other area being developed so as to attempt to minimize glare on
public roads and adjacent buildings within 300 feet of the drill site,
wellhead, or other area being developed.
10. At least two weeks prior to drilling an oil and gas well or multiple
oil and gas wells at a location, the operator shall provide the
following information to each resident within 1,000 feet of the
planned surface location of the well(s):
a. A copy of the well survey plat showing the location(s) of the
planned well(s);
b. A general description of the planned operations at the planned
well(s) and associated equipment used in the development of
the well(s);
c. The contact information for the operator; and
d. The availability of the operator to hold a meeting with such
residents to present the operator's plans for the well(s) and to
allow for questions and answers. The meeting(s) shall be held
prior to well site construction.
11. The operator shall provide to the Municipality Zoning Officer, at
least 10 days prior to well site construction:
a. A map showing the planned access route to the well sites on
public roads;
b. Information on the status of road bonding;
c. The operator's erosion and sedimentation plan;
d. The well survey plat showing the planned surface location(s) of
the well(s); and
e. The contact information for the operator.
12. At least 10 days prior to commencement of drilling, the operator
shall provide to the Municipality Zoning Officer a copy of the
drilling permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). The operator shall also provide a
copy of the recorded plat indicating the size of the proposed
drilling area.
13. In addition to the requirements in Subsections 1 through 12 of
Section 69.88.2 above, for any oil and gas well where the planned
69.88 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.88
1:947
surface location of the well will be within 1,000 feet of a protected
structure, the operator shall:
a. Install temporary safety fencing, at least six feet in height,
around drilling and hydraulic fracturing equipment and install
permanent fall protection fencing meeting OSHA requirements
around any pits that contain or could contain water or other
liquids at depths greater than two feet.
b. Install an adequate number of warning signs providing notice
of the potential dangers at the perimeter of the well site.
c. Provide at least one security guard 24/7 at all times when a
drilling rig or hydraulic fracturing equipment is on the well
site.
14. Prior to the commencement of drilling activities, no construction
activities involving excavation of, alteration to, or repair work on
any access road or well site shall be performed during the hours of
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
15. The Municipality recognizes and acknowledges that oil and gas
development is accompanied by inherent noise. However, the
operator shall take the following steps to minimize, to the extent
practicable, the noise resulting from the development:
a. Prior to drilling of an oil and gas well, the operator shall
establish a continuous seventy-two-hour ambient noise level at
the nearest protected structure property line or 100 feet from
the nearest protected structure (as measured to the closest
exterior point of the building), whichever is closer to the
protected structure, or, alternatively, and in lieu of establishing
the above seventy-two-hour ambient noise level, the operator
may assume and use, for the purposes of compliance with this
ordinance, a default ambient noise level of 55 dBA. The sound
level meter used in conducting any evaluation shall meet the
American National Standard Institute's standard for sound
meters or an instrument and the associated recording and
analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.
b. The operator shall provide documentation of any established,
seventy-two-hour evaluation relied upon to establish an
ambient noise level greater than 55 dBA to the Municipality's
Zoning Officer within three business days of such a request
from the Zoning Officer.
c. Limitations on exceeding noise levels.
[1] The noise generated during construction, drilling and
hydraulic fracturing activities, when measured at the
nearest protected structure property line or 100 feet from
the nearest protected structure (as measured to the
69.88 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.88
1:948
closest exterior point of the building), whichever is closer
to the protected structure, shall not exceed the average
ambient noise level (as determined by the seventy-twohour
evaluation) or the default level, whichever is higher:
[a] During drilling activities during the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.: by more than seven decibels;
[b] During drilling activities during the hours of 10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: by more than five decibels; or
[c] During construction or hydraulic fracturing
operations: by more than 10 decibels.
[2] The operator shall inform the Municipality of which level
(avenge ambient noise level or default level) is being used.
d. Adjustments to the forgoing noise limits may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 1
* NOTE: Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
e. If a complaint regarding noise generated during construction,
drilling or hydraulic fracturing activities is received by the
Municipality from any person, whether a resident or otherwise,
using a protected structure, as defined herein, for any lawful
purpose, the operator shall, within 24 hours of receipt of the
complaint from the Municipality, continuously monitor, for a
forty-eight-hour period, a point which is the closer of the
following to the complainant's building:
[1] The complainant's protected structure property line
nearest to the well site or equipment generating the noise;
or
[2] One hundred feet from the protected structure.
f. If the operator engages in any noise testing as required by this
ordinance, it will provide preliminary data to the Municipality
no later than five business days following completion of the
noise testing. Once the monitoring is complete, the operator
will meet with Municipality representatives and affected
residents to discuss whether possible noise abatement
69.88 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.88
1:949
69.89. Billboards. [Added 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 4-9-07]
measures are warranted, if the permitted levels set forth
herein were exceeded.
g. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor
used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on
any production equipment or used in development shall not be
discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an
exhaust muffler or an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or
exhaust box shall be constructed of noncombustible materials
designed and installed to suppress noise and disruptive
vibrations. Moreover, all such equipment with an exhaust
muffler or exhaust box shall be maintained in good operating
condition according to manufacturer's specifications.
h. All workover operations shall be restricted to the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except in the extent of an emergency, as
reasonably determined by the operator. "Workover operations"
shall mean work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, restore
production that has ceased, or increase production.
i. The noise restrictions contained in this Subsection 15 of
Section 69.88.2 shall also apply to natural gas compressor
stations and natural gas processing plants.
16. The operator shall take all reasonable measures to prevent the
emission of offensive odors from the development and from natural
gas compressor stations and natural gas processing plants.
69.88.3. Penalties: Enforcement of the provisions of this section 69.88 is to
be in compliance with the provisions of Section 69.72, Enforcement,
and with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC).133
69.89.1. District in which may be permitted: C-2 and MLI Districts.
69.89.2. Location and yards.
1. The minimum front, side and rear yard requirements applying to a
principal use as set forth within the zoning district in which the
billboard is to be located shall apply to each billboard structure.
2. Billboards shall only be permitted within 400 feet of the center line
(measured horizontally) of the street from which they are intended
to be viewed.
133. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 1010 et seq.
69.88 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.89
1:950
3. Billboards shall not be erected within 300 feet of the property line
of any public or private school, church or cemetery, playground,
recreation center, or community center.
4. Billboards shall not be erected within 200 feet of any residential
district zone line. If a billboard faces a residential district, the
minimum distance from the residential district zone line shall be
increased to 300 feet.
5. Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between any
existing or proposed billboard structures of 1,500 feet. Required
spacing shall be measured along both sides of the same roadway
frontage from the centermost point of the billboard structure along
a line extending from the centermost point of the billboard, which
is parallel to the center line of the roadway to which the billboard is
oriented. Official governmental signs, owned and maintained by a
governmental entity, shall not be counted nor shall measurements
be made from them for the purposes of determining spacing
requirements.
6. No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street of any existing business identification sign,
residential or nonresidential structure, or limit or reduce the light
and ventilation requirements under the Building Code.
7. No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of
the public street or road on which it is situated and shall not in any
case obstruct or impede traffic safety.
8. No sign shall be erected over any sidewalk or public right-of-way.
9. Billboards shall not be mounted on the roof, wall, or other part of
the building or any other structure.
69.89.3. Size and height.
1. Each billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross surface area
of 300 square feet per sign face.
2. A billboard shall have no more than two sign faces per billboard
structure.
3. The billboard structure may have sign faces placed back to back. A
V-shaped configuration on a single billboard structure is restricted
to be no greater than a thirty-degree angle opening between the
two faces of the billboard structure.
4. The dimensions of the gross surface area of the billboard's sign
face shall not exceed 15 feet in total height or 30 feet in total
length, provided that the total allowable gross surface area for the
sign face is not exceeded.
69.89 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.89
1:951
5. The billboard structure shall have an average maximum height
above the curb of the roadway from the side in which it is intended
to be viewed of 35 feet.
69.89.4. Construction and design.
1. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Building Code.
2. A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports of metal which are galvanized or constructed of
approved corrosive-resistant, noncombustible materials and shall
be painted.
3. The base shall be installed using a foundation and footings
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer for the type of
construction proposed.
4. The billboard structure must be properly grounded to protect from
lightning strikes or other electrical shocks in a manner acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. There shall be no permanently attached ladder or fixed structure or
device that can be used for climbing the billboard structure.
6. All utilities servicing the billboard must be located underground.
69.89.5. Landscaping.
1. The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the sign face
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or
bushes of minimum height of three feet placed in such manner as to
screen the foundation of the structure.
2. The sign owner shall maintain landscaping in an attractive and
healthy manner in accordance with accepted conservation
practices.
3. Permanent landscaping shall form a base and/or backdrop to the
billboard sign. All landscaped areas shall be at least 30 square feet
in size and shall be planted with shrubs that are at least two feet in
height at time of planting. The landscaping shrubs shall also consist
of at least 50% of plants that retain their vegetation throughout all
seasons (such as dwarf evergreens). The Community Development
Director shall approve the landscaping vegetation species selected
before a building permit is issued. All ground areas beneath and
between the plantings shall be either planted with a suitable
ground cover or covered with decorative mulch.
69.89.6. Illumination.
69.89 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.89
1:952
1. A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
footcandle of 0.5 upon the adjoining property.
2. All billboard lighting must be in conformance with all lighting
provisions as identified in other provisions of the Zoning Code.
3. Display lighting shall not operate between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., prevailing local time.
4. No billboard structure, sign face, or display lighting shall move,
flash, or emit noise. No display lighting shall cause distractions,
confusion, nuisance, or hazard to traffic, aircraft, or other
properties.
5. The use of colored lighting shall not be permitted.
69.89.7. Maintenance.
1. A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years.
2. Every 10 years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvania
registered engineer and shall provide to the Municipality a
certificate from the engineer certifying that the billboard is
structurally sound.
3. Annual inspections of the billboard may be conducted by the
Municipality to determine compliance with this chapter.
4. Billboards found to be in violation of this chapter shall be brought
into compliance or removed within 30 days upon proper
notification by the Municipality.
5. Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or hanging from the structure. All paper and
other waste materials shall be removed from the site and disposed
of properly whenever any sign face is changed.
69.89.8. Liability insurance.
1. The applicant for a sign permit to erect a billboard shall execute an
indemnification agreement to indemnify the Municipality for any
damage to person or property. In addition, the applicant shall
provide proof of insurance in the amount of $500,000. The
applicant shall be required to provide proof of insurance on an
annual basis.
69.89.9. Permits.
1. Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit, the
applicant for a billboard shall obtain and submit with the
69.89 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.89
1:953
69.90. Housing for seniors. [Added 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 5-11-15A]
application approvals from the County of Allegheny or the United
States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), when applicable.
2. Conditional use approval shall be valid for six months from the date
of action by Municipal Council granting the conditional use. If the
applicant fails to obtain a sign permit for the approved billboard
within the six-month period, conditional use approval shall expire
automatically, without written notice to the applicant.
3. The issuance of a sign permit for a billboard, which has been
granted conditional use approval shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) for billboards along state highways. If the applicant
fails to submit evidence of the required approval by PennDOT
within 30 days of the issuance of the conditional sign permit, the
Municipality's Code Enforcement Officer, who shall provide written
notice to the applicant, shall revoke the sign permit.
4. The applicant may reapply for the required sign permit, upon
submission of evidence of PennDOT approval, without payment of
any additional sign permit fee, provided that the application is filed
within the six-month period during which the conditional use
approval is valid.
5. The applicant shall be subject to the prevailing fee for replacement
signs whenever the face of the billboard is changed.
69.90.1. Districts in which use may be permitted: C-4.
69.90.2. Minimum lot area. The minimum size lot where a single-story
multiple-family dwelling is to be utilized in connection with housing for
seniors is one acre. The minimum lot size where a multistory multiplefamily
dwelling is to be utilized in connection with housing for seniors is
two acres. There shall not be more than 25 units per acre.
69.90.3. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
69.90.4. Minimum yards:
1. Front: 50 feet.
2. Side: 50 feet.
3. Rear: 50 feet.
69.90.5. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where abutting an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District, there shall be provided, in addition to the yard requirements, a
buffer area of not less than 20 feet. The fronts of all buildings and sides,
when the side or sides face a street of a residential district, shall be
faced with brick, stone or other suitable materials as approved by the
Planning Commission.
69.89 BETHEL PARK CODE 69.90
1:954
Chapter 70
ALARMS
69.90 GENERAL PROVISIONS 69.90
1:955

ARTICLE I
Alarms
70.1. Definitions.
70.2. Permit required.
70.3. Repeated false alarms.
70.4. Revocation of permit.
70.5. Permit fee and term; Chief of Police notified of installation.
70.1.1. As used in this ordinance, certain terms are defined as follows:
70.1.2.ALARM SYSTEM — Any device designed for the detection of an
unauthorized entry on the premises, unlawful act or any emergency
that alerts the Bethel Park Police Department of its commission or
occurrence and, when actuated, gives a signal, either visual, audible or
both, or transmits or causes to be transmitted a signal.
70.1.3. FALSE ALARM — Any alarm signal that alerts the Bethel Park Police
Department which is not the result of an actual or threatened
emergency requiring its immediate response. False alarms include
negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the
result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained
equipment; signals which are purposely activated to summon police or
emergency services in nonemergency situations and alarm signals for
which the actual cause is not determined.
70.1.4. LOCAL ALARM — A system that gives a signal, either visual, audible
or both, on the exterior portion of the property, but such signal does not
leave that structure by wire or radio wave to a control receiving
location.
70.2.1. No person shall install, have installed, own, use or possess an
operative alarm system without obtaining a permit from the Chief of
Police.
70.3.1. No person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall cause
or permit the giving of repeated false alarms, whether intentional,
accident or otherwise.
70.4.1. The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter if he determines:
1. The application for the permit contains a statement of material fact
which is false.
2. The licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
70.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 70.5
1:957
70.6. False alarm penalty.
70.7. Severability.
70.8. Repealer.
70.5.1. The fee for an alarm system license shall be $15 for residential
properties for each one-year period and $15 for commercial properties.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to determine residential and
commercial properties.
70.6.1. Any alarm system which has more than three false alarms within a
calendar year, the permit holder of that alarm shall pay to the
Municipality of Bethel Park $15 for each occurrence thereafter.
70.6.2. The Police Department shall collect information on the manufacture,
installation and maintenance of any burglar alarm system from which a
false alarm has originated.
70.7.1. The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if
any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any
reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
effect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this ordinance, but they shall stand notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part.
70.8.1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
70.5 BETHEL PARK CODE 70.8
1:958
ARTICLE II
Monitoring Fees
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 12-14-98D134]
70.9. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this ordinance, shall have the following
meanings:
70.9.1.ALARM AGENT — Any firm, corporation, partnership or person who
or which is employed by any business, firm, partnership, corporation or
other commercial entity which conducts the business of owning,
operating, maintaining, installing, leasing or selling automatic
protection devices and whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing in or on any building, residential dwelling, place or
premises any automatic protection device, as defined within this
ordinance, within the municipality.
70.9.2.ALARM COMPANY — The principal of any alarm agent, including,
but not limited to, any business, firm, corporation, partnership, parent,
subsidiary or other commercial entity that engages in the business,
either through alarm agents or directly, of owning, operating,
maintaining, installing, leasing or selling automatic protection devices.
70.9.3.AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE [hereinafter "APD"] — Any
electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and
related hardware which automatically transmits a prerecorded voice or
other alarm signal over regular telephone lines, by direct or indirect
connection to the communication center, upon receipt of a stimulus
from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or
condition inherently characteristic of a fire or intrusion or other
emergency.
70.9.4. CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — Any protective system
or group of such systems operated privately for customers by an alarm
agent or principal of such alarm agent; which maintains staff and
supervisors and receives and accepts recorded messages from APD's at
a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at
all times who have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a
signal, message or alarm, including relaying such messages to the
communications center for response by the police officers of the
municipality's Police Department.
70.9.5.COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The communication room in the
municipality's Police Department and other rooms which house
auxiliary communications equipment.
134. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Article II, Monitoring Systems,
adopted 9-14-1998 by Ord. No. 9-14-98D.
70.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 70.9
1:959
70.10. Communications center monitored alarms.
70.9.6.COMMUNICATIONS CENTER PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — Any
protective system or group of protective systems operated privately by
customers by an alarm agent or principal of such alarm agent which
directly terminates in the communications center of the Police
Department of the Municipality of Bethel Park and does not first
terminate in a central station privately owned and operated by an alarm
agent or principal of such alarm agent.
70.9.7. POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Municipality
of Bethel Park.
70.9.8. SUBSCRIBER — A person who has an APD or other electronic fire
and intruder alarm device installed on realty in which that person has
an interest.
70.10.1. Fees assessed. From the effective date of this ordinance hence, the
alarm agent, the principal of such alarm agent or the alarm company, as
the case may be, shall pay an annual monitoring fee to the Municipality
of Bethel Park for those APD's or alarms that are installed in the
municipality's communications center and, as such, are within the
definition of a communications center protective system as that term is
defined in this ordinance.
70.10.2. Amount of alarm monitoring fee. Each alarm agent, principal of
such agent or alarm company, as more fully described and set forth in
Exhibit A135 attached hereto, shall pay an annual monitoring fee to the
Municipality of Bethel Park in the amount of $35.
70.10.3. Payment of fees. Each alarm agent, principal of such agent or alarm
company, as set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto, shall pay an annual
monitoring fee for each APD set forth in Exhibit A for which each such
alarm agent, principal of such agent or alarm company is or was
responsible for the sale, lease, installation, maintenance or servicing of
such APD or alarm and currently charges and collects a monitoring fee.
The alarm agent or principal of such agent, as identified in Exhibit A
shall pay such fee to the Municipality of Bethel Park within 30 days of
the effective date of this ordinance and then annually thereafter.
70.10.4. Alarms installed after effective date. Alarms or APD's installed in
commercial or residential buildings or on premises situated in the
municipality after the effective date of this ordinance that will
terminate directly in the municipality's communications center shall
pay the annual monitoring fee set forth in Section 70.10.2 of this
ordinance upon installation of such alarm or APD and payments for
monitoring fees in subsequent years shall be paid on the same date as
135. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the municipal offices and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
70.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 70.10
1:960
70.11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
70.12. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective immediately.
70.13. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
section, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance, but
they shall stand notwithstanding such other invalid section, clause, phrase
or sentence.
those fees assessed and collected pursuant to Section 70.10.3 of this
ordinance.
70.10.5. Exemptions. Alarm agents, their principals and alarm companies
shall be exempt from paying monitoring fees for APD's terminating in
the communications center and which APD's are installed in buildings
or on premises owned or leased by the municipality, the Bethel Park
School District or the municipality's Fire Department.
70.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 70.13
1:961
Chapter 71
EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS
70.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 70.13
1:962
ARTICLE I
State of Emergency
[Adopted 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 12-12-94A]
71.1. Authority.
71.2. Form.
71.3. Term.
71.4. Council approval.
71.5. Prohibitions.
71.1.1. The Mayor is hereby authorized to use the specific powers granted
to him under the Statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania a to
declare a state of emergency.
71.2.1. The Mayor shall be required to issue such a proclamation in writing
which shall be available for view by all interested parties.
71.3.1. The declared state of emergency may not exceed seven days.
71.4.1. At any time during the proclamation of the emergency, the Council
may, by resolution, rescind, modify or extend the emergency
proclamation.
71.5.1. The written proclamation declaring such an emergency condition
shall outline all specific prohibitions which may contain the following:
1. Prohibiting persons from being on public streets during the hours
declared to be a period of curfew;
2. Prohibiting the entry or departure of persons into or from any
restricted areas;
3. (Reserved)
4. Prohibiting the sale, purchase or dispensing of any commodities or
goods as designated by the Mayor;
5. (Reserved)
6. Prohibiting the transportation, possession or use of flammable or
explosive liquids, except in connection with normal operations of
motor vehicles, normal use or legitimate commercial use;
7. Prohibiting any other such activities as the Mayor reasonably
believes should be prohibited to help preserve life, health, property
or the public peace, including, but not limited to those activities set
forth more fully in this ordinance.
71.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 71.6
1:963
71.6. Emergency condition. [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
11-12-07C]
71.7. Specificity.
71.8. Penalty. [Amended 11-12-2007 by Ord. No. 11-12-07C]
71.9. Effective date.
71.6.1. Authority to proclaim emergency condition. The Mayor shall have
the authority to proclaim an emergency condition. An emergency
condition can be declared for any natural event, including hurricane,
tornado, storm, high water, wind-driven water, tsunami, earthquake,
volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, or drought, or, regardless of
cause, fire, flood, explosion, or hazardous material contamination.
71.6.2. The Mayor may also declare an emergency snow condition. For
purposes of this article, "emergency snow condition" means any
condition involving an accumulation of snow or ice, which the Mayor
determines to be hazardous to safety. The emergency snow condition
shall be communicated as soon as proclaimed to local radio and
television stations for broadcast. An emergency snow condition shall
continue in effect from the date of proclamation until such time as the
Mayor proclaims termination of the condition.
71.6.3. Prohibition of unattended vehicles on roads during emergency snow
condition. No person, company, organization or any other entity shall
park or otherwise leave any motor vehicle unattended on the streets,
roads and highways within the boundaries of the Municipality of Bethel
Park during an emergency snow condition.
71.6.4. Prohibition on operating vehicle on roads during emergency snow
condition without proper tires. No person, company, organization or
any other entity shall operate any motor vehicle on the streets, roads
and highways within the boundaries of the Municipality of Bethel Park
during the period of an emergency snow condition which is not
equipped with tires having treads suitable for use in snow or icy
conditions.
71.7.1. The written proclamation shall clearly describe any restricted area
with particularity and must specify the hours when such prohibitions
are to be in effect.
71.8.1. Any person violating the Mayor's proclamation of emergency shall
be guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine not to exceed $300 in costs and in default thereof to
undergo imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
71.9.1. This ordinance shall become effective 30 days from enactment.
71.6 BETHEL PARK CODE 71.10
1:964
71.10. Conflicts.
Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the terms and
provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed to the
extent of said conflict.
71.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 71.10
1:965

ARTICLE II
Abatement of Releases
[Adopted by Ord. No. 12-12-94B]
71.11. Legislative Findings.
71.12. Definitions.
71.13. Grant of Authority.
71.11.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park has determined that Releases of
Hazardous Substances within the Municipality may require immediate
response; and
71.11.2. The Council desires to protect the safety and welfare of Bethel Park
residents and emergency response personnel and to provide for
reimbursement of Response Costs and other costs.
71.12.1. For purposes of this Ordinance, Hazardous Substances shall
include:
1. "Hazardous material" as defined by the Pennsylvania Hazardous
Material Emergency Planning and Response Act, Act of Dec. 7,
1990, P.L. 639, No. 165, § 103, 35 P.S. § 6022.103;
2. Natural gas, liquefied natural gas, gasoline, petroleum and other
petroleum products; and
3. Infectious and chemotherapeutic wastes as regulated by the
Pennsylvania Infectious and Chemotherapeutic Waste Disposal Act,
Act of July 13, 1988, P.L. 525, No. 93, § 1, 35 P.S. § 6019.1, et seq.
71.12.2. "Person" shall include any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or other legal entity.
71.12.3. "Release" shall include any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping
or disposing into the environment.
71.12.4. "Response Costs" shall have the meaning set forth in the
Pennsylvania Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response
Act, Act of Dec. 7, 1990, P.L. 639, No. 165 § 103, 35 P.S. § 6022.210(c).
71.13.1. The Municipality of Bethel Park hereby authorizes and directs its
emergency services and other municipal employees, and volunteer
emergency services organizations recognized by the Municipality, to
take actions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent Releases of
Hazardous Substances within the Municipality, to clean up such
Releases, and otherwise to abate the effects of such Releases. Such
actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, traffic control, medical
care, evacuation, relocation, analytical testing to measure or identify
71.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 71.13
1:967
71.14. Liability.
71.15. Vehicle Extrication Services.
71.16. Remedies Cumulative.
71.17. Conflicts with other Laws.
71.18. Partial Invalidity.
Hazardous Substances, and actions to contain, remove and dispose of
Hazardous Substances.
71.14.1. Any Person who owns or operates any vessel, container, vehicle,
property or facility from which Hazardous Substances are Released,
and any Person who abandons or discards any Hazardous Substances,
shall be strictly liable for: Response Costs incurred by the Municipality
or by any volunteer emergency services organization as a result of the
Release or abandonment or discarding of Hazardous Substances; and
Response costs, lost profits, or any other direct or consequential
damages sustained by any Person as a result of the Release or
abandonment or discarding of Hazardous Substances.
71.15.1. A charge of $250 shall be assessed by the Municipality against any
Person extricated from a vehicle by the Municipality or by any volunteer
emergency services organization in the Municipality using the Hurst
tool or the jaws of life.
71.16.1. The remedies provided by this ordinance shall be in addition all
other remedies provided by law.
71.17.1. Any conflicting ordinance or resolution or any part thereof is
rescinded insofar as it conflicts with the provisions of this Ordinance.
71.18.1. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable and, if any provision
of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, then
the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect, it being
Council's intention that the balance of this Ordinance would have been
adopted if such invalid, illegal or unconstitutional provision had not
been included.
71.13 BETHEL PARK CODE 71.18
1:968
Chapter 72
FLOOD MANAGEMENT
71.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 71.18
1:969

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
72.1. Statutory authority.
72.2. Title and purpose.
72.3. Applicability.
72.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
72.1.1. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,136
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety,
and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Municipal
Council of the Municipality of Bethel Park does hereby order as follows.
72.2.1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Bethel
Park Municipal Floodplain Management Ordinance."
72.2.2. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to:
1. Protect human life, health, safety and welfare in the Municipality.
2. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
3. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
4. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
5. Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
72.3.1. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction,
grading or land development anywhere within a floodplain, flood hazard
area or floodway within the Municipality, without first obtaining all of
the required permits from the Municipality and/or other governmental
agencies.
72.4.1. This ordinance supersedes any other conflicting provisions which
may be in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other
ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent
that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict
136. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
72.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.4
1:971
72.5. Severability.
72.6. Disclaimer of liability.
72.7. Repealer.
between any of the provisions of this ordinance, the more restrictive
shall apply.
72.5.1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable; and if any of its
provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions
of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this
ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal,
or invalid provision not been included herein.
72.6.1. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may
occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes,
such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
ordinance does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain
areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on
the part of the Municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
72.7.1. Any ordinance or part of any ordinance conflicting with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be, and the same are hereby, repealed
to the extent of such conflict, and specifically Ordinances 5-13-85A,
6-8-81A, 6-8-81B, 12-4-81A and 6-8-81C.
72.4 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.7
1:972
ARTICLE II
Definitions
72.8. Interpretation.
72.9. Definitions.
72.8.1. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words used
herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. As used in this ordinance, words in the singular include the plural,
and those in the plural include the singular. Words in the present
tense include the future tense; words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter.
2. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
3. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
4. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
5. The word "person" includes corporation, unincorporated
association, and partnership, as well as an individual. The word
"structure" includes the meaning of "building," and each shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
72.9.1. The following words, as used in this ordinance, shall have the
meanings indicated below:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure. An accessory use includes, but is not limited
to, fence, shed, swimming pool, outside storage area, garage, etc.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" and "one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The water surface elevation shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in Zone AE that indicates the water
surface elevation having a one-percent or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year; the water surface elevation
calculated in an engineering hydraulic/hydrologic study in Zone A of the
FIRM or adjacent to any other watercourse resulting from a base flood.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
72.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.9
1:973
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or by
walls, and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or any other property. Included shall be recreational vehicles
and trailers, with a permanent foundation, for use of human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets and
other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining dredging,
drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the
subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that includes
flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood in
areas studied by FEMA.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The person qualified and officially
appointed by the Municipal Council to administer and enforce this
ordinance.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
72.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.9
1:974
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved to carry and discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot. Unless otherwise specified, the floodway is as
indicated in the Flood Insurance Study and on the FIRM as provided
by FEMA. Along a watercourse where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is
assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends
from the top of bank of the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank
of the stream.
GRADING — Any excavation or fill, or any combination thereof,
including the conditions resulting from any earthmoving activity.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to
enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include that area identified
as the special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
and Flood Insurance Study and floodplains associated with all other
watercourses.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
1.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
2.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
3.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
a.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs
b.
4.
72.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.9
1:975
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable, in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than
180 consecutive days. Note: Manufactured homes constructed without
a permanent foundation are prohibited in the Municipality.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous land) of land divided two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
material for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, mechanical or other work
affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this Floodplain
Management Ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures. Any construction started after June 15, 1981, and
before the effective date of this Floodplain Management Ordinance is
subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, public or private corporation, unincorporated
association, partnership, firm, estate, municipality, governmental unit,
public entity, or any other entity whatsoever which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated
72.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.9
1:976
June 15, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred before December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated
June 15, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice engineering and who is
knowledgeable in the branch of civil engineering.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE)
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, or AE.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the appropriate
municipal permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days from the date of the appropriate
municipal permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
1. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
2.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
3.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
4.
72.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.9
1:977
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, a manufactured home and sheds.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
SURVEYOR — A person licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to practice the field of surveying.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the
Municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as construction standards applicable with the
state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references to
the above are specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height of the water for the onehundred-
year flood in relation to the NVAD88 datum as calculated in an
engineering hydrologic and hydraulic study.
72.9 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.9
1:978
ARTICLE III
Administration
72.10. Designation of floodplain administrator.
72.11. Permits required.
72.12. Plan requirements.
72.10.1. The Municipal Engineer within the Municipality of Bethel Park is
hereby appointed to administer and enforce this ordinance and is
referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator."
72.11.1. The floodplain administrator shall review the documentation
required for all municipal permits, including but not limited to grading,
building and/or development, to determine if the requirements in this
ordinance need to be included in the permit approval process.
72.11.2. Prior to the issuance of any municipal permit, the floodplain
administrator shall review the information submitted to determine if all
other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Uniform Building Code (Act 1999-45, as amended)137 the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);138 the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);139 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);140 and
the United States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
72.12.1. If the proposed construction, including accessory structures, decks,
other improvements and manufactured homes (on a permanent
foundation), is fully or partially located in an identified floodplain area
as designated as Zone AE or A by FEMA or other identified floodplain
areas not designated by FEMA, the applicant(s) shall file plans,
prepared by a surveyor or professional engineer, with the following
minimum information, plus any other pertinent information as may be
required by the floodplain administrator, prior to the issuance of any
municipal permit:
1. The scale of the plan shall not be less than 100 feet equals one inch;
2. The maximum size of the plan sheets shall be 24 inches by 36
inches;
3. North arrow, scale and date;
4. Site location map;
137. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
139. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. §§ 693.1 et seq.
140. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
72.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.12
1:979
5. Name and address of the property owner;
6. Topography based upon North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of two
feet;
7. The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and
other improvements, and gas wells, including the location of any
existing or proposed subdivision and development;
8. All property lines, including dimensions and area in acres and
square feet;
9. The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas;
10. The location of any existing bodies of water, detention systems,
watercourses, streams, rivers, floodplain areas, wetlands and
floodways;
11. The location and size of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, utilities, storm sewers, culverts, sanitary sewers, septic
systems and any other improvements;
12. The location of existing and proposed contour elevations of any
proposed fill or cut to be completed on the property shown to a
maximum of a two-foot interval;
13. The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of the
existing and proposed structure located in an identified floodplain;
14. The location and elevation of any proposed accessory structures
located in an identified floodplain;
15. A minimum of two cross sections in the area of the proposed fill or
cut to be completed on the site within the floodplain area, showing
the proposed location of the base flood elevation, must be shown;
16. The erosion and sedimentation control devices to be used for any
proposed construction;
17. The location of the floodplain boundary line and floodway limits for
the base flood elevation as shown on the current FIRM;
18. The elevation for the base flood and the lowest floor of the existing
and proposed building or structure based on the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988;
19. The seal and signature of the surveyor or professional engineer
who prepared the plan;
20. Storage elevations; and
21. Soil types.
72.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.12
1:980
72.12.2. If any proposed construction is located entirely or partially within
any identified floodplain area, the applicant(s) shall provide all the
necessary information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the
administrator to determine that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this ordinance and
all other applicable ordinances.
2. Storage elevations.
3. All utilities and facilities, such as gas, sewer, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
4. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
5. Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
6. Building materials are flood-resistant.
7. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
8. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
9. Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevation is provided.
10. Documentation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor, is
provided to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development or construction within an identified floodplain area,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation at any point
within the Municipality.
11. Documentation, certified by a professional engineer or architect, is
provided which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the
base flood elevation. This statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
12. Detailed information needed to determine compliance with Section
72.25.8, Storage, and Section 72.26, Development which may
endanger human life, is provided, including:
72.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.12
1:981
72.13. Review by other governmental agencies.
72.14. Post-construction documentation.
72.15. Changes.
a. The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in Sections 72.25 and 72.26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise maintained
on site.
b. A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of
the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills of the
dangerous materials or substances listed in Section 72.26
during a base flood.
72.13.1. A copy of all plans for proposed construction or development
located within an identified floodplain area shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Allegheny County Conservation District for review and
approval of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A copy of the
approval letter from the Allegheny County Conservation District shall
be submitted to the floodplain administrator prior the issuance of any
required permit.
72.13.2. A copy of the plans for proposed construction or development
located in a floodway shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for review and
approval. A copy of a permit waiver letter or the encroachment permit
approval received from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator prior the
issuance of any required permit.
72.14.1. The applicant shall submit an elevation certificate prepared, signed
and sealed by a professional engineer or surveyor certifying to the final
elevation of the lowest floor of the proposed structure after it was
constructed.
72.14.2. The applicant shall submit an as-built survey, signed and sealed by
a professional surveyor, showing the location of the floodplain and/or
floodway and the location of all structures and buildings with the
elevation of the lowest floor of the new construction shown on the plan.
72.14.3. If the construction for nonresidential structures is located within a
floodplain, the applicant shall submit a floodproofing certificate
prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer or architect.
72.15.1. After the issuance of all required municipal permit(s), no changes
of any kind shall be made to the approved plans or other documents
submitted without the written consent or approval of the municipal
representative(s) who issued the permit(s). Requests for any such
72.12 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.15
1:982
72.16. Inspections.
72.17. Violations and penalties.
change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to
the appropriate municipal representative(s) that issued the permit(s).
72.16.1. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that
the work is progressing in compliance with the information provided on
the approved permit documentation and with all applicable municipal
laws and ordinances. The floodplain administrator or other authorized
official shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of
the work as are necessary.
72.16.2. In the event the floodplain administrator or other authorized official
discovers that the work does not comply with the approved permit
documents or any applicable laws and ordinances, or that there has
been a false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the
floodplain administrator or other authorized official shall revoke or
suspend the approved permit(s).
72.16.3. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this ordinance, including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
72.16.4. In the discharge of his duties, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall have the authority to enter any building,
structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area,
upon presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
72.16.5. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
72.17.1. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, or repair any structure or
maintain or perform grading operations, excavation or fill, or cause the
same to be done, within an identified floodplain or floodway, contrary to
or in violation of any provision of this ordinance.
72.17.2. When notice of any violation of, or noncompliance with, the
provisions of this ordinance has been given by the floodplain
administrator or the Code Enforcement Officer to any person, such
violation shall be discontinued immediately or within a reasonable time
limit specified in such notice. If such violation is not discontinued or
extends beyond the specified time limit, the Code Enforcement Officer
or floodplain administrator shall revoke the permit approved for the
construction, and the violator shall be subject to the applicable penalty.
72.17.3. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, in its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited
72.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.17
1:983
72.18. Remedies.
72.19. Appeals.
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases,
the Municipality will provide the owner with a written notice of the
violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the
violation. If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed
time period, the Municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all,
applicable approvals or permits pertaining to any provision of this
ordinance.
72.17.4. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
liable, on conviction thereof, to a penalty not exceeding $200.
Whenever such person shall have been notified by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the floodplain administrator, by service of
summons in a prosecution, or in any other way, that he is committing
such violation of this ordinance, each day that he shall continue such
violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by a like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be
collected as like fines or penalties are now by law collected. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance
with, this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time.
72.18.1. In case any work is performed by any person in violation of any of
the provisions of this ordinance, the proper officer of the Municipality of
Bethel Park, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of
the Municipality an appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal
process or otherwise, to prevent such unlawful work and to restrain or
abate such violation.
72.19.1. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality relevant
to the provisions of this ordinance may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the Municipality's decision.
72.17 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.19
1:984
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
72.20. Identification.
72.21. Description of and requirements in identified floodplain
areas.
72.20.1. Any areas of the Municipality of Bethel Park classified as special
flood hazard areas (SFHA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated September 26,
2014, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof, including digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
72.20.2. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Municipality of
Bethel Park and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
72.20.3. Any floodplain area along watercourses within the Municipality of
Bethel Park, which is subject to the base flood and is not designated as
a special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Study.
72.21.1. Floodway area:
1. The areas identified as "floodway" are as follows:
a. Areas designated as a floodway in the Flood Insurance Study
prepared by FEMA, which represents the channel of the
watercourse and adjacent areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood.
b. In areas along a watercourse where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year storm
frequency, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
c. Areas along watercourses which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those floodplain
areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood
Insurance Study.
2. The following provisions shall apply to floodways:
a. No new construction, grading, substantial improvement,
encroachments, or other development activities shall be
permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic
and hydraulic analysis prepared by a professional engineer or
surveyor that the proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase in the base flood levels within the Municipality
72.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.21
1:985
and neighboring community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge; and
b. No new construction, grading or development shall be allowed
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
72.21.2. Special floodplain areas: the areas identified as Zone AE in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which the base flood elevations have been
provided. The following provisions shall apply to special floodplain
areas:
1. No new construction, grading or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse or within the delineated floodway, whichever is
more restrictive;
2. No new construction, grading or development shall be allowed
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
construction or development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation within the floodway or in the floodplain; and
3. No new construction, grading or development shall be allowed
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
72.21.3. Approximate floodplain area: the areas identified as Zone A in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and other watercourses for which no base flood
elevations have been provided. The following provisions shall apply to
approximate floodplain areas:
1. No new construction, grading or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection;
2. No new construction, grading or development shall be allowed
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
construction or development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation within the floodway and floodplain;
3. When available, information from other federal, state, and other
acceptable sources shall be used to determine the base flood
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible; and
4. The floodplain administrator will require the applicant to
determine the base flood elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by a professional engineer, who shall certify that
the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
72.21 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.21
1:986
72.22. Changes in identification of area.
technical concept. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
signed and sealed by the professional engineer and submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Municipality.
72.22.1. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Municipality where a hydrologic and hydraulic study prepared by a
professional engineer or surveyor documents the need for such
revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency by submitting the
appropriate letter of map revision.
72.22.2. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to the Municipality
and FEMA for a letter of map revision (LMOR) within six months of the
completion of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the base flood elevation or the floodplain
boundary.
72.22.3. All costs for submitting a floodplain map revision to FEMA shall be
the responsibility of the developer or property owner. The developer
will need to provide security for all costs related to the submission and
approval of any map revision submitted to FEMA. The Municipality
shall submit the map revision on the behalf of the developer or property
owner.
72.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.22
1:987

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
72.23. General requirements.
72.24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
72.23.1. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse, floodway or floodplain until all adjacent
municipalities, FEMA, the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development, and property owners which may be affected by
such action have been notified, by certified or registered mail, by the
developer or property owner.
72.23.2. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse, floodway or floodplain until all required
permits or approvals have been first obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection.
72.23.3. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse, floodway or floodplain unless it can be shown
that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
72.23.4. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this ordinance and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
72.24.1. Residential structures. The following provisions shall apply:
1. In any identified floodplain area, any new construction shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this ordinance,
identified floodplain areas include floodplain areas designated as
AE and A Zones in the FIS and the identified floodplains associated
with all other watercourses.
2. In any identified floodplain area, any substantial improvement to an
existing structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation. For the
purposes of this ordinance, identified floodplain areas include
floodplain areas designated as AE and A Zones in the FIS and the
identified floodplains associated with all other watercourses.
3. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
72.24.2. Nonresidential structures. The following provisions shall apply:
72.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.24
1:989
1. Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation, or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by such
structure shall remain either completely or essentially dry during
any flood up to that height. For the purposes of this ordinance,
identified floodplain areas include floodplain areas designated as
AE and A Zones in the FIS and floodplains associated with all other
watercourses.
2. Within any identified floodplain area, any substantial improvement
to an existing structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) at or above the base flood elevation. If any portion of the
lowest floor or basement is below the base flood elevation, it needs
to be floodproofed up to or above the base flood elevation in
accordance with Section 72.24.3 of this ordinance. In no case shall
enclosed space be below grade on all four sides (basements are
prohibited). For the purposes of this ordinance, identified
floodplain areas include floodplain areas designated as AE and A
Zones in the FIS and floodplains associated with all other
watercourses.
3. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated at or above the regulatory flood elevation
shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a professional engineer
or professional architect with a license in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above-referenced
standards.
4. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
72.24.3. Space Below the Lowest Floor. The following provisions shall apply:
1. Basements are prohibited.
2. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basement)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
72.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.24
1:990
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
3. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by either a
registered professional engineer or architect, meeting or
exceeding the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
72.24.4. Accessory structures or uses. Structures and uses accessory to a
principal building need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry
but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
1. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity;
2. Floor area or surface area shall not exceed 200 square feet;
3. The structure or use will have a low damage potential;
4. No structure or use will be located on the site within the floodway
limits;
5. The structure or use shall not increase the base flood elevation
within the identified floodplain area;
6. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to a minimum of
1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation;
7. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited;
8. Swimming pools are prohibited in any identified floodplain unless a
permit is acquired from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection;
9. Fences must be constructed to allow water to freely flow through
without increasing the base flood elevation. No solid fences will be
permitted in any identified floodplain area; and
10. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
72.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.24
1:991
72.25. Design and construction standards.
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must be certified by either a professional engineer or
professional architect licensed to practice in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, meeting or exceeding the following minimum
criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
72.24.5. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles not constructed on
a permanent foundation are prohibited in indentified floodplain areas.
72.25.1. Grading. The installation of fill material and/or excavation of soil in
an identified floodplain area shall meet the following requirements:
1. A permit must be obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection;
2. The soil shall be clean fill with only small rocks and be compacted
to provide the necessary permeability and be resistant to erosion,
scouring and settling;
3. The slope shall be no greater than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical;
4. The grading will not increase the base flood elevation within the
floodway or identified floodplain area of any watercourse;
5. The disturbed area will be required to be stabilized with natural
plants or other erosion-control materials that will minimize future
erosion or sediment scour along the floodway;
6. The grading performed does not adversely affect the adjacent
properties and the adjacent property owners agree in writing to the
grading;
7. A grading permit is obtained from the Municipality; and
8. A hydrologic and hydraulic study is required from the upper edge
of the disturbed area to a point measuring a minimum 200 feet
upstream of the lower edge of the proposed disturbed area to
determine the effects of the grading on the base flood elevation in
72.24 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.25
1:992
identified floodplain areas. The calculations shall be completed,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer.
72.25.2. Drainage facilities.
1. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall
ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent
the discharge of runoff onto adjacent properties.
2. A permit must be obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection for the construction of any drainage facility designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff within an identified floodplain
or floodway.
3. Any drainage facility located within a stream channel shall be
designed to convey the peak flow equal base flood and not increase
the base flood elevation.
4. No dry sump for the purposes of controlling storm water shall be
constructed in an identified floodplain area.
72.25.3. Stream bank stabilization. Performing stream bank stabilization
within an identified floodplain or floodway shall meet the following
requirements:
1. A permit must be obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
2. If the slope is being stabilized using the existing or new erosionresistant
materials covering the existing soil, the slope shall be cut
back so that it is no greater than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical.
3. If stone, gabion wall or concrete wall is being used to stabilize the
stream bank, a hydrologic and hydraulic study is required from the
upper edge of the disturbed area to a point measuring a minimum
200 feet upstream of the lower edge of the proposed disturbed area
to determine the effects of the grading on the base flood elevation
in identified floodplain areas. The calculations shall be completed,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer.
72.25.4.Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
1. All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
2. Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters. These facilities
shall be constructed to be watertight, eliminating infiltration and
contamination.
72.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.25
1:993
3. All on-site sewage systems shall be located outside of any identified
floodplain area to avoid impairment and contamination.
4. The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
72.25.5. Subdivisions and land developments.
1. In a new land development or subdivision, the developer shall
rehabilitate the banks of any watercourse traversing through the
property to minimize stream bank erosion in the future in
accordance with this ordinance.
2. In a new land development or subdivision, the developer shall not
grade within 25 feet of any identified floodplain area providing a
natural buffer between the new construction and the identified
floodplain area. If a natural tree buffer is not provided, the
developer shall plant trees in accordance with the buffer yard
requirements in the Chapter 69 of the Municipal Code for buffer
yards between residential and commercial zoned districts.
3. In a new land development or subdivision located in an identified
floodplain area, the developer shall prepare a hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study that will show effects of the proposed
development on the base flood elevation. The engineering analysis
shall be prepared in a format required by FEMA for a conditional
letter of map revision and letter of map revision. The hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by a professional
engineer, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concept. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be signed and sealed by the
professional engineer and submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Municipality.
72.25.6. Other utilities.
1. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone
systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
72.25.7. Streets.
1. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be at or above the
base flood elevation of the watercourse.
72.25.8. Storage.
1. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of
flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and not
listed in Section 72.26, Development which may endanger human
life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/
or be floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
72.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.25
1:994
72.25.9. Placement of buildings and structures.
1. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
water and shall be designed to have a minimum effect upon the
flow with no increase to the elevation of the base flood of the
watercourse.
72.25.10. Anchoring.
1. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. The design and construction of all anchoring
systems shall be certified by a professional engineer or architect.
2. All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the base flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
72.25.11. Floors, walls and ceilings.
1. Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
2. Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
3. Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
4. Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
72.25.12. Paints and adhesives.
1. Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
2. Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
3. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
72.25.13. Electrical components.
1. Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
72.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.25
1:995
72.26. Development which may endanger human life.
2. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
72.25.14. Equipment.
1. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus, shall
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
72.25.15. Fuel supply systems.
1. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
72.25.16. Uniform Construction Code coordination.
1. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401-405), as amended, and not limited to the following
provisions shall apply to the above and other sections and
subsections of this ordinance to the extent that they are more
restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this ordinance:
a. International Building Code 2009, or latest edition thereof:
Sections 801, 1203, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 1804, 1805, 3403,
and 3404.
b. International Residential Code 2009, or latest edition thereof:
Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix
E and Appendix J.
72.26.1. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community Affairs as
required by the Act, any new or substantially improved structures
which will be used for the production or storage of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances shall be prohibited in an identified
floodplain area and floodway:
1. Acetone.
2. Ammonia.
3. Benzene.
4. Calcium carbide.
5. Carbon disulfide.
6. Celluloid.
72.25 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.26
1:996
72.27. Requirements for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles.
7. Chlorine.
8. Hydrochloric acid.
9. Hydrocyanic acid.
10. Magnesium.
11. Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
12. Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
13. Phosphorus.
14. Potassium.
15. Sodium.
16. Sulphur and sulphur products.
17. Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
18. Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
72.27.1. The construction of or a substantial improvement to manufactured
homes not constructed on a permanent foundation is prohibited within
an identified floodplain area. No variance shall be granted.
72.27.2. The placement of a recreational vehicle not constructed on a
permanent foundation is prohibited within an identified floodplain area.
No variance shall be granted.
72.27.3. The construction of or a substantial improvement to manufactured
homes and/or recreational vehicles is prohibited within an identified
floodplain area unless a variance is obtained and the following
requirements are met:
1. The structure is placed on a permanent foundation;
2. The structure is elevated so that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation;
3. The structure is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
4. All ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump, are elevated
to the regulatory flood elevation;
72.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.27
1:997
72.28. Requirements for hospitals, nursing homes, jails/prisons and
new or substantially improved manufactured home park
subdivisions.
5. All manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse;
6. Installation of manufactured homes on permanent foundations
shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant
cannot provide the above information, the requirements of
Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or
the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured Housing,
1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code,
Chapters 401-405, shall apply; and
7. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto,
and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable
to units where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot
be provided or were not established for the proposed unit's(s')
installation.
72.28.1. The new construction of a hospital, nursing home, jail,
manufactured home park or prison shall be prohibited.
72.28.2. Any minor improvement that is not considered a substantial
improvement related to existing hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, jails
and manufactured home parks located in an identified floodplain area is
permitted if all of the floodproofing requirements in this ordinance are
met.
72.28.3. In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by
the Department of Community and Economic Development to
implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, any
substantial improvement related to existing hospitals, nursing homes,
prisons, jails and manufactured home parks shall be prohibited within
any identified floodplain area unless a special development permit is
obtained and the following additional items are provided for review and
approval by the Municipality:
1. The developer shall submit site plans that are in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Sections 72.12, 72.13, 72.14 and
72.15 of this ordinance and the following:
a. Profile drawings for all proposed streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drives, and vehicular accessways, including
existing and proposed grades;
72.27 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.28
1:998
b. Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate; and
c. The proposed elevation of the lowest floor of the structure 1 1/
2 feet above the base flood elevation.
2. A statement, certified by a professional engineer, professional
architect, professional landscape architect or professional land
surveyor, which contains a complete and accurate description of
how the base flood flows will be addressed during construction and
how any pollution, loose buoyant materials and debris will be
contained in the site during a base flood and not enter the existing
watercourse.
3. An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood (one-hundred-year storm).
4. Certification from a registered professional engineer, surveyor, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood.
5. A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life.
6. A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
surveyor or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows.
7. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by a
professional engineer with experience completing this type of
study, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Municipality and the State
Department of Community and Economic Development.
8. No municipal permit shall be approved unless it can be determined
that the structure or activity will be located, constructed and
maintained in a manner which will fully protect the health and
safety of the general public and any occupants of the structure. At a
minimum, all new structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so that:
72.28 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.28
1:999
a. The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
b. The lowest floor (including basement) elevation will be at least
1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
c. The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safety evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
9. Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
72.28.4. Special development permit review procedures. Upon receipt of an
application for a special development permit by the Municipality, the
following review procedures shall apply:
1. The Municipality shall submit all documentation received to the
Allegheny County Department of Economic Development, by
certified mail, within seven days, for review and recommendations.
2. The Municipality shall submit all documentation received to the
State Department of Community and Economic Development, by
certified mail, within seven working days after approval of any
permit and prior to releasing the permit to the property owner or
developer.
3. The Municipality shall allow the State Department of Community
and Economic Development 30 days, after receipt of the
notification by the Department, to review the application and
decision made by the Municipality.
4. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Municipality
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
5. If the Municipality does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special development permit
to the applicant.
6. If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
Municipality and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Municipality shall not issue the special permit.
72.28 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.28
1:1000
ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
72.29. Existing structures.
72.30. Improvements.
72.29.1. The provisions of this ordinance do not require any changes or
improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures. However,
when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions
of Section 72.30 shall apply.
72.30.1. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain
area:
1. No construction, development, use or activity shall be permitted
within any identified floodway.
2. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any identified floodplain area outside the floodway
that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the base flood elevation.
3. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance.
4. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
72.29 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.30
1:1001

ARTICLE VII
Variances
72.31. General provisions.
72.32. Variance procedures and conditions.
72.31.1. If compliance with any of the requirements of this ordinance would
result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or
landowner, the Municipality of Bethel Park may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
72.32.1. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Municipality of
Bethel Park in accordance with the procedures as follows:
1. No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in the BFE. In Zone A, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in Section 72.21.3(4).
2. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special development permit or to development which
may endanger human life.
3. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
4. In granting any variance, the Municipality of Bethel Park shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this ordinance.
5. Whenever a variance is granted, the Municipality of Bethel Park
shall notify the applicant in writing that:
a. The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
b. Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
6. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Municipality of Bethel
Park shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
a. That there is good and sufficient cause.
b. That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
c. That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
72.31 GENERAL PROVISIONS 72.32
1:1003
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
7. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Municipality of Bethel Park. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to FEMA.
72.32.2. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
72.32 BETHEL PARK CODE 72.32
1:1004
Appendix
Part I
STREETS AND RELATED LEGISLATION
I-1. Streets and Related Legislation.
The following table lists those Ordinances of the Municipality that pertain
to street acceptances, layouts, grades, improvements, and vacations of all
or portions of various streets.141
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Abbeyville Road 2-10-69C
1-13-75C*
Airedale Drive 105-7-53
9-12-60E
8-10-87D
Alicia Drive 12-14-81D 3-14-94D
6-8-87A
Aljean Drive 6-14-65I 3-14-94D
Allegheny Avenue 5-24-55C
7-10-67J
6-7-76B*
Altherton Drive 90-10-52
Alton Drive 66-10-51
Amberwood Court 8-11-86C
9-14-87A
Andrea Drive 110-9-53
122-2-54
Anna Street 11-11-68G
Annetta Drive 7-8-57D
7-8-57E
Appel Road 9-9-57C
141. Acceptance of sewers was specifically mentioned in most acceptance ordinances passed
subsequent to Ord. No. 11-9-59B. Refer to actual ordinances to determine if sewers were
accepted.
72.32 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1005
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
3-14-66D
3-14-66E
Applegate Avenue 104-7-53 9-20-89A
Arapahoe Road 5-24-55B
1-14-57D
Arkwood Drive 8-12-74B
Ashland Drive 9-9-57A
6-14-65E
6-13-66A
Auburn Avenue 3-14-83B
Auburn Avenue 5-14-90A
Barlynn Road 31-7-50
40-8-50
Barnes Avenue 11-11-63H
7-13-64D
Barnwood Drive 11-11-96A
Bartley Road 7-23-56B 11-4-55
8-27-56B
9-20-56C*
Bassett Drive 1-13-69B
11-15-76F
3-14-83A
Battleford Drive 7-10-58B
Beagle Drive 10-8-56A
11-10-58B
Berrington Woods 10-14-96A
Bertha Street 1-12-87F
Bethel Crest Drive 11-14-60A
11-14-66B
1-14-66B
1-9-78B
7-14-86B
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1006
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
2-9-87B
Bethel Green Drive 7-10-61D 10-8-56B
7-14-86A
Bethel Park Drive 12-20-57A
Betsy Drive 11-15-76D
Beverly Court 3-11-91D
Blossom Drive 3-24-83A
Bluestone Drive 2-13-89B
6-11-90A
Boles Court 4-11-88B
Boulder Drive 10-8-79A
12-14-81E
6-13-88D
2-13-89B
Boxer Drive 10-11-65C
9-6-67A
8-13-73E
Boxer Drive 8-14-78B
Boyer Avenue 3-11-57B
Boyerview Street 9-8-69D
Brian Drive 7-14-86A
6-13-88C
Broad Street 1-14-57F
Brookdale Drive 10-10-66D
Brookside Boulevard 7-14-69G
Brush Run Road 3-12-79A
Burnsdale Road 11-14-66B
1-14-74D
Cadillac Way 4-12-99
Cairn Drive 6-14-56A
11-10-58B
3-14-83A
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1007
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
California Avenue 102-6-53
106-7-53
9-14-59B
Cambridge Road Ext. 3-28-55B
Cassidy Drive 8-13-62C
Claytonia Drive 12-11-67F
Clearview Drive 85-9-52
Cobblewood Drive 5-14-84D
Cocker Drive 10-5-53
Collie Drive 9-12-60E
1-15-79A
Casswell Drive 2-19-57A
8-19-57A
Casswell Drive Ext. 7-8-68C
8-21-68A*
Cedar Street 9-14-59B
Center Avenue 11-11-63H 5-13-63E
1-10-83D
Centergate Drive 6-13-66A
Centerman Avenue 9-12-60F
11-11-63H
Chapel Drive 7-14-69E
Cherryview Lane 12-09-74B*
Cherryview Lane 1-14-80D
Chessbriar Drive 89-10-52
Chestnut Street 10-09-72G
Chestnut Street 7-14-03
Christine Place 8-12-68E
Church Road 10-12-59D 6-23-59A
9-12-60A
10-10-60A
Clarene Drive 7-12-65C
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1008
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Clark Avenue 76-03-52 8-14-61A
5-13-57A
7-08-57D
9-12-60D
4-10-67B
Clifton Road 12-11-17C
Colonial Lane 10-8-56C
1-14-57E
Conestoga Drive 96-1-53
8-13-62C
Copperwood Drive 8-11-86C
Copsewood Drive 12-10-62C
9-12-66B
Cork Drive 2-13-61A
11-14-66C
7-10-67F
12-11-67G
Corral Court 7-10-67F
Coventry Court 3-14-83A
Criss Road 12-10-62D
Cypress Drive 7-14-69F 9-8-69A
Dale Road 12-14-59A 10-20-59A
9-12-60C 9-12-60G
Daleview Drive 6-18-73D
9-10-73C
Daleview Drive 12-11-72D
Dalmation Drive 6-14-56A
11-10-58B
10-10-83A
Dana Drive 11-15-76D
Dashwood Drive 11-14-66C
12-11-67G
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1009
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Delfield Road 6-14-65D
6-12-67F
Delyla Drive 7-8-57H
8-19-57G
DeMarchi Drive 5-8-61B 6-14-76A
2-12-07B 5-8-06
Demare Drive 12-10-62E
Denise Drive 11-13-56G
5-13-57A
Dennison Road 8-19-57F
Devon Street 8-12-83C
Diablo Drive 11-14-66A
12-10-73D
Diamondwood Court 9-14-87A
Dianne Drive 140-8-54
Donati Road 5-13-74E
Donegal Drive 2-13-61A
11-14-66C
Dorlyn Drive 6-8-64G
Douthitt Avenue 5-13-63E
Dublin Road 6-13-60A
11-13-61A
Dumbarton Place 9-10-62D
8-12-63C
9-14-64C
Easement: Lot No. 230
Holiday Plan No. 2
6-13-66C
Easement: Lot No. 20
Baptist Park Plan No. 2
4-10-67C
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1010
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Easement: Lot Nos. 420
and 421 Boxer
Heights Plan No. 4
4-13-70C
Easement: Lot Nos.
442, 443, 444, 445 and
a portion of 446
Shamrock Manor Plan
No. 4
1-15-79B
Eastview Road 63-9-51
6-14-651
Eastview Road 9-13-65B
Elderwood Drive 33-7-50
Elm Street Extension 12-16-70A
Enterprise Boulevard 2-12-68C
9-24-79A
9-24-79B
9-08-86B
10-9-89B
Fair Oaks Street 6-12-67E
Falla Drive 12-11-67F
3-11-91D
Fara Drive 7-8-57E
First Alley 10-9-72G
Flamewood Drive 6-9-75A
Florence Drive 11-13-561
9-9-57A
Florence Street 38-8-50
Florida Avenue 125-4-54
11-13-56G
Forest Road 11-13-561 1-9-67A 55-6-51
9-9-57A 1-8-68B
9-10-62C
7-13-64E
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1011
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
2-8-65C
6-12-67G
Fox Terrier Drive 6-14-56A
8-12-68D
1-13-69B
3-22-76B
3-22-76C
8-14-78A
Franklin Drive 10-22-56A
Fredricka Drive 12-10-62A
11-11-63I
Fruitwood Drive 11-8-71A
8-12-74B
6-9-75A
Fruitwood Drive 8-13-79A
Galati Avenue 11-12-73G
Galway Drive 6-13-60A
2-13-61A
11-12-73H
Gardena Drive 10-9-67A
Gardenville Road 8-14-61E 1-14-57A
Gatewood Drive 12-17-76B
Gene Drive 7-8-57G
3-10-58A
Glen Hill Drive 12-13-65B
6-12-67F
8-12-68E
8-11-69H
6-8-70C
6-18-73D
12-8-75A
4-18-77A
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1012
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Glen Oak Drive 11-13-67E
Glen Ora Drive 6-8-70C
Graeser Avenue 8-6-56A
9-8-58A
12-8-58A
11-13-61B
Grand Ridge Road 1-13-03
Grandview Farms Court 3-11-91C
Grandview Farms Drive 3-11-91C
11-13-95D
Grandview Farms Place 11-13-95D
Grant Avenue 11-9-09D
Great Dane Drive 8-12-68D
1-13-69B
1-13-69C
11-12-731
Great Rock Drive 1-13-03
Greenbriar Road 12-18-56A
6-8-64D
Greenhaven Drive 12-13-65B
6-12-67F
2-11-85A 2-11-85A
1-13-03
1-12-04A
Greenwald Road 34-7-50
9-12-60C
Greenwald Road 2-8-65E
Grey Fox Circle 2-8-71A
Grouse Run Road 11-15-76F
8-11-78A
8-14-78B
Hamlin Drive 11-14-77A
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1013
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Hamrock Court 8-19-57G
Happy Hills Drive 6-18-73D
9-10-91D
Harrison Street 10-29-56A
Hartlin Drive 12-11-78D
Havengate Drive 12-13-65C
Havenwood Drive 7-10-61C
Hazeljack Drive 11-12-73H
Heather Drive 96-1-53
Hemlock Street 2-9-81A
Hershire Drive 11-13-61A
11-11-68F
Higbee Drive 6-10-74C
Higbee Street 12-17-56F
Highcrest 6-14-65E
Highfield Road 11-8-71A
12-11-72E
6-9-75A
10-8-79A
Highland Road 12-8-80D 1-24-55A 3-9-81B
2-14-55
Hillcrest Drive 6-9-58F
Hillcrest Road 8-19-57F
Hilliard Road 126-4-54
132-6-54
Hillside Drive 115-11-53
Hillside Drive 5-9-55B
Hillside Drive 11-10-08E
Hilltop Lane 9-12-66F
Hi-Ridge Drive 85-9-52
Hiscott Drive 11-15-76E
Hollydale Drive 9-10-84A
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1014
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Holly Hill Drive 12-10-62B
12-14-64C
12-12-66C
Horning Road 9-11-61C
Horseshoe Drive 8-19-57E
12-20-57A
8-17-59D
Hull Drive 11-12-73H
Industrial Boulevard 3-8-59C
8-21-65B
1-10-66C
6-12-67D
2-12-68C
9-8-86B
10-9-89B
Irish Place 9-10-62B
Irishtown Road 92-11-52
2-13-61A
7-10-61C
11-13-61A
11-14-77A
Iron Run Road 2-13-89B
Jasmine Drive 7-14-75D
3-10-86A
Jonathan Drive 12-14-64B
Keith Road 7-8-57F
12-14-64B
Kennebec Road 11-14-60F
Kevin Drive 8-8-66A
7-14-69E
Kevin Drive Spur 7-14-69E
Keystone Drive 8-11-69F
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1015
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
8-11-69H
Kings Mill Road 9-13-65C
Kings School Road 8-27-56A
11-14-60G
12-8-75A
King School Road 6-13-77A
8-14-78B
Ladera Drive 108-8-53
Lawrence Drive 7-10-67G
10-14-68C
Lento Boulevard 10-9-89C
Leprechaun Drive 11-13-61A
9-10-62B
11-11-68F
Liberty Avenue
Library Avenue 5-20-71A
8-9-71A
Lightwood Avenue 6-12-61B
12-10-62E
Limestone Drive 10-8-79A
8-11-86C
7-8-91E
Lincoln Street (portion) 11-9-09D
Linda Drive 140-8-54
Linda Street 8-12-85C
Lindermer Street 10-9-72G
Linwood Drive 32-7-50
39-8-50
Lisa Drive 3-14-66D
Lois Drive 10-22-56D
Long Avenue 9-12-60F
1-8-62D
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1016
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Longcrest Drive 5-13-91B
Lorene Drive 7-10-61D
Loretta Street 12-17-56A
Lorlita Lane 11-14-66A
Lucille Drive 12-10-56E
Lucy Drive 12-13-71
Lutz Lane 2-11-57A
Main Street 7-10-61E
8-8-77A
Manor Court 11-15-76E
Maple Spring Road 3-9-70E
Maple Way 12-8-86E
Maplevue Drive 11-13-561
2-11-57H
8-17-59C
6-8-64H
6-14-65E
Marche Drive 11-14-60A
Margaretta Street 110-9-53
Marge Street 3-10-58A
Marilynn Drive 7-13-64C
Marshall Road 2-8-65E
Marvle Valley Drive 11-14-66C
6-10-68D
Mayfair Drive (now
Paxton Drive)
3-9-70F
McKnight Drive 8-12-68E
2-10-69D
McPherson Avenue 1-10-83D
Melia Drive 12-10-56E
Melissa Drive 8-8-66A
Mica Court 12-14-81E
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1017
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Michele Circle 8-10-87D
Middlegate Drive 10-14-57A
8-17-59C
Mikush Drive 3-13-61C
6-12-61B
Milford Drive 94-12-52 1-24-55B
147-12-54
6-10-57A
Millennium Court 10-8-18C 10-8-18C
Millennium Drive 10-8-18C 10-8-18C
Mimosa Drive 12-12-66C
10-9-67A
7-14-75D
Mitch Haven Drive 12-10-73E
Monastery View 3-22-76C
3-14-83A
Monongahela Avenue 9-10-62A 10-16-56A
1-22-64A 7-8-57C
6-14-65D
Montour Avenue 12-11-67E
Montour Street 4-12-93A
11-8-93A
Morrow Place 11-9-81A
Motor Way 3-13-61A
Mountain Avenue 10-21-68A
Mueller Way 10-9-72G
Munroe Street 98-3-53 6-13-88B
5-13-91A
Murdock Avenue 5-14-55
1-14-56
Murray Avenue 9-8-58D 8-25-58A
9-12-60-F
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1018
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
1-8-62D
11-11-63H
12-14-64D
Myrna Drive 11-10-58A
N Street 9-10-62D
9-14-64C
North Lightwood
Avenue
11-11-68E
Oaklyn Road 78-4-52
9-14-64D
Oak Park Drive 12-10-62C
3-11-63D
9-12-66B
Oak Way 6-8-87B
3-13-95B
Old Highland Road 3-11-63H
O'Neill Drive 11-13-56H
8-17-59A
12-27-76C
Opalwood Court 7-8-91F,
11-9-92C
Orchard Avenue 11-14-60A
Orchard Drive 10-9-61A
Oregon Trail 8-19-57G
Overhill Street 10-20-58B
Oxford Drive 12-14-81D
Palomino Drive 11-11-96A
12-11-00
Parkridge Drive 12-10-56F
2-11-57H
Partridge Run Drive 11-12-731
Pennsylvania Avenue 9-10-62A
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1019
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Pennwood Court 10-17-77A
Phillip Avenue 5-13-63E
Phillippi Avenue 9-13-71A
Pickering Court 3-14-83A
Pinehaven Drive 12-10-56F
11-10-58A
Pinto Court 12-11-00
Plantation Drive 12-10-62B
7-14-75D
Pontiac Road 119-9-53
Portia Drive 12-14-701
Prescott Drive 12-17-56A
Priscilla Drive 107-7-23
Progress Boulevard 2-12-68C
2-8-71E
9-24-79A
10-9-89B
Puddingstone Lane 12-8-75A
6-13-77A
Ramsgate Drive 12-27-76B
Red Barn Court 3-12-90D
Red Barn Road 3-22-76B
3-12-90D
Rial Drive 11-15-76D
Richard Drive 7-8-57G
1020-58A
Right of Way in
Colonial Estates Plan
11-14-66D
Robert Drive 1010-66C
Rolling Green Drive 85-9-52
Rocky Ridge Road 2-11-85A
3-10-86B
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1020
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
8-11-86C
9-14-87A
6-13-88D
6-11-90A
Route No. 247 20-3-50
Rywood Drive 8-11-69G
Rywood Drive 6-7-76A
Saddlebrook Drive 12-14-98C
12-11-00
Sandra Drive 7-13-64C
6-13-66B
Sandstone Court 9-14-87A
6-13-88D
Sansue Drive 7-8-57F
6-10-63E
Santa Barbara Drive 146-12-56
Santa Fe Drive 141-10-54
10-20-58B
10-12-59E
Sarah Street 11-13-56H
8-19-57H
6-14-65F
Scenic Court 8-19-57E
Scenic View Drive 10-11-65B
6-9-69B
Second Alley 12-10-73C
Seneca Road 11-9-53
Setter Place 8-12-68D
Shawnee Road 10-21-81B
7-14-08
Sherwood Road 46-12-50
6-10-57A
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1021
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
11-14-66B
Sinclair Drive 7-8-57G
Sioux Road 119-9-53 5-9-60B 6-10-85B
9-11-61D
Slater Road 6-12-02D
Slatewood Court 3-10-86B
Smith Drive 37-8-50
43-10-50
Southampton Drive 11-12-73H
South Applegate
Avenue
9-8-75A
11-14-83B
South Pennsylvania
Avenue
102-6-53
Spartan Drive 12-8-58A
11-13-61B
Stonewood Court 1-13-92B
Stonewood Drive 6-11-90A
7-8-91F
1-13-92B
Strathmore Lane 148-12-54
9-8-58A
Steeplechase Court 11-11-96A
Summit Street 6-12-61B 10-16-61A
8-14-61F 1-8-62E
9-11-61F 3-12-62A*
10-9-61B*
Sun Lane 6-12-72A
Sunnyside Road 9-14-64D
Superior Street 116-12-53
Surrey Place 2-12-68B
Surrey Woods Road 7-10-67H
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1022
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
7-10-671
Sylvania Drive 44-10-50 126-4-54
132-6-54
Sylvan Road 67-10-51
90-10-52
108-8-53
Thunderwood Drive 8-11-69G
Tidewood Drive 8-11-69G
2-8-71A
11-8-71A
6-9-75A
Tischler Drive 10-9-61A
1-9-78B
Topaz Court 10-8-79A
Tracy Drive 9-12-60B
7-13-64C
Tralee Drive 6-13-60A
Transit Boulevard 9-24-79A
Turngate Drive 11-9-59B
8-17-59C
Unnamed alley in
Valley Avenue to
Library Road
2-8-65B
Unnamed alley:
Brightwood Plan
7-12-65A
Unnamed alley
between South
Applegate Avenue and
Windgate Drive
12-10-01
Unnamed right-of-way
in Dashwood Estates
Plan No. 4
6-9-80C
Unnamed road in
Welles Plan
10-12-59C
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1023
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Unnamed roads in
Welles Plan
10-12-59B
Unnamed street in Van
Voorhis Plan of Lots
5-14-79A
Unnamed street in
Summit Park Plan No. 1
12-12-66B
Unnamed street in
Bethel Crest Plan No. 7
7-14-86B
Unnamed ten-foot way
at end of Altherton
Drive
12-13-71A
Unnamed twelve-foot
way in Summit Park
Plan No. 1
93-11-52
7-11-60I
Unnamed twenty-foot
way in Coverdale Plan
No. 1
10-9-72G
Unnamed way between
Maple Street and
Cedar Street
10-9-72G
Unnamed fifty-foot
right-of-way off Rolling
Green
4-10-95B
Unnamed right-of-way
between lots 398 and
399 in Coverdale Plan
of Lots
3-13-95C
Unnamed right-of-way
in the Coverdale Village
Plan near Bethel
Baptist Church
5-8-95B
Unnamed way adjacent
to Chestnut Street and
near Spruce Street
7-14-03
Unnamed way between
Oak Street and Popular
Street
10-9-72G
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1024
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Unnamed twenty-foot
way between Main
Street and Spruce
Street
10-9-72G
Unnamed fifty-foot way
near intersection of
Sherwood Road
8-22-83A
Unnamed twenty-fivefoot
way in Petrilli Plan
of Lots
11-13-89D
Unnamed street off
Logan Road
6-9-97C
Unnamed street off
Sherwood Road
9-14-98B
Unpaved alley between
Cherry Street and
Hickory Street
12-10-73C
Valley Avenue 7-11-60I
Valley Drive 9-9-57B
Valley Drive 2-10-58D
Vancar Avenue 4-10-67B
Van Voorhis Drive 5-14-79A
Villahaven Drive 75-3-52
117-12-53
12-11-06C
Vista Glen Drive 7-10-61C
9-10-62A
Voss Road 9-9-57A
9-14-64D
Wadsworth Avenue 5-13-63E
2-12-73A
11-12-73A
Wagner Drive 10-22-56A
Wallace Avenue 12-10-73F 1-10-83D
7-14-86A
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS I-1
1:1025
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Walther Way 8-13-62D 9-10-62G
10-8-62A*
Wells Drive 145-12-54
8-19-57G
Wellsview Road 7-14-80A
Wellsville Road 111-9-53
West Munroe Street 11-13-56G
7-8-57D
9-14-59B
7-20-61E
12-27-76C
Whippet Drive 9-6-67A
1-13-69C
Wilkens Avenue 3-13-95B
Willamit Drive 7-12-65C
Willow Glen Drive 6-8-64F
12-11-72D
Willow Heath Drive 7-8-57H
10-29-59A
Wilson Drive 8-17-59B
7-10-61B
6-13-77A
1-14-80D
Windgate Avenue 5-9-55C
Windsor Place 7-23-56A
Winfred Drive 9-13-65B
Winfred Manor Drive 9-13-65A
9-13-65C
Winton Street 7-12-71A
Wishart Avenue 9-10-91B
Woodbridge Drive 6-7-76A
Woodcock Court 8-14-78A
I-1 BETHEL PARK CODE I-1
1:1026
Street Name
Acceptance,
Layouts and
Grades
Improvements
and
Improvement
Assessments
Easements
and Right-of-
Way Vacations
Woodlawn Avenue 6-11-79A
Woodlet Lane 12-10-62C
Wyncote Drive 109-8-53
Part II
SEWAGE AND RELATED LEGISLATION
II-1. Sewage and Related Legislation.
1. Authorization for agreement with Borough of Castle Shannon for
discharging certain Bethel Park sewers into Castle Shannon sewerage
system. [Ord. No. 57-7-51]
2. Authorization for Municipal Authority to undertake additional sewer
projects, $1,000. for study. [Ord. No. 57-7-51]
3. Establishment of Sanitary Sewer District 3-A in Lick Run Valley
drainage basin; agreement with Township of Baldwin authorized;
construction of sewers and pumping station; adoption of sewerage plan,
sewer assessments and sewer use restrictions. [Ord. No. 65-9-51]
4. Construction and acceptance from Washington Apartments, Inc. of 8
inch sanitary lateral sewer in Abbeyville Road and Washington Road
area. [Ord. No. 65-9-51]
5. Washington Road 8-inch sanitary sewer lateral: construction and
acceptance from J. and P. Mitchell. [Ord. No. 71-11-51]
6. Authorization for agreement with City of Pittsburgh and Allegheny
County Sanitary Authority for sewage treatment and disposal service
and imposing charges therefore. [Ord. No. 73-12-51]
7. South Hills Acres Farms laterals in Sewer District 3-A: assessments for
construction. [Ord. No. 87-9-52]
8. Establishment of Overhill Sanitary Sewer District No. 1: adoption of
sewerage plan; sewer assessments and use regulations. [Ord. No.
95-1-53]
9. Milford Drive, Hillard Road and Sylvania Drive 8-inch sanitary sewer
construction. [Ord. No. 114-10-53]
10. Establishment of Sanitary Sewer District 1-A in Upper Saw Mill Run
Watershed: amends Ord. No. 95-1-53. [Ord. No. 118-12-53]
I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS II-1
1:1027
11. Sanitary Sewer District 1-A in Upper Saw Mill Run Watershed:
assessments for construction. [Ord. No. 119-12-53]
12. Sanitary Sewer District 1-A: amend assessments established in Ord. No.
119-12-53. [Ord. No. 123-2-54]
13. Sanitary Sewer District 1-B in Upper Saw Mill Run Watershed:
assessments for construction as authorized in Ord. No. 114-10-53.
[Ord. No. 133-6-54]
14. Transfer of funds for use in construction of Saw Mill Run Basin and
overall sewer program. [Ord. No. 135-6-54]
15. Milford Drive Lateral Sanitary Sewer 1-3A: construction and
appropriations authorized. [Ord. No. 136-6-54]
16. Saw Mill Run Sanitary Trunk Sewers: construction and assessment
authorized. [Ord. No. 137-6-54]
17. Various plants of lots: storm sewer construction authorized. [Ord. No.
3-14-55]
18. Mollenauer District of Fifth Ward: sanitary sewer lateral 1-5 with
branches authorized; assessment of costs. [Ord. No. 6-13-55B]
19. Library Road District in Fifth Ward: sanitary sewer lateral 1-6
authorized; assessment of costs. [Ord. No. 6-13-55C]
20. Authorization for agreement for Township of St. Clair to construct
sanitary sewage trunk line between Bethel Park and Upper St. Clair;
form of agreement. [Ord. No. 2-13-56]
21. Library Road District in Fifth Ward: approval of amended plan for
construction of sanitary sewer lateral 1-6 authorized by Ord. No.
6-13-55C. [Ord. No. 3-12-56A]
22. Authorization for agreement of lease with Municipal Authority. [Ord.
No. 6-14-56B]
23. Third, Fourth and Seventh Wards: construction of trunk sewers;
$341,925.28. [Ord. No. 6-14-56C]
24. Saw Mill Run Watershed: construction of laterals in Fourth, Fifth and
Seventh Wards; $270,060.30. [Ord. No. 6-14-56D]
25. Approval of admission of Township of Snowden to Municipal Authority
of Bethel Park, form of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. No. 9-20-56A]
26. First, Fourth, Sixth and Seventh Wards: construction of laterals,
$401,296.50. [Ord. No. 10-22-56B]
27. Third and Seventh Wards: construction of laterals, $596,070. [Ord. No.
10-22-56C]
II-1 BETHEL PARK CODE II-1
1:1028
28. Fourth and Seventh Wards: construction of laterals, $554,300. [Ord.
No. 11-13-56C]
29. Third Ward: construction of laterals in east section of Third Ward,
$23,045. [Ord. No. 11-13-56D]
30. Piney Fork Watershed: construction of trunk sewers in First, Second
and Sixth Wards, $416,452. [Ord. No. 12-17-56B]
31. Third, Fourth and Seventh Wards: construction of laterals in
McLaughlin Run Drainage District, $341,925.28; amends Ord. No.
6-14-56C and Ord. No. 6-14-56D. [Ord. No. 12-17-56C]
32. Catfish Run Watershed in First and Fourth Wards: construction of
sanitary trunk sewer authorized; assessment of costs. [Ord. No.
12-17-56D]
33. Lick Run Watershed: construction of trunk sewers in Fourth Ward,
$91,875. [Ord. No. 12-17-56E]
34. Piney Fork Watershed: construction of laterals in Logan Road and
Rolling View Acres areas, $692,726. [Ord. No. 2-11-57C]
35. Piney Fork Watershed: construction of laterals in Kings School Road,
Library Acres and Irishtown Road areas, $902,250. [Ord. No.
2-11-57C]
36. Catfish Run Watershed: construction of laterals in Park Manor, South
Park Road, Brightwood Road and Hillcrest areas, $574,000. [Ord. No.
2-11-57D]
37. Fourth and Fifth Wards: construction of laterals, $158,150. [Ord. No.
2-11-57E]
38. Catfish Run Watershed: construction of trunk sewer in South Park area,
$112,285. [Ord. No. 6-18-57A]
39. Piney Fork Watershed: construction of trunk sewer, $372,830. [Ord.
No. 6-18-57B]
40. Piney Fork Watershed: construction of sewage treatment plant
approved. [Ord. No. 8-19-57B]
41. South Park: construction of sanitary trunk sewers approved. [Ord. No.
10-21-57B]
42. Sewer System Fund established; authorization to draw checks on such.
[Ord. No. 1-17-58A]
43. Easement to Municipal Authority for rights-of-way for sanitary sewers;
general permit for construction and maintenance of systems. [Ord. No.
1-17-58B]
II-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS II-1
1:1029
44. Acceptance of numerous private sanitary sewers along certain streets.
[Ord. No. 1-17-58C]
45. Transfer of existing sewer facilities to Municipal Authority. [Ord. No.
1-17-58D]
46. Ratification of agreement between Municipal Authority and
Municipality of Bethel Park and Township of Snowden regarding
construction of certain sewage facilities and charges therefor. [Ord.
No. 1-17-58E]
47. Ratification of supplemental and license agreements between
Municipal Authority, Municipality of Bethel Park and Township of
Snowden for construction of sewers in South Park. [Ord. No.
1-17-58F]
48. Sewer assessments in Saw Mill Run Watershed: amends Section 4 of
Ord. No. 12-17-56C. [Ord. No. 2-10-58A]
49. Sewer assessments in McLaughlin Run Drainage Area: amends Section
3 of Ord. No. 12-17-56C. [Ord. No.2-10-58B]
50. Ruthfred Acres area, eastern section in Third Ward: approval of revised
estimates, assessment procedures; amends Ord. No. 11-13-56D [Ord.
No. 2-20-58A]
51. Sewer assessments in Lick Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of Ord.
No. 2-11-57E. [Ord. No. 4-15-58A]
52. Sewer assessments in McLaughlin Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of
Ord. No. 10-22-56B. [Ord. No. 4-15-58B]
53. Sewer assessments in McLaughlin Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of
Ord. No. 10-22-56C. [Ord. No. 4-15-58C]
54. Sewer assessments in Piney Fork area: amends Section 3 of Ord. No.
12-17-56B. [Ord. No. 4-15-58D]
55. Sewer assessments in Catfish Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of Ord.
No. 2-11-57D. [Ord. No. 4-15-58E]
56. Sewer assessments in Catfish Run area: amends Section 3 of Ord. No.
12-17-56D. [Ord. No. 4-15-58F]
57. Sewer assessments in McLaughlin Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of
Ord. No. 12-17-56E. [Ord. No. 4-15-58G]
58. Sewer assessments in McLaughlin Run Watershed: amends Section 3 of
Ord. No. 11-13-56C. [Ord. No. 4-15-58H]
59. Authorization for supplemental agreement between Municipal
Authority, Municipality of Bethel Park and Township of Snowden. [Ord.
No. 5-6-58A]
II-1 BETHEL PARK CODE II-1
1:1030
60. Sewer assessments in Catfish Run Watershed: amends Section 2 of Ord.
No. 6-18-57A. [Ord. No. 6-9-58B]
61. Sewer assessments in Piney Fork Watershed: amends Section 2 of Ord.
No. 6-18-57B. [Ord. No. 6-9-58C]
62. Sewer assessments in Piney Fork Watershed: amends Section 3 of Ord.
No. 2-11-57C. [Ord. No. 6-9-58D]
63. Sewer assessments in Piney Fork Watershed: amends Section 3 of Ord.
No. 2-11-57C. [Ord. No. 6-9-58E]
64. Like Run Watershed: approval of plans and estimates for construction
of sewage pumping station. [Ord. No. 6-25-58A]
65. Lick Run Watershed: approval of plans for construction of 10 inch
sewage force main to Catfish Run drainage area. [Ord. No. 6-25-58B]
66. Authorization for contract with South Pittsburgh Water Company to bill
water customers for sewage rentals. [Ord. No. 9-8-58C]
67. Authorization for Allegheny County Sanitary Authority to bill
Municipality of Bethel Park for sewage treatment service. [Ord. No.
10-20-58C]
68. Saw Mill Run, Painters Run and McLaughlin Run drainage areas:
approval of plans and estimates for construction of sewage facilities
designated in Contract J-1. [Ord. No. 12-2-58B]
69. Gardenville Road: authorization to Municipal Authority for construction
and repair of sewage facilities. [Ord. No. 5-11-59A]
70. Sewer construction estimates revised: amends Ord. No. 12-8-58B.
[Ord. No. 3-14-60B]
71. Ratification of first supplemental agreement of lease between
Municipal Authority, Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 9-10-62F]
72. Authorization for surrender agreement with Municipal Authority to
surrender supplemented agreement of lease and for leasing of
expanded sewage system. [Ord. No. 11-6-62A]
73. Authorization for condemnation of land for use as ten-foot storm sewer
easement through Lot No. 34 in Sherwood Plan No. 3. [Ord. No.
6-10-63]
74. Twin Oaks Manor Plan: acceptance of sanitary sewer of ninety-foot
length near Lot No. 6 of said Plan. [Ord. No. 11-11-63G]
75. Industrial Boulevard: acceptance of sanitary sewers along five (5)
courses. [Ord. No. 1-11-65D]
76. Colella, Fischer and Gatewood Manor Plan of Lots: acceptance of
sanitary and storm sewer facilities. [Ord. No. 6-14-65G]
II-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS II-1
1:1031
77. Pitt-Bethel Plan of Lots: acceptance of sanitary sewers. [Ord. No.
8-8-66B]
78. Authorization for condemnation of land for construction of a storm
sewer improvement in the vicinity of McPherson Avenue. [Ord. No.
8-24-70A]
79. Authorization for condemnation of land for construction of a storm
sewer improvement in the vicinity of Horning Road. [Ord. Nos.
8-24-70B; 4-12-71A]
80. Acceptance of an eight-inch sanitary sewer adjacent to the Park Hill
Plan of Lots No. 1 in the Borough of Bethel Park, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania. [Ord. No. 10-9-72B]
81. Acceptance of a sanitary sewer constructed through a plan of lots to be
known as Daleview Plan of Lots No. 4 and to be recorded as part of the
sewer system of the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 5-14-73E]
82. Acceptance of a sanitary sewer installed within the right-of-way of
McMurray Road servicing the Divine Charity Evangelical Lutheran
Church property. [Ord. No. 2-10-75B]
83. Acceptance of sanitary sewers along the northerly side of Kings School
Road and through lands of Boxer Heights No. 12, Inc., being Boxer
Heights Plan No. 12 as approved by the Municipal Council 8-8-75.
[Ord. No. 2-9-76F]
84. Acceptance of sanitary sewers situate in the Fisher Plan of Lots. [Ord.
No. 1-9-78A]
85. Acceptance of an easement, together with a sanitary sewer constructed
therein, situate in the Cedar Lands, Inc., Plan, and said land so
dedicated shall become a part of the sewer system of the Municipality
of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 10-9-78E]
86. Acceptance of an easement, together with a sanitary sewer constructed
therein, situate in the Industrial Park Plan No. 1-J, and said land so
dedicated shall become a part of the sewer system of the municipality of
Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 10-9-78D]
87. Acceptance of an extension of O'Neill Drive, fifty (50) feet wide, in
Beachwood Highlands Plan No. 1, together with easements with storm
and sanitary sewers constructed therein, all situate in said plan, and
said land so dedicated shall become a part of the sewer system of the
Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 10-9-78E]
88. Acceptance of easement, together with a sanitary sewer constructed
therein, beginning at a point on the easterly line of Lot No. 60 in the
Dashwood South Plan No. 1. [Ord. No. 10-8-79A]
II-1 BETHEL PARK CODE II-1
1:1032
89. Acceptance of easement, together with a storm sewer constructed
therein, beginning at a point on the northerly line of Lot No. 62 situate
in the Dashwood South Plan No. 1. [Ord. No. 10-8-79A]
90. Acceptance of easement, together with a sanitary sewer constructed
therein, and the land so dedicated shall become a part of the sewer
system of the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 11-19-79A]
91. Acceptance of easement, together with a sanitary sewer constructed
therein, beginning at a point, said point being located along the easterly
right-of-way line of McPherson Avenue, 50 feet wide, and also being the
property corner common to both Lot No. 3 of the Mary Kay Plan and Lot
No. 31 of the Library Acres Plan. [Ord. No. 11-19-79B]
92. Acceptance of easement beginning at a point located along the westerly
lot line of Lot NO. 407 and along the line of the now or former sixty-foot
right-of-way located in the Dashwood Estates Plan No. 4, and the land
so dedicated shall continue to be and become part of the sewer system
of the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 6-9-80D]
93. Acceptance of easement beginning at a point located at the
northeasterly corner of Lot No. 408 and on the now or former sixty-foot
right-of-way located in the Dashwood Estates Plan No.4, and the land so
dedicated shall continue to be and become part of the sewer system of
the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 6-9-80D]
94. Authorization for the municipality to incur lease rental debt in
connection with the Municipal Authority of Bethel's Capital Addition
No. 2 (upgrading of the sewage treatment plant of the Authority and
construction of additional sanitary sewers and drainage improvements
in various sections of the municipality] by entering into a second
supplemental agreement of lease with said Authority, consenting to the
assignment of the said lease and authorizing all filings required by Act.
No. 1978-52, the Local Government Unit Debt act, and the performing
of all actions necessary and proper under said Act. [Ord. No.
9-15-80A]
95. Adoption of a final balanced sewage budget in the amount of one million
three hundred four thousand nine hundred eighty-seven dollars
($1,304,987.). [Ord. No. 11-24-81B]
96. Authorization for the municipality to incur lease rental debt in
connection with the Municipal Authority of Bethel's Capital Addition
No. 2 by entering into a second supplemental agreement of lease with
said Authority, consenting to the assignment of said lease and
authorizing all filings required by Act. No. 1978-52, the Local
Government Unit Debt Act, as reenacted and amended, and the
performing of all actions necessary and proper under said Act. [Ord.
No. 12-14-81L]
II-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS II-1
1:1033
97. Acceptance of the dedication to public use of an eight-inch diameter
trunk line constructed within the dedicated easement areas shown on
the Laun Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 1-10-83E]
98. Acceptance of the dedication to public use of an eight-inch diameter
trunk line constructed in the Corradetti Plan of Lots. [Ord. No.
1-10-83F]
99. Acceptance of the dedication to public use of an eight-inch diameter
trunk line constructed to serve the Klammer Plan of Lots. [Ord. No.
6-10-85A]
100. Acceptance of the dedication to public use of trunk line sanitary sewers
and related appurtenances structures, as well as trunk line storm
sewers and their related appurtenant structures in the Bethel Crest
Plan No. 7. [Ord. No. 2-9-87B]
101. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewers easement by the
Abbeyville Condominium. [Ord. No. 5-9-88C]
102. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the Cummins
Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 12-12-88A]
103. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the Joseph
Yelich Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 5-8-89A]
104. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the Parcel "A,"
Resubdivision of the Industrial Park Master Plan. [Ord. No. 5-8-89B]
105. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the
Resubdivision No. 3, Parcel "A," of the Industrial Park Master Plan.
[Ord. No. 5-8-89C]
106. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the
Resubdivision No. 4, Parcel "A," of the Industrial Park Master Plan.
[Ord. No. 5-8-89D]
107. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the Kirshman
Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 5-8-89E]
108. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary sewer lines in the Dashwood
South Plan No. 5. [Ord. No. 6-11-90A]
109. Acceptance of the dedication of sanitary lines in the Grandview Farms
Plan for Lot Nos. 7, 8 and 9 only. [Ord. No. 1-13-92C]
110. Acceptance of trunk line sanitary sewer extension including
appurtenances which are situated in the Bethel Industrial Park Plan No.
3A and the Montour Railroad Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 6-8-92D]
111. Acceptance of stormwater detention area at Clifton and Rocky Ridge
Roads. [Ord. No. 8-10-92A]
II-1 BETHEL PARK CODE II-1
1:1034
112. Acceptance of stormwater management system in Dashwood South
Plan Nos. 2A, 4, 5 and 7. [Ord. No. 11-13-95C]
113. Acceptance of trunk line sanitary sewer improvements in the Kratsa
Properties Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 12-14-98B]
114. Acceptance of storm sewer and sanitary sewer improvement in the
Saddlebrook Farms Phase No. 2. [Ord. No. 12-14-98C]
115. Accepting Grandview Farms Place and storm sewer and sanitary sewer
improvements, with exceptions, located in the Grandview Farms Plan
No. 3, as part of the road, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems of
the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 11-8-99B]
116. Accepting Palomino Drive, Pinto Court and Saddlebrook Drive and
Storm Sewer and Sanitary Sewer improvements, with exceptions,
located in the Saddlebrook Farms Plan No. 3, as part of the road,
Sanitary Sewer and Storm Sewer System in the Municipality of Bethel
Park. [Ord. No. 12-11-00]
117. Accepting Great Rock Drive, Greenhaven Drive and Grand Ridge Road
and the storm sewer and sanitary sewer improvements constructed
therein for Dashwood South Plan No. 9. [Ord. No. 1-13-03]
118. Accepting an extension of Greenhaven Drive and the storm sewer and
sanitary sewer improvements constructed therein for Dashwood South
Plan No. 10. [Ord. No. 1-12-04A]
119. Accepting the sanitary sewer improvements within the public right-ofway
of Brush Run Road and within a sanitary sewer easement as
constructed by Scott M. and Julianne M. Klara. [Ord. No. 1-12-04B]
120. Accepting the revised rights-of-way or easements located within the
Dashwood South Plan No. 10 in the Municipality of Bethel Park as a
part of the sanitary and storm sewer system of the Municipality of
Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 5-10-04]
121. Accepting certain relocated sanitary sewers and appurtenant manholes
and storm sewers and appurtenant structures located in the Kraft
Development Corporation Plan along with any necessary easements
and rights-of-way appurtenant as public systems and parts of the storm
sewer and sanitary systems of the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord.
No. 11-8-04D]
122. Accepting off-site sanitary sewer extension improvements installed to
service the carwash facility as constructed by Smoker & Associates,
Inc. as part of the sanitary sewer system in the Municipality of Bethel
Park. [Ord. No. 9-11-06]
123. Acceptance of sanitary sewers and appurtenant manholes and storm
sewers and appurtenant manholes and street inlets, located in the
Hamilton Woods Plan as part of the sanitary sewer and storm sewer
system in the Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 12-11-06C]
II-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS II-1
1:1035
Part III
FRANCHISES AND MISCELLANEOUS LEGISLATION
III-1. Franchises and Miscellaneous Legislation.
1. West Penn Power Company franchise; pole inspection fee. [Ord. No.
13-2-50]
2. Bell Telephone Company franchise; provision for police and fire
communication wiring. [Ord. No. 22-1-50]
3. Duquesne Light Company franchise; provision for police and fire
communication wiring. [Ord. No. 8-13-62B]
4. Exchange of property with R. and A. Kiefer, Inc., property located in
Summit Park Plan of Lots. [Ord. No. 8-13-62B]
5. Municipal Building construction: authorization for standard architect
agreement with Kuhn, Newcomer and Valentour. [Ord. No. 6-14-65B]
6. Streetlighting agreement with West Penn Power Company. [Ord. No.
8-9-65]
7. Streetlighting agreement for 10 years with Duquesne Light Company.
[Ord. No. 2-14-66A]
8. Municipal Building construction: condemnation of property of P. and L.
Eisaman in Summit Park Plan No. 1 for site of public building. [Ord.
No. 3-14-66C]
9. Increase in bonded indebtedness: $600,000 in bonds for construction of
Municipal Building. [Ord. No. 10-10-66A]
10. Park land: condemnation of property of J. A. Lynch, Jr., situate along
Monongahela Avenue for parklet purposes. [Ord. No. 12-12-66D]
11. Application for funds to acquire land for open-space uses, pursuant to
Housing Act of 1961. [Ord. No. 8-12-68]
12. Application of Civil Rights Act compliance relating to the development
of open-space land to the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development. [Ord. No. 11-11-68H]
13. Recreation area: condemnation of property of Joseph Panichi and
Annunziata Panichi, his wife, and John Collins and Pasqua Collins, his
wife, situate on Church Road for the purpose of constructing a
recreation area. [Ord. No. 5-12-69E; amended by Ord. No.
6-8-70D]
14. Recreation area: condemnation of property of Bethel Baseball
Association situate on Main Street for the purpose of constructing a
recreation area. [Ord. No. 6-9-69]
II-1 BETHEL PARK CODE III-1
1:1036
15. Reapportionment: changing the present boundary lines of the wards
within the Municipality of Bethel Park and adding two additional wards,
bringing the total number of wards to nine. [Ord. No. 2-8-71D]
16. Bethel Park TV Cable Company, Inc., franchise: providing for the
distribution of audio and television impulses; imposing regulations,
terms and conditions thereof, regulating the charges therefor and
providing for indemnification of the municipality from loss arising from
any suits or damages. [Ord. No. 10-11-71A]
17. Public Library Association: recognizing and designating the Public
Library Association of the Municipality of Bethel Park as official agency
for providing library service. [Ord. No. 12-13-71D]
18. Government Study Commission: providing that the question. "Shall a
Government study Commission of nine members be elected to study the
Charter and form a government of the Municipality of Bethel Park,
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, to study and consider the advisability
of an optional form of government and to recommend whether or not an
optional plan of government should be adopted?" be submitted to the
electors. [Ord. No. 6-22-72A]
19. Agreement to form and become a member of the South Hills Area
Council of Governments. [Ord. No. 9-10-73B]
20. Election authorized to determine whether a Government Study
Commission of nine members shall be elected to study the Charter and
form a government of the municipality, to study and consider the
adoption of a Home Rule Charter, and to recommend whether this form
of government should be adopted. [Ord. No. 2-11-74D]
21. Authorization to increase indebtedness by $150,000 for the purpose of
constructing a fire station on Clifton Road. [Ord. No. 5-10-76D]
22. Acceptance of a reappointment plan for the municipality as required by
the Municipal Reappointment Act 53 P.S. § 11601 et seq., and adoption
of official ward map. [Ord. No. 12-14-81K]
23. Amending the Reapportionment Ordinance adopted as Ord. No.
12-14-81K by changing the ward lines between Wards 7 and 3. [Ord.
No. 2-8-82A]
24. Authorization of certain municipal officials to enter into trust as a
settler with the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust on
behalf of the municipality. [Ord. No. 12-13-82A]
25. Authorization to contract with the Public Library Association of the
Municipality of Bethel Park. [Ord. No. 4-8-63B, amended by Ord.
No. 4-8-85A]
26. Ratification to discontinue the Bethel Park Youth Advisory Program.
[Ord. No. 7-11-83A]
III-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS III-1
1:1037
27. Adoption of annual budgets. [Ord. Nos. 11-23-84A and 11-27-85A]
28. Bethel Park TV Cable TV Company, franchise: provides for renewal of
those companies' present nonexclusive cable television franchise for an
additional term of 15 years.
29. Adoption of 1988 annual budgets. [Ord. No. 11-30-87A]
30. Authorization to join with other governmental units as a settlor of
PLGIT Investment Trust A, PLGIT Investment B and PLGIT Investment
Trust C; authorizing the Municipality of Bethel Park to purchase and
redeem shares in such trusts; designating the trusts as official
custodians; and making certain determinations. [Ord. No. 11-14-88A]
31. Adoption of 1989 annual budgets. [Ord. No. 11-30-88A]
32. Adoption of 1990 annual budgets. [Ord. No. 11-13-89A]
33. Authorization to incur lease rental debt in an amount not to exceed
$4,405,000 by guaranteeing two series of bonds in that amount to be
issued by Municipal Authority of the Borough of Bethel for the purpose
of undertaking the Authority's 1990 Capital Project and 1990 Refund
Project and agreeing to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds;
approving the form of guaranty; authorizing other necessary and
proper action and repealing inconsistent ordinance and resolutions.
[Ord. No. 5-9-90A]
34. Authorization to participate in the Pennsylvania Municipal Investment
Program. [Ord. No. 7-8-91B]
35. Adoption of 1992 annual budget. [Ord. No. 11-12-91A]
36. Amendment of 1992 annual budget. [Ord. No. 12-18-91A]
37. Adoption of the Modified Reapportionment Plan. [Ord. No. 7-13-92A]
38. Authorization for participation in the Municipal Risk Management
(MRM) Workers' Compensation pooled trust. [Ord. No. 6-8-92A]
39. Authorization of officers of the Municipality of Bethel Park to enter into
certain agreements and establishing procedures for the Police
Department of each municipality designated thereafter to render and
aid and assistance to one another. [Ord. No. 9-14-92B]
40. Adoption of the 1993 annual budget. [Ord. No. 12-14-92B]
41. Adoption of 1994 annual budget [Ord. No. 11-29-93A]
42. Authorization to participate as a member in the State Treasurer's'
INVEST Program for local governments ("INVEST") for the purpose of
purchasing and redeeming shares of INVEST ("INVEST shares"). [Ord.
No. 10-3-94B]
43. Adoption of 1995 budget. [Ord. No. 11-30-94A]
III-1 BETHEL PARK CODE III-1
1:1038
44. Establishment of a budgetary reserve account in the general fund,
pursuant to Section 3156-B of Act No. 77 of 1993, and authorization of
the use of these funds in the event of unanticipated fiscal emergencies.
[Ord. No. 11-30-94F]
45. Authorization to participate as a member in the State Treasurers'
INVEST Program for local governments ("INVEST") for the purpose of
purchasing and redeeming shares of INVEST ("INVEST shares"). [Ord.
No. 4-10-94A]
46. Adoption of the 1996 budget. [Ord. No. 11-29-95C]
47. Establishment and maintenance of township employees pension,
annuity, insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain
provisions of the pension plan or program applicable to police of said
municipality and to restate in its entirety such pension plan or program.
[Ord. No. 5-13-96B]
48. Establishment and maintenance of municipal employees pension,
annuity, insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain
provisions of the pension plan or program applicable to employees of
said municipality and to restate in its entirety such pension plan or
program. [Ord. No. 6-10-96A]
49. An ordinance proposing a change in the Home Rule Charter to provide
that pension benefits for police employees shall not exceed those
permitted by Act 600 and authorizing a referendum of the voters of the
municipality with respect to this proposed Charter changes. [Ord. No.
6-17-96A]
50. Authorization to purchase general obligation serial notes to buy the
Guttmann property. [Ord. No. 6-17-96B]
51. Authorization of interim reassessment of real property improved after
the beginning of the calendar year. [Ord. No. 8-12-96B]
52. Adoption of the 1997 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 12-2-96B]
53. Authorization to purchase general obligation serial notes for the Oxford
Transportation District. [Ord. No. 12-9-96A; repealed by Ord. No.
4-14-97A]
54. Establishment and maintenance of employees pension, annuity,
insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain provisions of the
pension plan or program applicable to the employees of the
municipality. [Ord. No. 3-10-97A]
55. Adoption of 1998 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-24-97C]
56. An ordinance amended Article 12, Sections 1203B, 1206A and 1207B,
of the Home Rule Charter and authorizing a referendum of the voters
with respect to the proposed Charter changes. [Ord. No. 4-13-98A]
III-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS III-1
1:1039
57. Authorization to incur lease rental debt. [Ord. No. 9-10-98]
58. Adoption of 1999 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-9-98C]
59. Establishment and maintenance of employees pension, annuity,
insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain provisions of the
pension plan or program applicable to the employees of the
municipality. [Ord. No. 1-11-99A]
60. Adoption of 2000 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-22-99C]
61. Establishment and maintenance of employees pension, annuity
insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain provisions of the
pension plan or program applicable to the employees of said
municipality to eliminate employer contributions for the year 2000.
[Ord. No. 2-14-00]
62. Authorizing the condemnation of certain property located within the
Municipality of Bethel Park to aid in the creation of a flood protection
project. [Ord. No. 8-28-00]
63. Establishment and maintenance of employees pension, annuity,
insurance and benefit fund or funds, to amend certain provisions of the
pension plan or program applicable to the police employees of said
municipality. [Ord. No. 10-9-00]
64. Transfer of real property owned by the municipality and located at 5400
Elm Street. [Ord. No. 2-12-01A]
65. Authorizing the condemnation of property located at Glenrock Drive
within the Municipality. [Ord. No. 10-08-01B]
66. Police Pension Plan reduction of the contribution rate to 0.5% of
compensation for 2002. [Ord. No. 10-08-01A]
67. Adoption of 2002 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-12-01D]
68. Adoption of reapportionment plan. [Ord. No. 7-8-02]
69. Adoption of 2004 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-10-03C]
70. Adoption of 2005 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-8-04B]
71. Adoption of 2006 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-14-05E]
72. Adoption of 2007 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-13-06E]
73. Adoption 2008 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-12-07B]
74. Authorizing the Municipality to incur lease rental debt for the purpose
of the current refunding of a portion of the outstanding guaranteed
sewer revenue bonds. [Ord. No. 6-9-08A]
75. Adoption of 2009 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-10-08D]
III-1 BETHEL PARK CODE III-1
1:1040
76. Designation of Open Records Officer and provision of posting of
information pertaining to requests of public records at the Municipal
Building and on the Municipality's website. [Res. No. R-11-10-08]
77. Adoption of 2010 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-9-09B]
78. Adoption of 2011 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-8-10C]
79. Authorization of execution of cable franchise agreement between the
Municipality and Comcast of California/Pennsylvania/Utah/Washington,
Inc. [Ord. No. 9-26-11]
80. Adoption of 2012 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-14-11C]
81. Adoption of reapportionment plan. [Ord. No. 2-13-12]
82. Authorizing the Municipality to incur lease rental debt for the purpose
of the current refunding of a portion of the outstanding guaranteed
sewer revenue bonds. [Ord. No. 4-9-12]
83. Adoption of final balanced budget for 2012. [Ord. No. 11-12-12D]
84. Initiating a referendum to amend Section 47.6-604 of the Home Rule
Charter to include an annual appropriation of revenue to the Bethel
Park Volunteer Fire Company. [Ord. No. 2-11-13]
85. Authorizing the Municipality to incur lease rental debt. [Ord. No.
5-23-13]
86. Authorizing the Municipality to incur nonelectoral debt for a fire
station. [Ord. No. 10-14-13]
87. Adoption of the 2014 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-11-13B]
88. Authorizing the conveyance of real property from the Bethel Park
Volunteer Fire Company to the Municipality. [Ord. No. 12-9-13C]
89. Authorizing the sale of property. [Ord. No. 3-10-14B]
90. Amendment of the Police Pension Plan. [Ord. No. 5-12-14A]
91. Amendment of the Non-Police Employees Pension Plan. [Ord. No.
5-12-14B]
92. Adoption of the 2015 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-10-14B]
93. Initiating a referendum to amend Article VI of the Home Rule Charter to
require that the Chief of Police of the Municipality be directly
responsible to the Municipal Manager. [Ord. No. 4-13-15]
94. Adoption of the 2016 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-9-15C]
95. Authorizing the Municipality to incur nonelectoral debt for a refunding
project. [Ord. No. 1-25-16]
III-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS III-1
1:1041
Part IV
ZONING MAP CHANGES
IV-1. Zoning Map Changes.
96. Authorizing the Municipality to incur nonelectoral debt for a refunding
project. [Ord. No. 10-10-16A]
97. Approving amendments to the Rules and Regulations of the Civil
Service Commission. [Ord. No. 10-10-16C]
98. Enacting the 2017 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-14-16A]
99. Initiating a referendum to amend the Home Rule Charter. [Ord. No.
4-10-17A]
100. Authorizing the Municipality to incur lease rental debt. [Ord. No.
9-25-17]
101. Authorizing the purchase of property on Country Road. [Ord. No.
10-9-17]
102. Enacting the 2018 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-13-17A]
103. Authorizing the Municipality to incur nonelectoral debt for a refunding
project. [Ord. No. 11-13-17C]
104. Initiating a referendum to amend the Home Rule Charter. [Ord. No.
6-11-18]
105. Authorizing the purchase of property on West Library Avenue. [Ord.
No. 10-8-18A]
106. Enacting the 2019 municipal budget. [Ord. No. 11-12-18B]
107. Initiating a referendum to amend the Home Rule Charter. [Ord. No.
6-10-19A]
108. Increasing the indebtedness of the Municipality by the issue of a
general obligation note. [Ord. No. 6-10-19B]
109. Authorizing the Municipality to incur lease rental debt. [Ord. No.
7-8-19]
1. Special use exception for property situate at Route 88 and Rosebank
Drive: nursing or convalescent home by D. and G. Rauch. [Ord. No.
2-13-67A]
2. Transfer of property of J. George bounded by Breezewood Manor Plan
of Lots and N. Levitske property from Classification R-3 Residential to
C-2 Commercial. [Ord. No. 5-8-67A]
III-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1042
3. Transfer of property bounded by Route 88 on the west. A. Reid property
on the north. Auburn Avenue on the east and Monroe Street on the
south from Classification R-3 Residential to R-5 Residential. [Ord. No.
5-8-67B]
4. Transfer of property bounded by lands of V. Maitland; St. Thomas More
Church, Pittsburgh, Canonsburg and Washington Railways; and E. and
P. Donati from Classification R-1 Residential to C-3 Professional Service.
[Ord. No. 5-8-67C]
5. Special use exception for property situate along Irishtown Road:
nursing or convalescent home by Crestview Land Company. [Ord. No.
6-12-67A]
6. Transfer of property bounded by Rhodes Avenue, Library Road and
other properties from Classification R-3 Residential to C-2 Commercial.
[Ord. No. 7-10-67B]
7. Transfer of property bounded by Library-Clifton Road, Marvle Valley
Drive and other properties from Classification R-2 Residential to R-3
Residential. [Ord. No. 7-10-67C]
8. Transfer of property bounded by St. Thomas More Church, Pittsburgh,
Canonsburg and Washington Railways and other properties from
Classifications R-1 and R-3 to C-3 Commercial. [Ord. No. 12-11-67A]
9. Special use exception for property of Pittsburgh National School of
Instrumentology situate on Library Road. [Ord. No. 5-13-68A]
10. Transfer of property of Seach Construction Company in Higbee Drive-
Baptist Road area from Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential.
[Ord. No. 7-8-68A]
11. Transfer of property of Highland Enterprises, Inc. in Cypress Drive area
from Classification R-1 Residential to R-3 Residential. [Ord. No.
9-9-68A]
12. Transfer of property of Tennyson Enterprises, Inc. in the vicinity of
Abbeyville Drive and Sprucewood Drive from Classification R-3 and R-4
Residential to R-5 Residential. [Ord. No. 10-14-68A]
13. Transfer of property bounded by Plantation Place No. 1, property now
or formerly of M. M. Hamilton, King's School Road: property now or
formerly of T. T. Wagner and by land of Southboro Homes, Inc., from
Classification R-1 Residential to R-2 Residential. [Ord. No.
10-14-68B]
14. Transfer of property bounded by property line of Lot 37 in Oak Grove
Plan of Lots, Lot 101 in Carras Plan of lots, property now or formerly of
Port Authority of Allegheny County; property now or formerly of H. S.
Hartman, Jr., property line of lot 15 in Clark Plan; property now or
formerly of G. P. Mitchell and Lot 1 in Gatewood Manor Plan No. 1 from
Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord. No. 4-14-69A]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1043
15. Transfer of property bounded by Library Road, property now or
formerly of Kraft Development Corporation and Levitske Brothers;
property now or formerly of W. F. Robertson; property now or formerly
of J. C. Wingard, Paul S. Kors and the Montour Railroad right-of-way
from Classification C-2 Commercial to R-5 Residential. [Ord. No.
5-12-69A]
16. Special use exception for property of Lena Knaus Peltzer situate at Park
Avenue and South Park Road: school for retarded children. [Ord. No.
7-14-69A]
17. Transfer of property bounded by Churchill Road, property now or
formerly of F. C. A. Gould; property now or formerly of Peters Creek
Regular Baptist Church; property now or formerly of F. J. LeMoyne;
right-of-way line of the Montour Railroad, Library Branch and property
now or formerly of Bontempo, from Classification R-2 Residential to R-5
Residential. [Ord. No. 8-11-69C]
18. Transfer of property situate on Fort Couch Road; property of Mrs.
Elanor Codispot and St. Thomas More Church, from Classification R-1
Residential and C-2 Commercial to C-3 Professional Service. [Ord. No.
8-20-69A]
19. Transfer of property bounded by Sylvan Drive, Brookside Farms Plan,
Walter Way; property now or formerly of J. R. Fox, Lot No. 28 of the
Drakeside Plan No. 3; property now or formerly of J. R. Hyatt, Bethel
Church Road and Woodford Road from Classification R-1 Residential to
R-2 Residential. [Ord. No. 1-12-70A]
20. Transfer of property bounded by Higbee Drive; property now or
formerly of Kraft Development Corporation; property now or formerly
of R. Nicholson; property now or formerly of D. Giarusso; property now
or formerly of A. Janolewski, from Classification R-3 Residential to C-3
Professional Service and from R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord.
No. 3-9-70A]
21. Transfer of property bounded by Library Avenue and Lots Nos. 18, 19,
23, 24, 25 and 26 in the Clark Place Plan of Lots; property of W. E.
Leopold, from Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord.
No. 6-12-70A]
22. Transfer of property bounded by Koeffler Street, Hamilton Road,
municipal line of Baldwin Borough and municipal line of Whitehall
Borough; form Classification R-1 Residential to R-2 Residential. [Ord.
No. 7-13-70B]
23. Transfer of property bounded by Lots Nos. 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18 and
19 in the Clark Plan of Lots; property of Van Car Corporation, from
Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord. No. 9-14-70A]
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1044
24. Transfer of property bounded by Cherry Street, Elm Street and land
now or formerly of Ebony Civic Club; property of Ebony Civic Club, from
Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord. No. 9-14-70B]
25. Transfer of property — Parcel 1 — bounded by South Park Road, L. R.
02063; property now or formerly of Bethel Park School Authority; Lots
Nos. 31, 32, 33, and 34 of J. Warren Lytle Plan of Lots; property now or
formerly of H. C. Byer; property now or formerly of R. C. Rusciolelli,
from Classification R-1 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord. No.
9-13-71B]
26. Transfer of property — Parcel 8 — bounded by Library Road (T. R. 88 -
L.R. 247); Brightwood Road; Lots Nos. 146 through 140 in the Summit
Park No. 2 Plan of Lots; the north part of Lot 153 in said plan; and
Munroe Street, from Classification R-3 Residential to R-4 Residential.
[Ord. No. 9-13-71B]
27. Transfer of property — Parcel 10 — bounded by lands of the Port
Authority of Allegheny County (formerly Pittsburgh Railways
Company); lands now or formerly of Valley Cleaning Company; Lots
Nos. 28 and 29 in the Town and County Site Plan of Lots; Lots Nos. 4, 3,
2 and 1 in the Croco Plan of Lots; Lots Nos. 46, 47, 48, 51, 1, 2, 3, 25,
24, 23, 22, 21 and 20 in the Clark Plan of Lots; lands now or formerly of
Armbruster Development Corp. from Classification R-3 Residential to
R-4 Residential. [Ord. No. 9-13-71B]
28. Transfer of property — Parcel 20A — bounded by Library Road (T. R. 88
Pa. L. R. 247); lands now or formerly of Boron Oil Company; lands now
or formerly of D. D. Dunkle; lands now or formerly of R. V. Stolze; Lot
NO. 17 in the Bethel Ridge Manor No. 1 Plan of Lots; Lots Nos. 26
through 31 in the Bethel Ridge Manor No. 2 Plan of Lots; Lots Nos. 36
through 43 in the Bethel Ridge Manor No. 3 Plan of lots; Lots Nos. 84
through 88 in the Bethel Ridge Manor No. 6 Plan of Lots; lands now or
formerly of J. C. Husler, T. C. Nestelske, and D. J. Seman (formerly E.
Harris), from Classification R-2 Residential to R-4 Residential. [Ord.
No. 9-13-71B]
29. Transfer of property — that parcel of ground situate in the Municipality
of Bethel Park, County of Allegheny, and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, being more particularly bounded and described as
follows: Beginning at the southwesterly corner of the property leased
by the Brookside Lumber Company and presently zoned MLI, said point
of beginning being south 84 15' west, 50 feet from the northwesterly
corner of property now or formerly of Helen R. Edwards; thence from
said point of beginning, south 84 15' west, 30 feet to a point; thence
north 5 45' west, 660 feet to a point; thence north 84 15' east, 30 feet to
the existing property leased by Brookside Lumber Company, zoned
MLI; thence along the existing MLI zoned district, south 5 45' east, 660
feet to the place of beginning be rezoned and reclassified from Zoning
Classification R-3 to Zoning Classification MLI. [Ord. No. 8-14-72A]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1045
30. Transfer of property — that parcel of ground situate in the Municipality
of Bethel Park, County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a point
on the southeasterly side of Ruthfred Acres Plan No. 7, as recorded in
the Recorder's Office of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, in Plan Book
Volume 40, pages 32-35, said point being located along the
southeasterly side of Ruthfred Acres Plan No. 7, north 49 38' east, a
distance of 209.35 feet from the center line of Cyprus drive, 50 feet
wide, as shown in said Ruthfred Acres Plan No. 7 and on the dividing
line of said plan and lands nor or late of W. A. Maroney and Edith
Maroney, his wife; thence from said point of beginning along the
southeasterly side of Ruthfred Acres Plan NO. 7, north 49 38' east, a
distance of 211.39 feet to a point in Drake Road; thence by a line
through Drake Road, south 37 0' east, a distance of 260 feet to a point
in Drake Road, said point begin on the dividing line of land herein
described and lands now or late of A. R. Brown; thence along said
dividing line, south 49 38' west, a distance of 211.39 feet to a pin on the
line dividing land herein described and lands now or late of W. A.
Maroney and Edith Maroney, his wife,; thence along said dividing line,
north 37 0' west, a distance of 260 feet to a point at the place of
beginning be rezoned and reclassified from Zoning Classification R-1 to
Zoning R-3. [Ord. No. 9-11-72A]
31. Transfer of certain property of B. Bercik from Zoning Classification R-2
to R-4, said property to be transferred being bounded by the right-ofway
of the Montour Railroad, the Municipality of Bethel Park-South
Park Township dividing line and the Allegheny and Washington County
line. [Ord. No. 10-9-72]
32. Transfer of certain property of the Andrews Agency and F. A. Ochiuto
from Zoning Classification R-2 to Zoning Classification R-4, and
property to be transferred being bounded by Pennsylvania Legislative
Route NO. 247 (Route No. 88), lands of Eileen Letchworth and Thomas
R. Porter, the dividing line between South Park Township and the
Municipality of Bethel Park, lands of T. A. Carberry, Helen Street in
South Park Township, the right-of-way of the Allegheny County Port
Authority and Library Road, containing seven and twenty-five
hundredths (7.25) acres, more or less. [Ord. No. 2-12-73B]
33. Creation of R-T Townhouse Dwelling District area. [Ord. No. 7-9-73A;
amended by Ord. No. 2-10-75A]
34. Transfer of certain properties at Hamilton Road and Baptist Road from
Zoning Classification C-2 to C-3. [Ord. No. 2-11-74A]
35. Transfer or property occupied by multiple-store apartments designated
as the Dorchester Apartments, located east of Fort Couch Road, west of
the Port Authority street railway line and south of the Pathfinder
School, from Zoning Classification C-3 to R-5. [Ord. No. 3-11-74B]
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1046
36. Transfer of certain property known as the Hiscott Parcel from Zoning
Classification R-1 to Zoning Classification R-3, said property to be
transferred being located to; the southeast of No. 51 Ruthfred Drive,
being Parcel A in the Hiscott Plan of Lots as recorded in Plan Book
Volume 85, pages 153 and 154, and an adjoining parcel to the
southwest. [Ord. No. 5-13-74A]
37. Approving an application for the erection of a fire station of Clifton-
Library Road as a special use exception in the R-2 District. [Ord. No.
2-24-75A]
38. Transfer of certain parcel of land from Zoning Classification R-2 to
Zoning Classification R-3, said parcel of land to be transferred being
located on the easterly and southerly side of Kings School Road,
approximately one-half (1/2) mile north of Clifton Road. [Ord. No.
5-28-75A]
39. Transfer of certain property known as the Boyer Parcel from Zoning
Classification R-2 to Zoning Classification R-T, said property to be
transferred being located south of the intersection of Kings School
Road West with Clifton Road, and certain adjoining parcels. [Ord. No.
11-10-75A; repealed by Ord. No. 3-22-76A]
40. Transfer of certain property of the Pittsburgh terminal Corporation
from Zoning Classifications R-3 to C-3, known as Parcel A; from C-3 to
C-2, known as Parcel B; from R-3 to C-3, known as Parcel C; and from
C-3 to R-3, known as Parcel D. [Ord. No. 3-8-76C]
41. Transfer of certain property of H. R. Edwards from Zoning
Classification R-3 to Zoning Classification MLI, said property to be
transferred being approximately six hundred thirty-five (635) feet in
length on the westerly side of Logan Road, land now or formerly
occupied by Brookside Lumber Company. [Ord. No. 3-8-76C]
42. Repealing Ord. No. 11-10-75A in its entirety. Transfer of certain
property known as the Boyer Parcel from Zoning Classification R-2 to
Zoning Classification R-T, said property to be transferred being located
south of the intersection of Kings School Road West with Clifton Road
and certain adjoining parcels. [Ord. No. 3-22-76A]
43. Transfer of certain property known as the DeMarchi Parcel from Zoning
Classification MLI to Zoning Classification C-2, said property to be
transferred being approximately two and five-tenths (2.5) acres of land
located on the southerly side of DeMarchi drive and east of the right-ofway
line of the Norfolk and Western Railway Company. [Ord. No.
4-12-76B]
44. Transfer of certain property from Zoning Classification C-3 to Zoning
Classification C-2, said property to be transferred being situate at the
northerly corner of Washington Road and North Highland Road. [Ord.
No. 8-19-76A]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1047
45. Transfer of property situate to the west of Clifton Road between
McMurray Road and the Montour Railroad from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-1. [Ord. No. 10-11-76A]
46. Transfer of property situate to the south of the Municipality's Miners
Memorial Park and the Pittsburgh Western Land Company's Industrial
Park from Zoning Classification R-3 to R-T. [Ord. No. 11-15-76B]
47. Transfer of property bounded by Lytle Road, South Applegate Avenue
and Applegate Avenue from Zoning Classifications R-1 and C-2 to R-2.
[Ord. No. 4-11-77A]
48. Transfer of approximately 37 acres near Christ Methodist Church from
Zoning Classifications R-5 and C-3 to C-2; approximately 11 acres near
Christ Methodist Church from Zoning Classifications R-5 and R-2 to
C-3; and approximately 12 acres near St. Thomas More Church from
Zoning Classification R-2 to R-5. [Ord. No. 10-10-77A]
49. Transfer of certain property near Library Road and Kings School Road
from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-1. [Ord. No. 10-17-77B]
50. Transfer of certain property known as 5317 Brightwood Road from
Zoning Classification R-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 12-12-77A]
51. Transfer of certain property at the intersection of Thomwood Drive and
Chessbriar Drive from Zoning Classification R-1 to R-2. [Ord. No.
10-9-78A]
52. Transfer of certain property at the intersection of South Park Road and
Church Road from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-2. [Ord. No.
10-9-78B]
53. Transfer of certain property, being Lot Nos. 24, 25 and 26 in a plan of
lots known as "Hillcrest," from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-1. [Ord.
No. 2-12-79C]
54. Transfer of certain property, being Lot Nos. 27 and 28 in a plan of lots
known as "Hillcrest," from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-1. [Ord. No.
2-12-79C]
55. Transfer of property bounded in part by Lot 317 of the Winfred Manor
Plan of Lots No. 3; property now or formerly owned by Edward
Courtney; and South Park Road from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-2.
[Ord. No. 2-12-79A]
56. Transfer of property bounded in part by Lots 314, 315 and 316 of the
Winfred Manor Plan of Lots No. 3; lands now or formerly owned by
Stanley Dulemba; South Park Road; and lands now or formerly owned
by Edward Courtney from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-2. [Ord. No.
2-12-79A]
57. Transfer of property bounded by Fort Couch Road; lands now or
formerly owned by H. M. Campbell; lands now or formerly owned by the
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1048
Freehold Real Estate Company; lands now or formerly of Ettore
Fontana; and lands now or formerly of S. Codispoti and H. T. Freyvogel
from Zoning Classification R-1 to R-4. [Ord. No. 2-12-79D]
58. Transfer of property bounded by Kings School Road; land now or
formerly owned by Fopico, Inc.; Boxer Heights Plan No. 14; and Boxer
Drive from Zoning Classification R-2 to R-3. [Ord. No. 4-9-79B]
59. Creation of CD Conservation District area. [Ord. No. 10-8-79B]
60. Transfer of certain property situate on McMurray Road from Zoning
Classification R-1 to C-3. [Ord. No. 1-14-80A]
61. Transfer of certain property situate on the southerly side of library
Road from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 1-14-80C]
62. Transfer of certain property, being all of Lot No. 10 and part of Lot No.
51 in the Plan of Lots No. 2, from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-3. [Ord.
No. 6-9-80B]
63. Transfer of certain property on Brightwood Road from Zoning
Classification R-3 to R-4. [Ord. No. 9-15-80B]
64. Transfer of certain properties on Baptist Road from Zoning
Classifications R-4, R-3, C-2 and C-3 to R-4 and from Zoning
Classifications C-3 and R-4 to C-2. [Ord. No. 7-13-81A]
65. Transfer of certain property on North Highland Road from Zoning
Classification R-4 to C-3. [Ord. No. 7-13-81B]
66. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
C-1 to C-2. [Ord. No. 10-12-81]
67. Transfer of certain property on Fort Couch Road from Zoning
Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 2-8-82D]
68. Transfer of certain property on the east side of the intersection of
McMurray Road and Clifton-Library Road from Zoning Classification
C-1 to C-2. [Ord. No. 4-12-82B]
69. Transfer of certain property on Broughton Road from Zoning
Classification R-3 to C-1. [Ord. No. 4-12-82D]
70. Transfer of certain property at Washington Road and Old Highland
Road from Zoning Classification R-3 to C-3. [Ord. No. 5-10-82B]
71. Transfer of certain property on Donati Road from Zoning Classification
C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 9-13-82B]
72. Transfer of certain property on Logan Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to R-T. [Ord. No. 11-8-82A]
73. Transfer of certain property on Fort Couch Road from Zoning
Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 11-8-82B]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1049
74. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to R-4. [Ord. No. 11-8-82C]
75. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-1 and R-T. [Ord. No. 12-13-82C]
76. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-4. [Ord. No. 6-13-83F]
77. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
R-2 to R-4. [Ord. No. 11-14-83D]
78. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-4. [Ord. No. 11-14-83D]
79. Transfer of certain property northwest of center line intersection of
West Library avenue and South Park Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 11-14-83E]
80. Transfer of certain property southwest of intersection of Brightwood
Road and Library Road from Zoning Classification R-5 to C-2. [Ord. No.
11-14-83F]
81. Transfer of certain property on Brightwood Road from Zoning
Classification R-3 to R-4. [Ord. No. 2-13-84E]
82. Transfer of certain property on Donati Road from Zoning Classification
C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 5-14-84E]
83. Transfer of certain property on Library Road from Zoning Classification
C-1 to C-2. [Ord. No. 5-14-84F]
84. Transfer of certain property on South Park Road from Zoning
Classification R-2 to C-2. [Ord. No. 8-13-84C]
85. Transfer of certain property on Bethel Green Drive, Murdock Avenue
and Wallace Avenue from Zoning Classification R-1 to R-3. [Ord. No.
10-8-84A]
86. Transfer of certain property on Wellsview Road from Zoning
Classification R-5 to R-3. [Ord. No. 2-11-85B]
87. Transfer of certain property on Brightwood Road from Zoning
Classification R-3 to R-T. [Ord. No. 2-11-85C]
88. Transfer of certain property on Logan Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to R-T. [Ord. No. 2-11-85D]
89. Transfer of certain property on Milford Drive from Zoning Classification
MLI to R-3. [Ord. No. 2-11-85E]
90. Transfer of certain property on Highland Road from Zoning
Classification R-2 to R-T. [Ord. No. 9-9-85A]
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1050
91. Transfer of certain property on the proposed extension of Alicia Drive
from Zoning Classification R-2 to R-T, from Zoning Classification R-2 to
C-3 and from Zoning Classification R-2 to C-D. [Ord. No. 9-9-85B]
92. Transfer of certain property on Baptist Road from Zoning Classification
R-3 to C-2, from Zoning Classification R-3 to R-T and from Zoning
Classification M to C-2. [Ord. No. 1-13-86A]
93. Transfer of certain property on Baptist Road and DeMarchi Drive from
Zoning Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 9-8-86A]
94. Transfer of certain property on Baptist Road from Zoning Classification
M to R-3. [Ord. No. 12-8-86A]
95. Transfer of certain property on Homing Road from Zoning
Classification M to R-T. [Ord. No. 12-8-86B]
96. Transfer of certain property on Clifton Road from Zoning Classification
R-2 to C-4. [Ord. No. 12-8-86C]
97. Transfer of certain property on Broughton Road and Paxton Drive from
Zoning Classification R-3 to C-4. [Ord. No. 12-8-86D]
98. Transfer of certain property on Baptist Road from Zoning Classification
M to C-3. [Ord. No. 1-12-87C]
99. Transfer of certain property on McMurray Road from Zoning
Classification M to C-1 and from Zoning Classification M to R-3. [Ord.
No. 1-12-87D]
100. Transfer of certain property on Lytle Road from Zoning Classification
R-2 to C-4. [Ord. No. 2-9-87A]
101. Transfer of certain property on Oxford Drive from Zoning Classification
R-2 to C-2 and from Zoning Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No.
4-13-87E]
102. Transfer of certain property on Oxford Drive from Zoning Classification
R-4 to C-4. [Ord. No. 4-13-87F]
103. Transfer of certain property on Lytle Road from Zoning Classification
R-2 to C-4. [Ord. No. 2-9-87A]
104. Transfer of certain property on Alicia Drive and Oxford Drive from
Classification R-2 to C-2 and by transferring certain property from
Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord. No. 4-13-87E]
105. Transfer of certain property on Oxford Drive from Classification R-4 to
Classification C-3. [Ord. No. 4-13-87E]
106. Transfer of certain property on Wellsview Road from Classification R-3
to Classification R-5. [Ord. No. 11-9-87A]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1051
107. Transfer of certain property on Logan Road from Classification R-3 to
Classification R-5. [Ord. No. 4-11-88C]
108. Transfer of certain property on Highland Road from Classification C-3
to Classification R-5. [Ord. No. 4-11-88D]
109. Transfer of certain property on Industrial Boulevard Extension from
Classification C-2 to MLI. [Ord. No. 6-13-88A]
110. Transfer of certain property on Valley Drive from Classification R-3 to
Classification R-T. [Ord. No. 6-13-88E]
111. Transfer of certain property on Baptist Road from Classification C-3 to
Classification C-2. [Ord. No. 7-11-88B]
112. Transfer of certain property on Logan Road from Classification R-3 to
Classification MLI. [Ord. No. 7-11-88C]
113. Transfer of certain property on South Park Road, Logan Road,
Broughton Road and Brightwood Road to be included in the Highway
Overlay Zone.
114. Transfer of certain property on Bertha Street from Classification R-3 to
Classification C-2. [Ord. No. 8-8-88A]
115. Transfer of property on South Park Road from Classification R-3 to C-1.
[Ord. No. 10-10-88A]
116. Transfer of certain property on 7003 Baptist Road from Classification
R-3 to Classification R-4 and Classification of R-3 to Classification R-5.
[Ord. No. 7-10-89A]
117. Transfer of certain property on 5621 Library Road from Classification
R-3 to Classification R-4. [Ord. No. 7-10-89C]
118. Transfer of certain property at South Park and McMurray Road from
Classification R-3 to Classification C-1. [Ord. No. 10-9-89A]
119. Transfer of certain property on Park Avenue from Classification R-1 to
Classification C-4. [Ord. No. 109-89D; repealed by court order]
120. Transfer of certain property on Broughton Road from Classifications
R-1 and R-3 to Classification R-4. [Ord. No. 11-13-89C]
121. Transfer of certain property at 5717 Library Road from Classification
R-3 to Classification R-T. [Ord. No. 7-8-91D]
122. Transfer of certain property at 5727 and 5729 Library Road from
Classification R-T to C-4. [Ord. No. 12-16-91A]
123. Transfer of certain property at 3000 Alicia Drive from Classification R-4
to Classification C-3. [Ord. No. 12-16-91B]
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1052
124. Transfer of certain property at intersection of Bethel Church Road and
Library Road from Classification R-4 to Classification C-1. [Ord. No.
12-16-91C]
125. Transfer of certain property at 414 McMurray Road from Zoning
Classification R-3 to C-1. [Ord. No. 9-30-92A]
126. Transfer of certain property at 11 Fort Couch Road from Classification
C-1 to R-3 [Ord. No. 12-14-92A]
127. Transfer of certain property on Bethel Church Road (across from
Bethel Presbyterian Church) from Classification R-3 to R-4 [Ord. No.
3-14-94C]
128. Transfer of certain property on Church Road (Bethel Park School
Campus and Peter Page Park) from Zoning Classification R-1 and R-3 to
C-D [Ord. No. 5-9-94D]
129. Transfer of certain property on 2880 Industrial Boulevard from
Classification R-3 to C-2 [Ord. No. 7-11-94A]
130. Transfer of certain property at corner of Churchill Road, Library Road
and Clifton Road from Classification C-2 to R-T and C-D [Ord. No.
7-11-94B]
131. Transfer of certain property at corner of Kings School Road and Stoltz
Road from Classification R-1 to R-2 [Ord. No. 7-11-94C]
132. Transfer of certain property at corner of Oxford Drive and Alicia Drive
from Classification C-3 to C-2 and R-2 to C-2 and C-3 to C-D [Ord. No.
8-14-95D]
133. Transfer of certain property off Cambridge Drive and known as
McMillan School from Classification R-2 to C-4. [Ord. No. 8-14-95E]
134. Transfer of certain property on Washington Road from Classification
R-4 to C-2 [Ord. No. 6-9-97A]
135. Transfer of certain property near the intersection of South Park Road
and McMurray Road from Classification R-3 to R-T; and adding open
space overlay (OS) to certain property zoned R-3. [Ord. No. 6-9-97B]
136. Transfer of certain property on South Park Road and Library Road from
Classification R-1 to C-2 [Ord. No. 7-14-97A]
137. Transfer of certain property located on Baptist Road (SR 3009), located
approximately 900 feet south of the Hamilton Road (SR 3037) and
Baptist Road intersection, located approximately 1,300 feet north of the
Horning Road and Baptist Road intersection, and located adjacent to N/
F Pittsburgh and West Virginia Railroad (belt division) right-of-way
from Classification R-3 to CD [Ord. No. 6-8-98C]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS IV-1
1:1053
138. Addition of Oxford Drive Transportation District Zone as an overlay
district, with boundaries as set forth on Figure 3 of Exhibit A to Ord. No.
3-8-99B. [Ord. No. 3-8-99C]
139. Transfer of certain property located on McMurray Road and Limestone
Drive from Classification C-1 to C-4. [Ord. No. 11-8-04C]
140. Transfer of certain property located on Baptist Road and near the
intersection with Hamilton Road from Classification C-3 to C-2. [Ord.
No. 8-8-05]
141. Transfer of certain property located on Higbee Drive at the intersection
of Higbee Drive and Baptist Road from Classification R-3 to C-2 and R-4.
[Ord. No. 11-14-05F]
142. Transfer of certain property located on Baptist Road (SR 3009), located
approximately 1,000 feet south of the intersection of Hamilton Road
(SR 3037) and Baptist Road, located approximately 2,800 feet north of
the intersection of Horning Road and Baptist Road and located adjacent
to N/F Pittsburgh and West Virginia Railroad (Belt Division) right-ofway
from Classification CD to R-3 and adding Open Space Overlay (OS).
[Ord. No. 12-11-06D]
143. Transfer of certain property located on Library Road (SR88), located at
the intersection with Hillside Drive and approximately 950 feet south of
the intersection of Valley Drive and Library Road and adjacent to the
intersection of Library Road and Mollenauer Street from Classification
MLI to C-2. [Ord. No. 7-9-07]
144. Transfer of certain property located along Ridgeway Drive and near the
intersection of Ridgeway Drive and Hillside Drive and near the
intersection of Hillside Drive and Library Road (SR 88), is rezoned from
Classification MLI to C-3. [Ord. No. 3-10-08B]
145. Transfer of certain property from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial District),
said property being located on Broughton Road and near the
intersection of Broughton Drive and Baptist Road. [Ord. No. 4-12-10]
146. Transfer of certain properties from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) to C-2 (General Commercial District), said
properties being located at 5150 Library Road. [Ord. No. 3-10-14A]
147. Transfer of certain properties from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) to R-4 (Multiple-Family Residential
District), said property being located at 5625 Library Road (SR 88) and
near the Library Road and Brightwood Road intersection. [Ord. No.
1-12-15]
148. Transfer of certain properties from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) and R-3 with an Open Space Zoning
Classification to C-2 (General Commercial District) and R-T (Townhouse
IV-1 BETHEL PARK CODE IV-1
1:1054
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-10-14A 2-10-2014 Trapping and wild animal
control: feeding of deer
Ch. 63, Art. II
2-10-14B 2-10-2014 Trapping and wild animal
control: wild animals and
feral cats
Ch. 63, Art. III
3-10-14A 3-10-2014 Zoning Map changes Appendix Part IV
3-10-14B 3-10-2014 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
5-12-14A 5-12-2014 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
5-12-14B 5-12-2014 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
6-9-14 6-9-2014 Municipal claims and liens
attorneys' fees
Ch. 34, Art. IX
9-8-14 9-8-2014 Uniform Construction Code
amendment; Floodplain
Districts repealer; grading
amendment; subdivisions
amendment; floodplain
management
Ch. 26, Art. I; Ch.
26, Art. V; Ch. 40,
Art. I; Ch. 60; Ch.
72
Development), said properties being located at Baptist Road and
Hamilton Road. [Ord. No. 6-8-15]
149. Transfer of certain properties from Zoning Classification C-4 (Office
Commercial District) to C-1 (Neighborhood Commercial District), said
properties being located at Library Road. [Ord. No. 10-10-16B]
150. Transfer of certain properties from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) to C-2 (General Commercial District), said
properties being located at Library Road. [Ord. No. 11-27-18]
151. Transfer of certain property from Zoning Classification R-3 (One-
Family Residential District) to C-2 (General Commercial District), said
property being identified as Lot 1E on the Cool Springs Subdivision #1,
located on Cool Springs Drive (a portion of property lot and block
#316-E-10). [Ord. No. 7-22-19]
IV-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1055
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-10-14A 11-10-2014 Annual tax rate and senior
citizen tax relief
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
11-10-14B 11-10-2014 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
12-8-14 12-8-2014 Salaries amendment Ch. 12, Art. I
1-12-15 1-12-2015 Zoning Map changes Appendix Part IV
2-9-15 2-9-2015 Police Department: civil
service rules and
regulations
Ch. 11, Art. VI
3-9-15 3-9-2015 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 6, Art. II
4-13-15 4-13-2015 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
5-11-15A 5-11-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 69
5-11-15B 5-11-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 69
6-8-15 6-8-2015 Zoning Map changes Appendix Part IV
7-13-15 7-13-2015 Police Department: civil
service rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 11, Art. VI
8-10-15 8-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 65
11-9-15A 11-9-2015 Annual tax rate and senior
citizens tax relief
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
11-9-15B 11-9-2015 Sewer charges and rentals
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. I
11-9-15C 11-9-2015 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
1-25-16 1-25-2016 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
6-13-16A 6-13-2016 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 6, Art. II
6-13-16B 6-13-2016 Salaries, allowances and
personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. I
7-11-16A 7-11-2016 Salaries amendment Ch. 12, Art. I
§ DL-1 BETHEL PARK CODE § DL-1
1:1056
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-11-16B 7-11-2016 Shade Tree Commission Superseded by Ord.
No. 5-8-17
8-8-16 8-8-2016 Sewer charges and rentals
amendment
Ch. 55, Art. I
10-10-16A 10-10-2016 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
10-10-16B 10-10-2016 Zoning Map changes Appendix Part IV
10-10-16C 10-10-2016 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
11-14-16A 11-14-2016 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
11-14-16B 11-14-2016 Annual tax rate and senior
citizen tax relief
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
12-12-16 12-12-2016 Salaries amendment Ch. 12, Art. I
4-10-17A 4-10-2017 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
amendment
Appendix Part III
4-10-17B 4-10-2017 Licensed occupations
amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
5-8-17 5-8-2017 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 10-9-17D
6-12-17A 6-12-2017 Salaries amendment Ch. 12, Art. I
6-12-17B 6-12-2017 Parks: general regulations
amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
8-14-17 8-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 69
9-11-17 9-11-2017 Unmanned aircraft Ch. 14, Art. I
9-25-17 9-25-2017 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
10-9-17A 10-9-2017 Registration of foreclosed
property
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2-12-18
10-9-17B 10-9-2017 Franchises and
miscellaneous legislation
Appendix Part III
10-9-17C 10-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 69
10-9-17D 10-9-2017 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1057
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-13-17A 11-13-2017 Franchises and
Miscellaneous Legislation
Appendix Part III
11-13-17B 11-13-2017 Taxes: Annual Tax Rate and
Senior Citizen Tax Relief
Amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
11-13-17C 11-13-2017 Franchises and
Miscellaneous Legislation
Appendix Part III
12-11-17A 12-11-2017 Salaries Amendment Ch. 12, Art. I
12-11-17B 12-11-2017 Streets, Sidewalks and
Public Places: Excavations
Amendment
Ch. 59, Art. III
12-11-17C 12-11-2017 Streets and Related
Legislation
Appendix Part I
2-12-18 2-12-2018 Building: Registration of
Foreclosed Property
Ch. 26, Art. IV
3-12-18 3-12-2018 Parks: General Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
6-11-18 6-11-2018 Franchises and
Miscellaneous Legislation
Appendix Part III
7-9-18 7-9-2018 Police Department: Civil
Service Rules and
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 11, Art. VI
8-13-18A 8-13-2018 Subdivisions Amendment;
Stormwater Management
Ch. 60; Ch. 61
8-13-18B 8-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 69
9-10-18 9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 69
10-8-18A 10-8-2018 Franchises and
Miscellaneous Legislation
Appendix Part III
10-8-18B 10-8-2018 Shade Tree Commission
Amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
10-8-18C 10-8-2018 Streets and Related
Legislation
Appendix Part I
10-8-18D 10-8-2018 Vehicle and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 65
§ DL-1 BETHEL PARK CODE § DL-1
1:1058
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
11-12-18A 11-12-2018 Taxes
Amendment
Ch. 62 21
11-12-18B 11-12-2018 Franchises and
Miscellaneous
Legislation
Appendix Part III 21
11-27-18 11-27-2018 Zoning Map
Changes
Appendix Part IV 21
12-10-18A 12-10-2018 Garbage and
Rubbish
Amendment
Ch. 39 21
12-10-18B 12-10-2018 Salaries,
Allowances and
Personnel
Policies
Amendment
Ch. 12 21
2-11-19 2-11-2019 Bidding
Requirements
Amendment
Ch. 4 21
5-13-19 5-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 34 21
6-10-19B 6-10-2019 Franchises and
Miscellaneous
Legislation
Appendix Part III 21
7-8-19 7-8-2019 Franchises and
Miscellaneous
Legislation
Appendix Part III 21
7-22-19 7-22-2019 Zoning Map
Changes
Amendment
Appendix Part IV 21
9-9-19 9-9-2019 General
Obligation Note
NCM 21
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1059