C
u
m
r
u 
T
o
w
n
s
h
i
p 

B
e
r
k
s 
C
o
u
n
t
y
, 
P
e
n
n
s
y
l
v
a
n
i
a 

Z
o
n
i
n
g 
O
r
d
i
n
a
n
c
e 
o
f 
2
0
0
9 

The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 was initially adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 686. 
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 has been amended, restated and enacted upon by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 689. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 
Table of Contents 
Page Article 1: General Provisions Section 101: Preamble 1 Section 102: Short Title 1 Section 103: Purpose Statements 1 Section 104: Community Development Objectives 2 Section 105: Regional Allocation of Land Uses  2 Section 106: Application and Interpretation 3 Section 107: Severability 3 Section 108: Repealer 3 Section 109: Exemptions 3 Section 110: Effective Date 
Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201: General Interpretation  4 Section 202: Specific Terms 4 
Article 3: Zoning  Map and Zoning  Districts 
Section 301: Establishment of Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts 38 Section 302: Official Zoning Map 38 Section 303: Interpretation of District Boundaries 39 Section 304: Application of District Regulations 40 

Article 4: Zoning  District Regulations 
Section 401: Statement of Intent 41 Section 402: Agricultural District (AG) 41 Section 403: Rural Conservation (RC) 46 Section 404: Low Density Residential District (LR) 50 Section 405: Medium Density Residential District: (MR) 53 Section 406: High Density Residential (HR) 56 Section 407: Local Commercial District (LC) 59 Section 408: Highway Commercial District (HC) 64 Section 409: Office Commercial District (OC) 69 Section 410: General Industrial District (GI) 72 

Article 5: Conservation Overlay Districts 
Section 501: Statement of Intent 77 Section 502: Floodplain Overlay District 77 Section 503: Wetlands Overlay District 78 
Page 
Section 504: Steep Slope Overlay District 80 Section 505: Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 82 Section 506: Riparian Buffer Overlay District 88 Section 507: Carbonate Geology Overlay District 89 

Article 6: Special Overlay  Districts 
Section 601: Statement of Intent 93 Section 602: Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District 93 Section 603: Airport Overlay District 95 Section 604: Historical Preservation Overlay District 96 

Article 7: Residential Land Use and Development Requirements 
Section 701: Statement of Intent 98 Section 702: Single Family Detached Residential Uses 98 Section 703: Single Family Semi-Detached Residential Uses 99 Section 704: Multi-Family Townhouse Uses and Developments 100 Section 705: Multi-Family Apartment Uses and Developments 103 Section 706: Cluster Design Alternative for the AG District 107 Section 707: Cluster Design Alternative for the RC District 112 Section 708: Cluster Design Alternative for the MR District 117 Section 709: Cluster Design Alternative for the HR District 122 Section 710: Group Homes 128 Section 711: Age-Qualified Retirement Communities 130 Section 712: Personal Care, Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home 136 Section 713: Bed and Breakfast Establishments 137 Section 714: Secondary Housing Unit 139 Section 715: Home Occupation Regulations 141 Section 716: Mixed Use Commercial and Residential Developments 143 
Article 8: Non-Residential Land Use  and Development Requirements 
Section 801: Statement of Intent 146 Section 802: Non-Residential Performance Standards and Controls 146 Section 803: Adult Business and Entertainment Uses 149 Section 804: Agricultural Uses 151 Section 805: Airports, Heliports and Helistops 159 Section 806: Automotive Sales and Service Stations 160 Section 807: Banks and Financial Institutions 164 Section 808: Business and Professional Offices 165 Section 809: Business and Professional Office Parks 166 Section 810: Club, Lodge or Social Quarters 168 Section 811: Commercial Composting and Mushroom Production 169 Section 812: Commercial Drive-Through Establishments 173 Section 813 Commercial Greenhouses 174 
Page 
Section 814: Commercial Outdoor Sales and Uses 176 Section 815: Commercial Water Resource Uses 176 Section 816: Conference Center or Convention Center 178 Section 817: Construction Services 181 Section 818: Convenience Stores and Mini-Markets 181 Section 819: Day Care Facilities and Uses 184 Section 820: Educational Uses 186 Section 821: Emergency Services Operation 187 Section 822: Fabrication and Finishing Uses 188 Section 823: Food Processing Facility 189 Section 824: Funeral Home 191 Section 825: Game Preserve and Regulated Hunting Grounds 192 Section 826: Golf Courses 192 Section 827: Home Centers 194 Section 828: Horseback Riding School 195 Section 829: Hotel or Motel Uses 195 Section 830: Industrial Parks 197 Section 831: Junk Yards and Salvage Yards 199 Section 832: Kennels 202 Section 833: Laundromats and Dry Cleaners 204 Section 834: Manufacturing Uses 205 Section 835: Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Providers 206 Section 836: Mini-Malls 207 Section 837: Mini-Warehouse or Self-Storage Facilities 209 Section 838: Municipal and Governmental Uses 211 Section 839: Nurseries and Landscaping Centers 212 Section 840: Personal Service Establishment 213 Section 841: Places of Worship and Religious Uses 214 Section 842: Printing or Publishing Facilities 215 Section 843: Quarrying and Mining Operations 216 Section 844: Recreational Uses 219 Section 845: Research Facilities 221 Section 846: Restaurants 222 Section 847: Retail Business Uses 223 Section 848: Shopping Centers and Shopping Malls 224 Section 849: Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities 227 Section 850: Telecommunication and Wireless Communication Facilities 229 Section 851: Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments 235 Section 852: Utilities 237 Section 853: Veterinary Hospitals and Animal Clinics 239 Section 854 Warehousing and Freight Uses 240 Section 855 Wholesale and Distribution Uses 241 Section 856: Undefined or Other Land Uses 243 
Page 

Article 9: Supplemental Regulations 
Section 901: Statement of Intent 245 Section 902: Access to Lots, Buildings, Structures and/or Uses 245 Section 903: Accessory Uses and Structures 245 Section 904: Residential Conversion Standards 250 Section 905: Height Exceptions 251 Section 906: Front Yard and Lot Width Exceptions 251 Section 907: Flag Lots or Key Hole Lots 252 Section 908: Visibility at Intersections 253 Section 909: Corner Lot Restrictions and Requirements 253 Section 910: Fences, Walls and Hedges 254 Section 911: Projections into Yards 255 Section 912: Development Along Existing Public Roads 255 Section 913: Common Open Space 256 Section 914: Landscaping 258 Section 915: Temporary Structures and Uses 258 Section 916: Outdoor Storage and Sales 259 Section 917: Prohibited Uses 259 Section 918: Hazardous Conditions and Areas 260 Section 919: Exterior Lighting 260 Section 920: Swimming Pools and Therapeutic Spas 261 Section 921: Renewable Energy Systems 262 Section 922: Filling, Excavating and Grading 263 Section 923: Blasting and Detonation Requirements 263 Section 924: Mailboxes 263 Section 925: Domestic Pet and Farm Animals 264 

Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 1001: Statement of Intent 265 Section 1002: General Provisions for Off-street Loading and Parking 265 Section 1003: Off-Street Loading Areas 266 Section 1004: Off-Street Parking Areas 268 Section 1005: Driveways, Private Roads, Access Lanes and Fire Lanes 274 Section 1006: Highway Frontage Development and Access Management Requirements 274 

Article 11: Signs 
Section 1101: Statement of Intent 276 Section 1102: General Standards and Requirements for all Signs 276 Section 1103: Summarization Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements 279 Section 1104: Signs Requirements for Residential Uses 282 Section 1105: Sign Requirements for Non-Residential Uses 283 Section 1106: Off-Premises Advertising Signs or Billboards 285 
Page 
Section 1107: Special Use Signs, Temporary Signs and Promotional Signs 287 Section 1108: Nonconforming Signs and Abandoned Signs 289 Section 1109: Prohibited Signs 290 

Article 12: Nonconformities 
Section 1201: Statement of Intent 291 Section 1202: Nonconforming Lots of Record 291 Section 1203: Nonconforming Uses of Land 291 Section 1204: Nonconforming Buildings or Structures 292 Section 1205: Nonconforming Use of Buildings or Structures 293 Section 1206: Registration of Nonconformities 293 Section 1207: Pre-Existing Planned Residential Communities 294 

Article 13: Administration  and Enforcement 
Section 1301: Statement of Intent 295 Section 1302: Zoning Permits, Certificates of Use and Occupancy, and Other Permits 295 Section 1303: Zoning Officer 298 Section 1304: Zoning Hearing Board 299 Section 1305: Public Hearings and Procedures 300 Section 1306: Zoning Variances 299 Section 1307: Special Exceptions 302 Section 1308: Conditional Uses 303 Section 1309: Amendments 307 Section 1310: Curative Amendments 308 Section 1311: Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan Implementation Agreement 309 Section 1312: Appeals 309 Section 1313: Filing Fees and Costs 309 Section 1314: Violations, Penalties and Remedies 309 
Article 14: Municipal Enactment 
Section 1401: Municipal Adoption by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners 311 Section 1402: Effective Date 311 

Article 1: General  Provisions 
Section 101:   Preamble 
An ordinance establishing regulations, specifications and restrictions for: the uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water; the size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures; the areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by uses and structures including areas, courts, yards and other open spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures; and the density of population and intensity of land uses, within Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and for said purposes dividing Cumru Township into districts and prescribing certain uniform regulations for each such districts and providing for the administrative enforcement and amendment provisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Section 102:   Short Title 
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as the "Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009”. 
Section 103:   Purpose 
(A) 
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance has been adopted in accordance with: the requirements of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; the goals, objectives and policies established within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan; and consideration for the overall character of Cumru Township considering issues relative to growth, development, preservation and redevelopment.  In addition, the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance is designed to accomplish the following: 

(1) 	
To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the public health, safety, general welfare, coordinated and practical community development, proper density of population, civil defense, emergency management, airports and national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air, police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements, as well. 

(2) 	
To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel and transportation; loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; loss of natural resources including farmland, woodland and water supply. 

(3) 	
To identify, protect and preserve important natural features and resources, with specific emphasis upon floodplains, stream valleys, wetlands, steep slopes and woodlands. 

(4) 	
To have planned aesthetic, innovative and orderly residential growth and development by considering environmentally sensitive land areas, agricultural uses, existing land uses, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, utilities, infrastructure, groundwater recharge areas, and the rural characteristics. 

(5) 	
To sustain and improve the quality of life within the community. 

(6) 	
To conserve, protect, sustain and enhance the natural and scenic resources. 

(7) 	
To identify, preserve and protect the historical, architectural and cultural resources within the community. 

(8) 	
To preserve and encourage the continuation of agricultural uses as viable industry within the region.  

(9) 	
To provide a diversified housing supply that meets the existing and projected demands of the community. 

(10) 	
To achieve and maintain a dynamic business climate to ensure a continuation of sound economic growth. 

(11) 	
To provide opportunities for commercial and industrial growth, development, revitalization and rehabilitation by considering environmental limitations, existing land uses, infrastructure, employment opportunities, and the suburban characteristics of Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
To provide community facilities and services, which meet the needs of the community while staying within the fiscal budget limitations of Cumru Township. 

(13) 	
To provide parks, recreation facilities and open space areas, which meet the needs of the residents. 

(14) 	
To improve, maintain and plan sanitary sewage disposal facilities and water supply facilities in an effort to meet the needs of the community, protect the environment and support development consistent with land use plans. 

(15) 	
To ensure that all basic utilities including sanitary sewage facilities, water supply facilities, communication systems and energy supplies are available to serve existing and prospective uses within Cumru Township. 

(16) 	
To promote, encourage and practice energy conservation. 

(17) 	
To provide and maintain a safe, efficient and diversified transportation system, which optimizes mobility, strengthens the economy and protects the environment. 

(18) 	
To achieve a high level of intergovernmental planning by coordinating efforts with local, county and regional groups within the public and private sectors. 

(19) 	
To execute and comply with the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 

(20) 	
To make a reasonable effort to comply with the intergovernmental agreement for the implementation efforts associated the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The purpose statements contained in this Zoning Ordinance are intended to provide overall guidance and direction, as well as to establish the foundation for community growth, development, preservation and redevelopment efforts in Cumru Township. Should one or more purpose statements become unfeasible or cannot be implemented for any reason, the validity of this Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance shall not be invalid or unconstitutional. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 1 	Article 1:  General Provisions 
Section 104:   Community Development Objectives 
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance attempts to emulate through its regulations the goals, objectives and policies of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  These regulations have been established with considerations to physical characteristics, population trends, housing characteristics, existing land use, community facilities and services and existing transportation characteristics. 

Section 105: Regional Allocation of Land Uses 
(A) 	
Through the development of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, Cumru Township in conjunction with Brecknock Township, Kenhorst Borough, Mohnton Borough and Shillington Borough developed a future land use plan in order to provide for a regional allocation of land uses considering land use features, community facilities, utility provisions and the transportation network.  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 has been prepared in order to comply with the Intergovernmental Agreement for the implementation efforts associated the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(B) 	
Uses not permitted or recognized by this Zoning Ordinance may be permitted and included as part of the municipal zoning ordinance(s) that have been adopted by Brecknock Township, Kenhorst Borough, Mohnton Borough and/or Shillington Borough.  Should a use not be permitted or recognized within any of the zoning ordinances, an application should be made to the Zoning Officer to consider in accordance the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 2 	Article 1:  General Provisions 
Section 106:  Application and Interpretation 
(A) 	
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, land, watercourses, or parts thereof within Cumru Township shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved, removed, demolished, eliminated, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained within this Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health and safety and the general welfare of the residents and occupants of Cumru Township.  Where the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be complied with.  Where the provisions of any other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of such other municipal statute, ordinance or regulation shall be complied with unless otherwise stated in this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
This Zoning Ordinance contains various supplemental matrix charts that are intended to specify certain zoning requirements or summarize certain zoning requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within the supplemental matrix charts, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(D) 	
Unless otherwise specified, the state and federal requirements for code enforcement, construction, emergency management and property maintenance, as recognized or adopted by Cumru Township, shall supersede the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 107: Severability 
Should any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this Zoning Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of this Zoning Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 108: Repealer 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, together with the amendments and supplements thereto, are hereby repealed to the extent that the same conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance; provided however, that the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any provision of such repealed ordinance or to punish any offense against any such repealed ordinance committed prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 109:   Exemptions 
This Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to any existing or proposed buildings, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if, upon petition of said corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the Township have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings. 

Section 110:  Effective Date 
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners initially enacted the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 686.  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 689.  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 shall become effective upon municipal adoption. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 3 	Article 1:  General Provisions 


Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201:  General Interpretation. 
(A) 	
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms and words are defined under Section 202.  The following guidelines shall be utilized to interpret the terminology of this Zoning Ordinance: 

(1) 	
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 

(2) 	
Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 

(3) 	
Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. 

(4) 	
The word "shall", “must” or “will” is mandatory. 

(5) 	
The word "may" or “should” is permissive. 

(6) 	
The word "person" includes “individual”, “corporation”, “partnership”, “organization”, “association”, “trust”, or other similar entities. 

(7) 	
The words "used for" include "designed for", "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 

(8) 	
The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof". 

(9) 	
The word “structure” includes “building” and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof”. 

(10) 	
The word “street” includes “expressway”, “arterial”, “highway”, “thoroughfare”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “court”, “lane” and “road”. 

(11) 	
The word “watercourse” includes “channel”, “creek”, “ditch”, “drain”, “dry run”, “spring”, “stream” and “swale”. 



(B) 	
Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. 


Section 202:   Specific Terms 
Terms or words used in this Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall be construed as defined below. When terms, phrases or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
Abandoned Vehicle:  Any inoperable vehicle lacking a currently effective state license or inspection sticker, as further defined and regulated by Cumru Township and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  
Abut:	  The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another.   
Access Drive:  An improved cartway or paved service road designed to provide vehicular access between the public road and the off-street parking area for the designated use. 
Access Point: A clearly defined point of ingress and egress for vehicles at the street line. 
Accessory Building or Structure: A building subordinate to the principal building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal use. 
Accessory Use: A subordinate use of a portion of a lot, which is customarily incidental to the main or principal use of land or of a building on a lot. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 4 	Article 2: Definitions 
Acre: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Act:  The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 247: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 537: The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
Act 537 Plan:  The Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 537, as amended. 
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District: A special overlay district established to permit the planned reuse, division and/or redevelopment of existing buildings, structures and land areas within certain Zoning Districts, subject to the requirements of Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Adjacent: The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another. 
Administrative Office(s): An establishment primarily engaged in overall management and supervisory functions, such as executive, personnel, finance, legal and sales activities, typically performed in a single location or building for other branches or divisions of the same company. 
ADT (Average Daily Traffic): The average number of vehicles that pass over a given point per day. 
Adult Business Use or Adult Entertainment Use: Any adult arcades, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult novelty stores, adult video stores, escort agencies, nude model studios, sexual encounter centers, non-therapeutic massage parlor, or other similar adult business uses or adult entertainment uses, whereas, under the provisions of Cumru Township and the State Obscenity Code, as amended, must exclude minors or may not knowingly disseminate to minors.  The following sub-definitions shall also apply to adult business uses or adult entertainment uses: 
Adult Arcade or Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building offering video presentations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons within private viewing booths and/or by use of token, coin-operated viewing booths, projectors, video machines, or other electronic media sources projectors, as defined by Cumru Township and/or the State Obscenity Code, as amended. 
Adult Bookstore and Adult Novelty Store: A commercial establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rental) books, magazines, periodical, photographs, films, videos, motion pictures, slides or similar materials, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by Cumru Township and/or the State Obscenity Code, as amended.  An adult bookstore and/or adult novelty store may include the sale of instruments, devices, novelties or paraphernalia, which are designed for the use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult Cabaret:  A nightclub, bar, club, restaurant tavern, theater, or similar commercial establishments, which features: persons who appear in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; live performances which are categorized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are categorized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult Establishment:  An adult business use and/or an adult entertainment use, as permitted under the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Adult Theater:  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, business, or similar commercial establishment, which features:  persons who appear in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; live performances which are categorized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are categorized by the depiction or description of  specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 5 Article 2: Definitions 
Escort:  A person who, for consideration, agrees, or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie, or to privately perform a striptease for another person.  
Escort Agency:  A person or business association, who or which furnishes, offer, or advertises to furnish escorts for a fee, tip, or other consideration, as part of its business. 
Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or displays specific anatomic areas, and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons, who may pay money or any other form of consideration.  
Nudity or State of Nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, the showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Seminude or Seminude Condition:  The state of dress in which clothing partially or transparently covers or exposes specified anatomical areas. 
Sexual Encounter Center: A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex: activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in the state of nudity or semi-nudity; any variation of “mud wrestling”; or any sexual encounter activities defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Sexually Oriented Business:  Any adult business or entertainment use. 
Specific Anatomical Areas:  Human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, female breasts(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals (covered or uncovered) in a discernibly turgid state, or as defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Specified Sexual Activities: Activities including: the fondling or other erotic touching of human genital, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the sexual activities set forth in this Zoning Ordinance; or any specified sexual activities defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
State Obscenity Code:  Section 5903, Title 18, Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended. 
Age-Qualified Retirement Community:  A unified planned residential development servicing the housing, personal needs and care of older persons, who are 55 years of age or older, within residential units, and as further defined and regulated by this Zoning Ordinance.  This use is intended to provide housing opportunities for older persons in accordance with local, state and federal laws. 
Agricultural Operation: An enterprise that is actively engaged in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops, livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological development within the agricultural industry. 
Agriculture (General): The cultivation of the soil and the raising and harvesting of the products of the soil, including but not limited to nursery, horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry.  This Zoning Ordinance outlines the limitations for general agricultural activities.  These limitations shall not disrupt any of the rights and privileges established under the Pennsylvania Agricultural Security Act, the Right to Farm Law, the Nutrient Management Law, and the Agriculture Communities and Rural Environment (ACRE) Law. 
Agriculture (Intensive): Specialized agricultural activities, including but not limited to mushroom, swine, dairy, beef and poultry production, and any other livestock production, which due to the intensity of production or raw material storage needs, necessitate special control of operation, raw material storage and processing, and disposal 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 6 Article 2: Definitions 
of liquid and solid wastes. Intensive agricultural activities shall also include general agricultural activities exceeding the standards and specifications outlined under this Zoning Ordinance. This Zoning Ordinance also outlines the limitations for intensive agricultural activities.  These limitations shall not disrupt any of the rights and privileges established under the Pennsylvania Agricultural Security Act, the Right to Farm Law, the Nutrient Management Law, and the Agriculture Communities and Rural Environment (ACRE) Law. 
Agronomic: The science and technology of utilizing plants for food, fuel, feed, and fiber in a sustainable environment by applying the sciences of biology, chemistry, ecology, earth science, and genetics. 
Aquaculture: The raising and harvesting freshwater and saltwater organisms including mollusks, crustaceans and aquatic plants under controlled conditions. 
Horticulture:  The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants. 
Hydroponics: The growing of plants without soil in water to which nutrients have been added.  Other names for hydroponics are soil-less gardening, soil-less culture, chemiculture, and water gardening. 
Silvaculture: The science of controlling  the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests over land areas, which are generally not suitable for a sustainable forest. 
Airport: A private, public or commercial facility utilized for the landing and takeoff of aircraft including any appurtenant areas utilized as airport buildings or navigation facilities, which are permitted in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. 
Airport Overlay District: A special overlay of land, water and air space, as originally established in July of 1981 through the adoption of Cumru Township Ordinance 363.  The general purpose of the Airport Overlay District is to establish and identify a variety of features and zones including: runways, runway approach zones; transitional zones, horizontal zones; and conical zones.  Height limitations and land use restrictions are also established to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the aircraft as well as those residents and buildings located on the ground. 
Alluvial Soils:  Soils, which have been formed in alluvium and deposited by past stream or flooding conditions. 
Alluvium: Soil material such as sand, silt or clay that has been deposited on land by past stream or flooding conditions. 
Alteration(s):  Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, joists, rafters, headers, or enclosed walls, or any enlargement or modification thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another, or any other change of use of a building or a lot. 
Amusement Arcade: A commercial establishment, which provides multiple amusement devices, games of skill or chance, video games, skeet-ball, and other similar devices. 
Animal Hospital or Clinic: A professional veterinary establishment used for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of ailing or injured animals, which may include overnight accommodations.  The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall be considered a kennel. 
Animal Husbandry:  The raising and keeping of farm animals for any commercial purpose.  The keeping of livestock and poultry as farm pets for domestic purposes shall not be considered as animal husbandry. 
Animal Unit: Farm animals or livestock equaling 1,000 pounds of body weight of any species. 
Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device utilized for communication. 
Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure.  If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 7 Article 2: Definitions 
Antenna Support Structure:  Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving communications. 
Antique Shop: A commercial establishment for the sale of antiques such as clocks, lamps, clothing, rugs, jewelry, furniture and similar items. 
Applicant:  A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and assigns. 
Application for Development: Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan. 
Appointing Authority:  The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Architect: An architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Assisted Living Facility:  A building, complex or distinct part thereof designed to foster assisted living and consisting of self-contained living units where services are available to support resident independence, autonomy, and aging in place in the least restrictive environment possible, including where cognitive support services are required. The residence promotes resident self-direction and active participation in decision-making while emphasizing individuality, privacy and dignity. The term includes housing required to be licensed under the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development assisted living conversion program. The term does not include a personal care home, domiciliary care home, publicly financed housing, an independent living community, or a housing unit in a continuing care retirement community certified by the Insurance Department, where residents of such homes or units contract for services directly. Assisted Living Facilities are licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Attic: That part of a building, which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. 
Automobile Sales: Any building or land area devoted to the sale of three (3) or more new or used vehicles at any given time, including customary service and repair facilities within an enclosed building. 
Automobile Service Station: Any building or land area devoted to the repair, servicing, restoration, reconstruction and maintenance of vehicles, including the retail sale of gasoline, motor oil, car washes, batteries and other similar vehicular accessories. 
Barn: A structure utilized for the storage of farm products, agricultural equipment, animal feed and/or the housing of farm animals. 
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below the grade plane.  A basement shall be considered a story above grade plane when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is as follows: more than six (6) feet above the grade plane; more than six (6) feet above the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; and/or more than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at any point. 
Bed and Breakfast: The use and occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling for the purpose of accommodating transient guests for compensation or rent up to a maximum of ten (10) consecutive days. 
Block: A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, water courses or bodies of water, boundary lines of Cumru Township, or by any combination of the above. 
Board:  The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Board of Commissioners: The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Buffer Yard:  A continuous strip of land, which is clear of all buildings and paved areas and is adequately landscaped in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 8 Article 2: Definitions 
Building:  Any combination of material forming any structure, which is erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, whereas the framed components or structural parts are designed for the complete enclosure (with walls and a roof) and support for individuals, animals or property of any kind. 
Building Area: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including all enclosed extensions.  The definition of “building area” should not be considered synonymous or be compared with the any subordinate definitions for “lot area” including “lot area (building)”. 
Building Coverage:  The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings. 
Building Envelope: The area of a lot that has no building or construction restrictions such as, building set back requirements, rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 20 percent in grade, or similar restrictions as defined in this Zoning Ordinance.  
Building Frontage:  The front of a building considering the location of the main entrance and the public street providing access.  For corner lots, the building frontage shall be established along both streets to which the building has frontage or access. 
Building Height:  The vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the average roof height, as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by Cumru Township. 
Building Length:  The longest horizontal dimension of a building, as measured in a single straight direction. 
Building Setback: The minimum distance a building must be setback from the ultimate street right-of-way line (where it exists) or from the street legal right-of-way line (where the ultimate right-of-way does not exist) of the street immediately adjacent thereto. 
Building Setback Line: The line within a property establishing the minimum required distance between any building, or portions thereof, to be erected or altered and a street right-of-way (except the right-of-way of a service street).  The distance shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line, which abuts the property, and the building setback line shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. 
Business or Office Park:  A group of mixed uses within a planned non-residential development, which principally relate to business or office uses, as specified under Section 809 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Carbonate Geology Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which are generally underlain by geological features with limestone and dolomite characteristics, as defined and regulated under Section 507 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Car Washing Facility: A commercial facility to clean the exterior or interior portion of automobiles, which may include self-service facilities or full-service facilities as a principal use or subordinate use. 
Carport: A building open on two (2) or more sides and used in association with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles. 
Cartway:  The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved designed for vehicular use. 
Cellar:  A story partly below the finished grade, having at least one-half (1/2) of its height (measured from finished floor to finished ceiling) below the average level of the adjoining finished grade where such grade abuts the exterior walls of the building. A cellar shall not be considered a story in determining the permissible number of stories. 
Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human or animal remains and may include columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
Certificate of Use and Occupancy: A statement issued and enforced by the authorized code official designated by Cumru Township, whereas upon the completion, conversion, extension or modification of a new building or existing building, a certificate of compliance is issued and the building can be lawfully occupied for the intended use or activity. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 9 Article 2: Definitions 
Child:  An individual considered by law to be a minor that is under the age of a person who is under 18 years of age. For the purposes of a day care center or facility, a child shall be considered any person who is under 15 years of age. 
Church:  A building used for public worship by a congregation, excluding buildings used primarily for residential, educational, burial, recreational or other uses not normally associated with worship. 
Clear Cutting:  The removal or destruction of all vegetation from an area of land, or the removal or cutting of more than ninety (90) percent of the woodlands on any lot or parcel of land.  
Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection, as prescribed by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, which shall be measured thirty (30) inches above the ground elevation to ten (10) feet above ground elevation.  The area is further defined by connecting three (3) points consisting of the point of intersection of the streets and a point located at a specified linear distance along the centerline of the intersecting streets. 
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters:  An association of persons for some common nonprofit activity, not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Private Club or Country Club: Land and buildings containing private or semi-private recreation facilities, social quarters, restaurants, meeting rooms, banquet facilities, bars, taprooms, and similar uses, for the exclusive use of the members and their guests. 
Social Club or Lodge: Land and buildings containing recreation facilities, social quarters, restaurants, meeting rooms, banquet facilities, bars, taprooms, and similar uses, owned and operated by non-profit organizations for the exclusive use of the members or guests. 
Cluster Design for the AG District: A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving low density single-family dwellings within the AG Zoning District, as further specified under Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Cluster Design for the RC District: A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving low density single-family dwellings within the RC Zoning District, as further specified under Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance 
Cluster Design for the MR District: A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving medium density single-family dwellings within the MR Zoning District, as further specified under Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Cluster Design for the HR District: A conservation zoning and development technique utilized to preserve open space, protect natural features, and encourage a form of cluster design involving high density single-family and townhouse dwellings within the HR Zoning District, as further specified under Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Commercial Composting: A commercial use involving the accumulation of biodegradable and organic materials from approved uses including: mushroom production uses; municipal uses; landscaping uses; nursery uses; forestry uses; and other similar uses, as determined appropriate by Cumru Township; whereas, the composted materials are packaged, processed and/or transported from the commercial composting facility and utilized for other applications. 
Commercial Drive Through Establishment:  A permitted commercial use, where the patrons have the option to be provided services without leaving their vehicle, as permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Commercial Recreational Use: A use or activity operated as a business that is open to the public for the purpose of recreation and entertainment, including but not limited to, bowling alleys, health or fitness clubs, swimming pools, miniature golf courses, museums, theaters, amusement arcades, and other similar  commercial recreational uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Schools: An educational facility carried on as a business and not operated by a public agency.  The range of curriculums can include, but not limited to, academic instruction, business, technical programs, art, music, dance, language, and other similar commercial school uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 10 Article 2: Definitions 
Commercial Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, retail sales, businesses, offices, personal services, banks, financial institutions, restaurants, communications, recreation, and other similar commercial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Use of Water Resources: The use of naturally occurring water when 5,000 gallons or more of such water is used on site per day or when 5,000 gallons or more of such water is exported or transported for use off site. “Naturally occurring water” shall mean all water above and below the ground surface. 
Commercial Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for a business or trade activity of any kind, including construction, excavating, earthmoving equipment, or similar equipment, regardless of the use, excluding a Class I and II motor vehicle, which is properly licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development, designed and intended for use or enjoyment of all residents of the development in which it is located. Common open spaces shall not include: land areas within street rights-of-way; required open areas between buildings; required open areas between buildings and street rights-of-way, driveways and parking areas; and other areas that may be specified within this Zoning Ordinance.  No dwelling unit, accessory building or parking area may be located within common open spaces. 
Common Parking Area: A parking facility other than those provided within the lot lines of a lot on which one (1) single-family detached dwelling, one (1) single-family semi-detached dwelling, or one (1) townhouse is located. 
Common Wall: A wall used or adopted for joint service between two (2) buildings or parts thereof. 
Community Center: A public or quasi-public municipal, institutional or recreational use devoted exclusively to accommodate one or more group activities, including but not limited to, civic, social, recreational, educational, or cultural, or other similar activities determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer, and provided that the community center properly maintained and is not utilized as a residential use. 
Completion: The act of bringing to a condition of physical completeness and readiness for use and occupancy. 
Comprehensive Plan. The Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Conditional Use:  A use in a particular zoning district by approval of the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the specific criteria set forth in this Zoning Ordinance. 
Conference Center or Convention Center: A facility utilized for meetings and seminars, with accommodations for meeting rooms, food preparation, social quarters, restaurants, banquet facilities, bars, taprooms, recreation facilities, restaurants, entertainment, overnight accommodations, and similar uses. 
Conservation Overlay Districts:  Overlay provisions established to consider conservation management, environmental resource protection, natural resources, and open space preservation.  These provisions are intended to supplement and enhance the existing underlying zoning district regulations for certain land areas and water features including: floodplains; wetlands and hydric soils; steep slopes; woodlands; riparian buffers; and carbonate geology formations. 
Conservation Use: The preservation and utilization of land and surface water as wildlife habitats, forests, farmland, meadows, wetlands, lakes, streams, rivers, and other similar uses or features that involve no site improvements other than those required for education, recreation or municipal uses. 
Consistency: An agreement or correspondence between matters being compared, which denotes a reasonable rational, similar, connection or relationship. 
Construction:  The placement of materials and equipment in a defined area to be assembled, built, applied and/or demolished in a temporary or permanent manner, as approved by the designated officials of Cumru Township. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 11 Article 2: Definitions 
Construction Services: A use occupied by a contractor or construction company, which may include professional and business offices as well as accessory storage buildings or facilities for trucks, equipment and/or construction materials. 
Construction Site: The total necessary land area required for all buildings or uses within a unified development before a zoning permit may be issued. 
Convalescent Home: A facility primarily designed to provide a home-like environment while patients recover from long term illnesses or medical procedures. Many residents of convalescent homes anticipate a return to their own homes after recovery, although some will remain for the rest of their natural lives. Convalescent homes generally provide a combination of medical services and support staff. Post-surgical patients, especially the elderly, may be assigned to convalescent homes by their doctors for long or short term physical therapy and monitored recovery. Others suffering from chronic illnesses may be kept in convalescent homes to minimize transportation needs between treatments. 
Convenience Store or Mini-Market: A building with less than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area, which is opened to the general public for up to 24 hours per day and designed and intended to be utilized solely for both the retail sale within the building of limited food items, beverages, take-out only delicatessen, newspapers, magazines, and incidental personal care items (but excluding the sale of prescription drugs and clothing) and the location within the building of not more than two ATM banking machines for the convenience of the general public, and the retail sale of gasoline outside of the building when dispensed from gasoline fueling positions located under a canopy. 
Conversion: To change or adapt land or structures to a different use, occupancy or purpose. 
County: The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
County Planning Commission: The Berks County Planning Commission. 
Court:  A portion of a lot unoccupied above grade but partially or wholly surrounded by the walls of a structure or buildings. 
Critical Environmental Area: An area of land or water with one or more of the following characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; wetlands; hydric soils; high water table soils; land subject to hazardous, municipal or industrial waste; fault areas; sinkholes; stream corridors; estuaries; habitats of endangered species; and/or other protected areas, species or habitats listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory. 
Curb Line: The point where the face of the curb meets the edge of the cartway.  If no curb exists, the curbline shall be considered the edge of the improved cartway. 
Curative Amendment:  A proposed zoning amendment made to the Board of Commissioners by any landowner/applicant who desires to challenge on substantial grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or the development of land in which the landowner/applicant has an interest. 
Day Care Use, Center or Facility: The offering of care or supervision to minors or adults with special needs.  The following sub-categories are related to day-care centers and facilities: 
Commercial Day Care Center: A facility which, on a daily basis, exclusively provides supplemental care and supervision and/or instruction to seven (7) or more children or adults simultaneously, who are not related to the caregiver or operator, where tuition, fees or other forms of compensation are charged, whether governmentally subsidized or not, and which is licensed or approved to dispense child or adult care by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and whether operated by a for-profit entity or a not-for-profit entity. 
Home Day Care: A building used principally as a residence by one (1) adult caregiver resident thereof in which day-care services are simultaneously provided for four (4) to six (6) children or adults who are unrelated to the resident caregiver.  Such residential property shall have an outdoor play area in the rear of the property of sufficient size to accommodate six (6) persons at once.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “home day care” shall be synonymous with “family day care”. 
Deck: An open or partially enclosed area of a permitted use, which is constructed in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and is occupied for seasonal activities.  
Dedication:  The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 12 Article 2: Definitions 
Deed: A written document whereby an estate in real property is described, conveyed and recorded. 
Deed Restriction:  Clauses included in a deed or other recorded document, which restricts, controls or limits the general use of a defined parcel of land or development. 
Density: The total number of residential dwelling units per acre or lot area. 
Designated Common Open Space: The area designated as “common open space” within a residential development, containing open areas for recreational uses and natural resource conservation. 
Developer: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, equitable owner, or tenant with the permission of the landowner, for whom subdivision or land development plans are being or have been made. 
Development:  Any man made change to improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the installation of utilities, filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations. 
Development Plan: A proposal for the development of land, prepared in accordance with the provisions specified by Cumru Township, including a plan for subdivision or land development, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.  The phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this Zoning Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition. 
Diameter at Breast Height: The diameter of a tree trunk, as measured fifty-four (54) inches from the ground surface. 
Dinner Theater: A building occupied as a commercial establishment for the purposes of serving food as a restaurant and entertaining patrons with live theatrical performances, which are considered to be a subordinate use to a restaurant and not to be an adult business or adult entertainment use. 
Distance Between Buildings:  The shortest horizontal distance between buildings. 
District: A portion of Cumru Township within which certain uniform regulations, permitted uses, procedural requirement, utility provisions and dimensional specifications, or combinations thereof, as they apply under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Domestic Pets: The keeping and housing of non-farm animals as pets on a property in accordance with local, state and federal laws. 
Drive-Through Establishment: A commercial establishment, whereas the patrons are provided specialty services as part of a permitted use without leaving their vehicle, as further defined and regulated by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Driveway: A privately owned and improved access drive, which provides vehicular access between a public road or an approved private road into the lot or parcel having frontage on the road. 
Dry Cleaners:  A commercial use and facility where clothing or fabrics are cleaned and pressed utilizing non-aqueous solvents, solutions or other accepted practices. 
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one 
(1) or more families living independently of each other.  Such buildings as hospitals, hotels, boarding, rooming, lodging houses, nursing homes, motels and institutional residences are not included in the definition of dwelling. The following dwelling types are further defined as follows: 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling:  A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family and having no common wall with an adjacent building. 
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for two (2) families, one (1) family living on each side of a vertical common wall. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for three (3) or more families.  Individual dwelling units may share up to three (3) part walls with other units and either have a common outside access areas or have individual outside access areas.  Types of such buildings shall include townhouses, apartments and/or condominiums. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 13 Article 2: Definitions 
Townhouse: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family, which is one (1) of a group of three (3) or more such buildings, placed side by side and separated by unpierced vertical common walls, each dwelling having at least one (1) separate entrance from the outside. 
Apartment Building: A building on a single lot arranged, designed and intended to be occupied as a residence for two (2) or more families, and in which the dwelling units may be separated horizontally and/or vertically. 
Condominium:  Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common open space solely for the owners of those portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, as amended, or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, as amended. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, single-family dwelling constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania intended for permanent occupancy contained in one (1) unit, or in two (2) or more units designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. 
Modular or Manufactured Home:  Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on the building site. Housing units defined as mobile homes are excluded from this definition. 
Secondary Housing Unit:  A separate housing unit that is secondary or independent from the primary housing unit or permitted use, which may consist of guest houses and/or accessory apartments, which are designed in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 714 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement: A defined parcel area of land or right-of-way, which is granted or conveyed for the limited use of land for public, quasi-public or private purposes. 
Educational Use: A use having one or more of the following purposes: to educate or instruct individuals in a school setting with instruction directed towards academic, moral, intellectual, mental, physical and vocational instruction. Excepted from this definition are uses devoted to driver training schools, heavy equipment training schools, riding schools, private recreational uses, day-care centers, and other uses that are not considered academic in character. 
Egress: A point of exit from a property. 
Electric Substation: An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or utilization through which electric energy in bulk is passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the need of the general public. 
Elevation: The horizontal alignment of a surface above mean sea level, as it exists in pre-development conditions or as it is proposed in post development conditions. 
Centerline Elevation:  The elevation of the street at the midpoint of the street. 
Curb Elevation: The elevation of the street at the curb line. 
First Floor Elevation:  The elevation of the level of living space at the main entrance of the building. 
Garage Elevation:  The elevation of the garage floor at the center of the garage door. 
Emergency Services Operation:  A use that is principally devoted to emergency response or emergency management services, including structures and facilities for fire departments, police stations, ambulance stations, emergency management operations and community response networks. 
Employees: The total number of workers (including both part-time and full-time) present on a parcel of land at any given time, other than temporary or occasional construction workers. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 14 Article 2: Definitions 
Engineer: A professional engineer, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Report: A detailed written report that provides discussion of significant environmental impacts and provides reasonable alternatives, which would avoid or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the environment. 
Erosion:  The removal of soil, rock or surface particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other agents. 
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility, municipality or governmental agency for general utility services, including gas, electric, steam, water, sewage disposal, telephone and similar utility services, excluding telecommunication and wireless communication providers. 
Fabrication and Finishing Use: An industrial facility and use, whereas, metals are joined, assembled, welded, brazed, soldered, coated, wrapped, blended and/or converted utilizing machines, equipment, chemicals, heat, water, lasers, plasma and/or other accepted techniques.  
Facade: The front of a building facing a public or private street or any other building face that is given special architectural treatment. 
Family:  A family as defined by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, which may include: one (1) person occupying a single dwelling; two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in single dwelling and maintaining it as a functional common household; and/or a group of not more than four (4) persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in single dwelling and maintaining it as a functional common household.  The term “family” shall be deemed to include any domestic employees or gratuitous guests but shall not include any roomer, boarder, lodger or persons residing in a group home. 
Family Entertainment Complex: An indoor or outdoor facility providing recreational, educational, social and entertainment facilities, which are designed and intended as a commercial recreation use suitable for children and their parents.  
Farm: An area of land, including all buildings, accessory buildings, farm buildings and one (1) single-family detached principal dwelling, which are utilized as part of an agricultural operation. 
Farm Animals: The raising and ownership of poultry, sheep, goats, swine, cattle, horses, and other similar animals, which are common to a farm in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Farm Building: A barn, silo or any building used for the storage of agricultural equipment or farm produce, or housing livestock or poultry.  The term "farm building" shall not include dwellings. 
Farm-Related Business: A business substantially devoted to serving an agricultural operation on a farm, as further regulated by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Farm-Support Business: An accessory business that is not substantially devoted to serving an agricultural operation on a farm, which is intended to provide supplemental income, as further regulated by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Fence: A manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof.  The term "fence" shall be deemed to include a wall. 
Financial Institution: A bank, savings and loan, credit union, or similar use. 
Fire Apparatus Access Road: A road that provides fire apparatus access from the fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof.  This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway. 
Flagpole: A flagstaff designed and solely intended for the patriotic display of the flag of the United States of America, or its armed forces, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof, or the flag of a group or organization, or combination thereof, and for no other purpose. A flagpole shall not include a standard antenna, a standard antenna support structure, a commercial communications antenna support structure, tower, antenna or any other structure designed, intended or capable of supporting any other use or purpose. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 15 Article 2: Definitions 
Floodplain Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners via Ordinance Number 552 on November 18, 1997, as may be amended from time to time.  
Floodplain Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined within the Flood Insurance Study, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which principally include areas located along the major creeks and waterways of Cumru Township.  The Floodplain Overlay District is further defined and regulated under Section 502 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Floor Area (Gross Floor Area). The gross floor space of the building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of wall separating buildings.  In particular, the floor area of a building or buildings shall include: basement space; all spaces other than cellar space with structural headroom of seven feet, six inches (7'6") or more; interior balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches, terraces or other space which are attached to the principal structure on at least one (1) side; attic spaces (with or without a finished floor) providing structural headroom of seven feet, six inches (7'6") or more is available over fifty percent (50%) of such attic space.  However, the "floor area" shall not include: cellar space, except that cellar space used for retailing; elevator shafts, stairwells, bulkhead, accessory water tanks or cooling towers; terraces; breezeways; uncovered steps; open space; and/or accessory buildings. 
Floor Area Ratio: The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot divided by the gross area of such lot in square feet. 
Food Processing Facility: The assembling, mixing, treating, preserving and packaging of food or beverage substances within an enclosed building for distribution to other retail or wholesale establishments. 
Forestry: The management of forests and timberlands when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development. 
Felling: The act of cutting a standing tree so it falls to the ground. 
Landing: A place or area where logs, pulpwood or firewood are assembled for transportation to processing facilities. 
Lop: To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow the material to settle close to the ground. 
Operator: An individual, partnership, company, firm, association, or corporation, which is engaged in timber harvesting or forestry operations, including the agents, subcontractors and employees thereof. 
Skidding: Dragging trees on the ground from the stump to the landing area by any means. 
Slash: Woody debris left in the woods after logging, including logs, chunks, bark, branches, uprooted stumps, broken or uprooted vegetation, or similar items. 
Stand: Any area of the forest vegetation whose site conditions, past history and current species composition are sufficiently uniform to be managed as a unit. 
Timber Harvesting, Tree Harvesting, or Logging:  The process of cutting down trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale or commercial processing into wood products. 
Top: The upper portion of a tree that has little or no commercial resale value because of its small size, taper or defect. 
Fuel: Solid, liquid or gaseous materials that can be utilized to produce heat or energy. 
Funeral Home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial, including the viewing of the deceased and any lawful rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation.  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 16 Article 2: Definitions 
Game Preserve:  A public or private area utilized for raising, protecting, breeding and/or hunting wildlife within a natural environment. 
Garage, Private Residential: An accessory building or a part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the owners or tenants of the premises and for the storage of not more than three (3) motor vehicles owned and used by persons other than the owner or tenant of the premises.  Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle or truck may be stored in a private garage. 
Garage, Public or Repair: A building, other than a private or storage garage, one (1) or more stories in height, used solely for commercial storage service or repair of motor vehicles. 
Garage, Storage: A building, not a private residential or a public garage, one (1) story in height, used solely for the storage of motor vehicles used in conjunction with a business or industry, but not for the sale, service or repair thereof nor for the sale of fuel, accessories or supplies. 
Geometric Design: The dimensions of a facility and the relationships of its features such as alignment, profile, grades, widths, sight distances, clearances, and slopes. 
Golf Course: A public or private course with a minimum of nine (9) holes and a length of more than 2,000 yards. 
Governing Body: The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County. 
Government Use: Any activities, services or uses conducted by any agency or department of local, county, state or federal government, which are not related to municipal uses owned or operated by Cumru Township. 
Grade Plane: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at the exterior walls.  Where the finished ground levels slope away from the exterior walls, the referenced plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building. 
Greenhouse: An enclosed building that is specifically designed and utilized to grow, raise, cultivate and/or sell plants, shrubs, flowers, trees private or similar products as part of a public, private or commercial use. 
Greenway: A linear corridor of open space including natural features such as waterways, stream valleys, ridgelines, and scenic vistas, or along man-made features such as railroad beds or abandoned canals, which provide areas for wildlife habitats and recreational uses. 
Group Home:  A household of not more than five (5) persons, not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship, who, because of their physical or emotional condition, or their social or interpretation skills, otherwise would limit, inhibit, or prevent their ability to function as useful or productive members of society.  All such group homes shall be provided with supported services through a licensed social service agency. 
Hazardous Materials: Those chemicals or substances, which are physical hazards or health hazards as defined and classified by Cumru Township, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition 
Health and Recreation Club: A commercial recreation use that is typically contained within a facility utilized for health, fitness and/or recreational activities.  All activities relating to an adult business use shall be prohibited within a health and recreation club. 
Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of a structure. 
Heliport: A defined area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotor-wing aircraft or helicopters, with sufficient space for all required safety controls and maneuvers in accordance with all state and federal requirements, as well as to allow for the provision of service facilities. 
Helistop:  A defined area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate touch down and lift-off of rotor-wing aircraft or helicopters.  All such areas shall have sufficient space to accommodate all required safety controls and maneuvers in accordance with all state and federal requirements, but in no case shall such area provide service facilities.  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 17 Article 2: Definitions 
High Water Table Soils: Surface soils, which are within three (3) feet of the seasonal high water table.  High water table soils are further defined, described and mapped by the Soil Survey of Berks County. 
Highway Access Point:  A place of ingress/egress from or access to a street or highway created by a driveway or another street or highway.  Measurement between them shall be from the centerline of one (1) such point to the centerline of another such point. 
Highway Frontage:  The lot dimensions measured along the right-of-way line of any one (1) street or highway abutting a lot. 
Historical Preservation Overlay: A special overlay district established to provide provisions for subdivision, land development, aesthetics, architectural appearance, landscaping, signs and streetscape design, as further specified in Section 604 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Historical Resource or Historical Site: A place, building, structure or site, whereas because of its’ local, state or national significance is considered as a historical site or resource.  All such historical sites are identified as follows: by the National Register of Historical Places; by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission; and as identified in a planning document, reference manual, or publication that has been adopted by Cumru Township.  
Home Center:  A retail business establishment occupying a single permitted retail use, which sells a variety of home, construction, and building products or supplies. 
Home Occupation: An accessory use, which is customarily conducted within a residential use or a structure accessory thereto, which is clearly secondary and incidental to the residential use in which the practitioner resides.  The following categories of home occupation are hereby defined: 
Category 1 Home Occupations: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the residential use and which involves no customer, client or patient traffic (whether vehicular or pedestrian), pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with a residential use.  A “Category 1 Home Occupation” shall be synonymous with “No Impact Home-Based Business”, as defined by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Category 2 Home Occupations: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the residential use, which may involve some employee(s), customer, client or patient traffic (whether vehicular or pedestrian), pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with a residential use. 
Horseback Riding School or Stable:  A facility utilized to educate riders on equestrian skill and/or to board horses within a humane environment. 
Horticulture:  The cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants. 
Hotel:  A building or group of buildings containing five (5) or more individual rooms for rental, primarily for transients, with common hallways for all rooms on the same floor, and where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite.  "Hotel" does not include institutional or educational uses and buildings where human beings are housed under legal constraint. 
Hydric Soil: A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. Hydric soils are defined, described and mapped by the Soil Survey of Berks County. 
Impervious Coverage: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Impervious Surface: All impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 18 Article 2: Definitions 
Impoundment Facility or Yard:  A designated and secured area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles, which have been transported to the facility for a period of time not to exceed 120 days, and as further regulated under the provisions of Section 831 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Improvements: Any type of structure, paved area and/or physical changes to the land, including but not limited to, grading, paving, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, street signs, traffic control devices, monuments, utilities, water supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities. 
Improvement Setback:  The minimum distance an improvement must be set back from a street right-of-way and/or property line. 
Incinerator: A facility designed to reduce municipal solid waste, fuel, gas, refuse, or other material by combustion. This use may include heat exchange equipment for energy recovery. 
Industrial Park:  A group of mixed uses within a planned non-residential development, which principally relate to industrial uses, as specified under Section 830 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Industrial Use:  A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, assembling, manufacturing, distributing, processing, storing or warehousing of products and materials, and similar industrial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Ingress:  A point of entrance to a property 
Institutional Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, educational uses, churches, religious uses, assisted living care facilities, and other similar institutional uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Junk or Salvage:  Discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery. 
Junk Yard or Salvage Yard: A lot, land or structure, or parts thereof, used for the collection, storage, dismantling, salvage, sale, exchange and/or recycling of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, debris, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery. The deposit or storage of two (2) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 831 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Jurisdictional Determination (JD) -A site survey and review performed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers to assess and officially determine whether or not a defined parcel of land or water body is subject to wetlands regulations. 
Kennel, Commercial:  Any property, including any building or structure thereon, where five (5) or more dogs or domesticated pets over the age of twelve (12) weeks, which are kept or maintained for boarding, grooming, breeding, training, showing, selling or exchange to other individuals. All such commercial kennel operations shall be subject to the provisions of Section 832.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Kennel, Private:  Any property, including any building or structure thereon, where five (5) or more dogs or domesticated pets over the age of twelve (12) weeks, are kept or maintained per acre of land area that is owned by the property owner, up to a maximum of ten (10) dogs or domesticated pets.  All such private kennel operations shall be subject to the provisions of Section 832.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Kitchen Facilities: An enclosed and weatherproofed room consisting of a sink with plumbing facilities, stationary stove/oven and a refrigerator, which complies with all codes adopted by Cumru Township. 
Laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located the facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing and experimentation, but not including the manufacture of products for sale.  All such laboratories shall be licensed by the appropriate local, county, state or federal agencies to conduct lawful activities. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 19 Article 2: Definitions 
Land Development: Any of the following activities: 
(1) 	
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving: a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features. 

(2) 	
A subdivision of land. 

(3) 	
Development in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Landowner:  The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition). A lessee under a written lease who has written authorization of the legal owner shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Landscape Architect: A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Landscaping or Garden Center: A commercial retail facility where plants, vegetables, shrubs, trees, seeds, soil, fertilizer, mulch, stone, masonry products, hardscape products, wood products, water features, exterior lighting, fencing tools, equipment, and other similar products are purchased by consumers in order to enhance the exterior of a building or use.  
Laundromats:  A commercial use within a building intended for patrons to have clothing or fabrics cleaned and dried in coin-operated machines. 
Livestock: Farm animals including chickens, turkey, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs, cattle, horses, and other similar farm animals, which are common to a farm. 
Loading Space: A defined space located within a lot or parcel of land, which has accessibility to a public street, for temporary use of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise and materials to the principal use and building contained on the lot or parcel of land. 
Lot:  A designated parcel, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, regardless of size or ownership, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required.  The term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term. 
Corner Lot:  A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two (2) streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees.  The front yard and lot width requirements shall apply to each street to which the corner lot has frontage.  The other yards shall be designated as side yards. 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street. 
Reverse Frontage Lots: Lots that have frontage on two (2) public streets while restricting vehicular access solely from the public street which would front along the commonly identified rear of the lot. 
Through Lot.  An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot: An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part of the lot.  The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise land locked interior parcel. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 20 	Article 2: Definitions 
Lot Area (Gross):  The total space contained within the lot lines. 
Lot Area (Net):  The total space contained within the lot lines, excluding the following land and water areas: 100 percent of all areas exclusively contained within the existing, future and ultimate limits of street rights-of-way; 100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as common open space; 100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as an easement to accommodate third party utilities, vehicular access, municipal uses and/or stormwater improvements. Pursuant to the terms of this definition, the following formula for calculating the net lot area is hereby specified: 
GLA  – 100% of ROW – 100% of COS – 100% of ESM  = NLA 
GLA = Gross Lot Area 
ROW = Total area exclusively within the limits of the existing, future and ultimate street right-of-way 
COS = Total area exclusively designated as common open space 
ESM = Total area exclusively designated as an easement for utilities, vehicular access, municipal uses and/or 
stormwater improvements 
NLA = Net Lot Area  
The net lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located.  The net lot area calculations shall utilize the order or hierarchy of features specified by the formula, whereas, land and water areas shall not be calculated or classified in more than one (1) category. 
Lot Area (Building):  The provisions and the formula for calculating the required building lot area shall only apply to newly created lots, which have been considered as part of a subdivision or land development application.  All such provisions and formulas are contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
Lot Coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by all impervious surfaces, as determined by the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer. 
Lot Depth:  The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Lot Frontage:  That portion of a lot, which fronts on a single street. 
Lot Line:  The property line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot. 
Front Lot Line: The line separating a lot from a street.  The front lot line is also the street line. 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line, which is opposite the front lot line. The rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be established such that it will be at least ten (10) feet long. 
Side Lot Line:  Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Street or Alley Lot Line:  A lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. 
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the legal right-of-way line of the street immediately adjacent thereto, unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Manufacture or Manufacturing Use: The assembling, creating, cleaning, fabricating, processing, testing, recycling, packaging, converting, distributing and/or repairing of raw materials, with the use of labor and machinery, of products that will be made available for sale.  The term “manufacture” shall not include retail sales, personal services, solid waste disposal, truck distribution, mineral extraction, woodland extraction, forestry, exportation of groundwater, warehousing, or similar uses determined by the Zoning Officer.  
Massage Parlor or Therapeutic Massage Facility: A place of business where a person or persons engage in or carry on any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of any part of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or spa apparatus.  This particular use shall only include licensed physicians or members of the American Massage Therapist Association. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 21 Article 2: Definitions 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, utilizing the most current National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Mediation:  A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider acceptable. 
Medical or Dental Clinic: A building, which primarily involves a health care use, where patients are admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, psychologist, social workers, or other similar licensed professional, whereas the patients are not typically lodged overnight or after normal office hours unless prescribed by the licensed professional. 
Medical Research Center:  A public or private facility utilized for medical testing, sampling or research in a controlled laboratory environment. 
Medical Rehabilitation and Physical Therapy: A public or private facility utilized for the treatment, rehabilitation and training of outpatients to regain, develop or enhance their physical skills, condition or stamina, which have been lost or impaired through injury or illness.  
Mineral Extraction: The act or process of mining or extracting minerals by activities conducted in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Minerals: A solid homogeny aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone, dolomite, sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite, clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat, crude oil and natural gas. 
Mini-Mall: The multiple use of a single property for a planned group of non-residential uses, including retail operations, personal services, offices, financial institutions, medical and dental clinics, restaurants, taverns, and similar planned uses as determined by the Zoning Officer, where the uses are less than a cumulative total of 30,000 square feet of gross floor area and are owned and maintained by an individual, corporation, partnership or organization.  All mini-malls shall be planned and designed as an integrated unit or converted as such, with common off-street parking facilities and stormwater management facilities. 
Mini-Market: A commercial establishment usually not over 4,000 square feet in gross floor area, offering prepackaged foods, newspapers, magazines, and other similar items. 
Mini-Warehouse or Self-Storage Facility:  A building or group of buildings that are divided into individual units, each of which unit is available for rent or lease to the public for the self-storage of tangible personal property. 
Mixed-Use Commercial and Residential Developments:  A combination of uses within a building or group of buildings, which includes a permitted commercial use occupying the first floor and no more than four (4) residential apartment units occupying the second and third floors, as regulated under Section 716 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Motel:  A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing individual living or sleeping units designed for temporary use by tourists or transients, each of which is provided with an independent exterior entrance and off-street parking space.  The term “motel” includes, auto courts, motor courts, motor inns, motor lodges, roadside hotels, or similar accommodations. 
MPC: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Municipality:  Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Municipal Authority:  The Cumru Township Municipal Authority. 
Municipal Use:  A use owned and maintained by Cumru Township for public recreation area, park, swimming pool, golf course, spectator sports, municipal offices, police station, water and sewage facilities, utilities, community centers, solid waste disposal areas, recycling centers, composting facilities, road materials and equipment storage and similar governmental or municipal uses. 
Non-Commercial Animal Composting: A legal method of disposing of dead farm animals. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 22 Article 2: Definitions 
Nonconforming Lot: A lot, which does not meet with the minimum lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the Zoning Hearing Board. 
Nonconforming Structure or Building: A structure or building, or part thereof, which does not meet the applicable provisions or requirements of the district in which it is located, either at the time of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, where such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such Zoning Ordinance or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs. 
Nonconforming Use:  A building, structure, sign or use of land which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, either at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto, but which did not violate any applicable use regulations prior to the enactment of such Zoning Ordinance or amendments. However, no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely because of the existence of less than the required off-street parking spaces. 
Nursery: A commercial retail use involving the raising and selling of plants, shrubs, flowers, trees and other landscaping products. 
Nursing Home or Skilled Nursing Facility: A building or part thereof used for the lodging, boarding, and nursing care, on a 24-hr basis, of four or more persons who, because of mental or physical incapacity, may be unable to provide for their own needs and safety without the assistance of another person; provides facilities and services primarily for in-patients who require nursing care and related medical services less intense than those given in a general hospital or an extended-care facility. Nursing homes are required to have a licensed nurse on duty 24 hours a day, and during at least one shift each day, one of those nurses must be a Registered Nurse. Services provided in nursing homes include services of nurses, nursing aides and assistants; physical, occupational and speech therapists; social workers and recreational assistants; and room and board. Most care in nursing facilities is provided by certified nursing assistants, not by skilled personnel. Nursing facilities that participate in the Medicare and Medicaid programs are subject to federal requirements regarding staffing and quality of care for residents (42 CFR Part 483). Facilities are also licensed and inspected by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Obstruction: Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, structure, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill or other matter, which may impede, retard or change the normal direction or path of air, water or any modes of transportation.  
Occupancy: The possession of any structure, building, land area or water body, with the intent to remain for the purpose of residing, conducting business, or performing social, recreational, cultural, educational, municipal, governmental, institutional, religious, charitable, or similar uses.   
Permanent Occupancy: Occupancy for a period in excess of 120 consecutive days within one (1) calendar year. 
Temporary or Seasonal Occupancy:  Occupancy for a period less than 120 consecutive days within one (1) calendar year. 
Office:  A use that primarily involves professional or non-profit services relating to, but not limited to, administrative, business, clerical, financial, governmental, medical, municipal, political, religious, or similar office uses, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Official Map:  A legally adopted map that depicts the location of existing and proposed streets, public utilities, public facilities and/or public areas, which may be adopted the by Cumru Township Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Official Zoning Map:  The Zoning Map of Cumru Township. 
Open Area: Land or water areas in which no buildings or impervious surfaces are located. 
Open Space: The unoccupied space, land area, or water body, that is located on approved lot or development, which is open to the sky and not occupied by buildings, structures, sidewalks, off-street parking areas, access drives and/or other impervious areas. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 23 Article 2: Definitions 
Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 or any provisions or amendments thereof, enacted by the Board of Commissioners, including the Official Zoning Map. 
Outdoor Storage: The external storage of materials, products and accessory components of a use, which conforms to the normal functions and procedures conducted on that use in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Outside Sales:  All sales conducted outside of a principal building.  Commercial outdoor sales shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 814 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
PA: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Park:  A tract of land, designed and utilized by the general public for active and/or passive recreation purposes. 
Parking Lot: An off-street area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto. 
Parking Perimeter: The external limits of the permitted or approved off-street parking area. 
Parking Space: A reasonably level space, available for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle, not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep, which shall have an area of not less than one hundred and eighty (180) square feet exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or access. 
Patio:  An area or courtyard, which is not covered by a roof or permanent awning, and is designed for seasonal outdoor living purposes, as an accessory use to the principal structure or building. 
Paved Area: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Permit: A document issued by the proper regulatory agency authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities as specified on the application or permit. 
Building Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use, which indicates that the proposed construction, alteration, development, reconstruction, or similar activities are in accordance with the appropriate construction provisions established by Cumru Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the activities specified on the application or the provisions of the permit. 
Demolition Permit:  A permit issued to demolish, remove, destroy and/or eliminate a building or structure. 
Occupancy Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use, which indicates that certain construction, alteration, reconstruction, development, or similar activities have been completed and inspected in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township, and allows the applicant to occupy the building, structure or land area in accordance with the provisions of the permit. 
Seasonal, Special Use or Temporary Permit: A permit issued for a specific building, structure or land use, which indicates that the activities are in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township, and authorizes an applicant to commence with the seasonal, special use or temporary activities for a defined period of time, not to exceed sixty (60) cumulative days within a calendar year or as specified on the permit. 
Sign Permit: A permit issued for a specific on-premises or off-premises sign. 
Zoning Permit: A permit issued by the Zoning Officer for a specific building, structure or land use in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Permitted Use: A use permitted in a particular district to occupy or use land for a specific purpose in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance, when such use is permitted by right. 
Person: The term shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, limited liability company, firm, trust, business trust, estate, foundation, municipality, governmental entity, public utility, other association or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 24 Article 2: Definitions 
Personal Care Home: Residences that provide shelter, meals, supervision and assistance with personal care tasks, typically for older people, people with physical, behavioral health, or cognitive disabilities who are unable to care for themselves but do not need nursing home or medical care. Personal Care Homes are licensed and inspected by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. 
Personal Service Establishment: A building or portion of a building in which the services of a person permitted to practice a specified profession are offered to the general public.  Examples of such professions may include, accountants, agents, architects, barbers, beauticians, lawyers, planners, therapists, optometrists, photographers, tailors, therapeutic massage, electronic repair technicians, or other similar personal service establishments as determined by the Zoning Officer.  
Places of Worship:  Land areas occupied by buildings, churches, synagogues, retreat centers, monasteries, seminaries, convents, shrines, cemeteries, and other similar non-profit facilities, as further defined under Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance, which are primarily used for religious or spiritual worship. 
Plan: A proposal for development, subdivision or land development, including all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities, which complies with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Planning Commission:  The Cumru Township Planning Commission, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Porch:  A roofed or unroofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of a building, which is typically opened on three (3) sides. 
Preservation or Protection: When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of natural resources. 
Prime Agricultural Land or Resources: Prime agricultural soils or land areas as defined by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance and/or the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 
Principal Building: A building in which a principal use on a lot is carried on. 
Principal Use:  The main or primary purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which they may be occupied or maintained under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, only one (1) principal use shall be permitted on a lot. 
Printing or Publishing Establishment: A commercial, industrial or institutional use where documents, newspapers, magazines, books, literature, reference materials, periodicals, manuals, maps, music, advertisements, signs and other materials are proofed, evaluated, critiqued, reproduced and sold to consumers. 
Professional: An occupation practiced or performed by an individual who has been formally educated or trained for such occupation and who is typically, but not necessarily, licensed or certified in such occupation. 
Public Grounds or Land Areas:  All such areas including: parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites. 
Public Hearing:  A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by Cumru Township the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the “Pennsylvania Sunshine Law”. 
Public Notice: Notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within Cumru Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 25 Article 2: Definitions 
Quarrying or Mining Activities:  The removal or extraction of minerals, rock, natural resources, or other products of earth, either on the surface or below the surface, in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Quarry Support Activities: Those activities or subordinate uses to a quarry operation, which may include a bituminous asphalt plant, concrete manufacturing facility, concrete plant, concrete and asphalt recycling facility, demolition recycling facility, manufacturing facility and/or similar quarry support uses that are intended to complement or support quarrying or mining activities. 
Recreation Area (Active): Land area containing recreational facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in physical or energetic functions, primarily group functions.  Active recreation areas may include, but not limited to, athletic fields, basketball courts, baseball fields, softball fields, football fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, playgrounds, tot lots, community centers, golf courses, hockey rinks, skateboard areas, swimming pools and volleyball courts.  
Recreation Area (Passive):  Land area containing recreation facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in quiet functions that do not require physical or energetic functions.  Passive recreation areas may include, but not limited to: common open space; trails for walking or bicycling; surface water for canoeing or fishing; land preserve areas for hunting; pavilions; picnic areas; cultural centers; scenic vistas; and amphitheaters.  
Recreation Facilities:  Land, water, buildings, structures, apparatuses and/or equipment, which are required to accommodate recreational uses. 
Recreational Uses: An active or passive recreational use designed to accommodate physical, leisure, sporting or relaxation activities on land or water.  Recreational uses may include, basketball, baseball, football, bicycling, walking, jogging, running, golfing, fishing, boating, hunting, hockey, skating, skateboarding, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, exercise/fitness, bowling, billiards, bird watching, picnicking, equestrian events, rodeos, automobile racing events, demolition derby events, motorcycle exhibitions, shooting ranges, or any other similar recreational uses, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Recreational Uses: A recreational use in which members of the community congregate and a fee is typically paid to occupy or utilize the recreation facilities.  A family entertainment complex, arcade, health club, recreation club, sports arena, community center and similar facilities shall be considered as a commercial recreation use. 
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses:  A recreational use in which members of the community may congregate and no fee is paid to occupy or utilize the recreation facilities. 
Recreational Vehicles:  A vehicle of any size, which is designed as a temporary dwelling or living unit for travel, recreation and vacation uses.  Recreation vehicles may include motorized vehicles designed to be self-propelled or non-motorized vehicles designed to be towed or carried by another vehicle including campers, pickup coaches, travel trailer, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, snowmobiles, and similar vehicles. 
Regulated Hunting Grounds: A public or private area utilized for raising, breeding and/or hunting wildlife within a natural environment. 
Religious Use: Land areas occupied by buildings, churches, synagogues, retreat centers, monasteries, seminaries, convents, shrines, cemeteries, and other similar non-profit facilities, as further defined under Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance, which are primarily used for religious or spiritual worship. 
Renewable Energy System:  Equipment and devices utilized to store, convert, process and/or transmit a natural source of energy (solar, wind, rain, surface water, ground water, geothermal and other similar sources) into a primary or alternative energy supply source, which provides service to a permitted use on an approved lot.  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 26 Article 2: Definitions 
Rental Business: A commercial use in which machinery, equipment and goods, but not motor vehicles, are rented to customers for temporary use pursuant to a short-term rental contract, including the sale of machinery, equipment and goods as an accessory use.  For the purposes of this definition: “machinery” means equipment, which requires a motor to operate; “equipment” means any non-motorized device permanently attached to and movable on wheels; and “goods” means any other rental items. 
Rental Unit: A defined area within a building or structure, which is rented or leased to accommodate residential or non-residential uses, as permitted by Cumru Township. 
Research Facility: A commercial, industrial or institutional facility utilized for testing, sampling or research in a controlled laboratory environment. 
Residential Use: A use within a permitted dwelling unit, designed and utilized as the living quarters for one (1) or more families living independently of each other.  Residential uses may be permitted within single family detached units, single family semi-detached units, two family attached units, mobile homes, apartment units, townhouse units, and secondary housing units, provided the type of dwelling unit is a permitted use within the zoning district to which it is located, and provided that the dwelling unit is designed to comply with the standards and specifications referenced by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Restaurant:  A commercial establishment devoted to the sale and consumption of food and beverages to patrons within an enclosed building, while the patrons are seated at counters, booths, or tables.  A restaurant may include an area or use devoted to outdoor eating, retail sales, social quarters, meeting rooms, bars, taverns, taprooms, and similar uses. 
Restaurant, Fast Food or Drive-Through:  A restaurant devoted to the sale of food and beverages to patrons either within an enclosed building, at a pick-up counter, through a drive-through service lane, and/or through a delivery service.  All such facilities may offer their patrons the option to consume the food and beverages either inside the restaurant or at an off-site location. 
Resource Recovery Facility: A facility or land that is used for any one (1) or a combination of the following or similar uses: composting, incineration, material separation, recycling or trash transfer.  A resource recovery facility shall be owned and operated by Cumru Township. 
Composting Facility: A facility for the composting of the organic matter in municipal solid waste. 
Incinerator: A facility designed to reduce municipal solid waste by combustion.  This use may or may not include heat exchange equipment for energy recovery. 
Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) Facility: The extraction of materials from municipal solid waste for recycling or for use as refuse derived fuel (RDF). 
Recycling Facility: A business that accumulates material such as paper, glass, aluminum and/or plastic that is no longer useful for its intended purpose.  The materials are then sold to another business as a raw material, which can be used to manufacture a new product. 
Transfer Station: A facility where municipal solid waste is delivered for the purpose of transferring the material into another container or vehicles for transport to a final disposal site or processing facility. (A transfer station may include the separation and collection of material for the purpose of recycling). 
Retail Business Establishment: A permitted business establishment occupying a single permitted retail use, whereas, depending upon its size, type, location or intensity may require distinct approval procedures. 
Retail Use: A commercial establishment devoted to the sale of products and services to patrons within an enclosed building.  Retail uses may include establishments selling food, groceries, beverages, clothing, business or office supplies, entertainment items, furniture, home improvement supplies, household products, personal care supplies, building supplies, sporting goods, equipment, machines, computers, electronics, pet supplies, medical supplies, agricultural supplies, automobile supplies, firearms, and other similar retail uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 27 Article 2: Definitions 
Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is dedicated or reserved to accommodate streets, utilities, stormwater management facilities, traffic control facilities, curbs, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, street lights, and other public improvements. 
Legal Right-Of-Way: The existing width or area of land, which is currently owned and maintained by Cumru Township, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or other public agency or authority. 
Ultimate or Required Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is determined necessary to  reserve and/or dedicate  in order to accommodate future public improvements. 
Riparian Buffer Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of stream valleys, floodplains, wetlands, hydric soils, high water table soils with hydric components, and steep slopes, as further defined and regulated under Section 506 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sanitary Facilities: The required plumbing fixtures within a dwelling unit including a sink, toilet, bathtub or shower, which are functioning and compliant with the provisions of Cumru Township.   
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System:  A system designed to collect, convey, treat and dispose of sewage from users in compliance with local, county, state and federal regulations. 
On-Lot System:  A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a neighborhood area. 
Public or Municipal System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant. 
Optional System Requirement:  A special or unique use of land, which because of its wastewater disposal requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot sewage disposal methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal treatment system.  The selected method for wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment shall be consistent with the Cumru Township Act 537 Plan, the Cumru Township Sewer Use Ordinance, and Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. 
Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective solid surface in the shape of a dish, cone or horn, which is used to transmit and/or receive signals. 
School: A building or group of building intended to provide or facilitate an educational use including pre-schools, nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, secondary schools, trade schools, vocational schools, colleges and/or universities, which are licensed and accredited as an education facility. 
Screen or Screening: An assemblage of permissible materials, which are strategically arranged so as to effectively block or obstruct the views between adjacent or adjoining properties from ground level to a height of six (6) feet above grade level, or as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Seasonal Pool: An essential and unique wetland habitat, which is typically small, shallow, ephemeral water bodies, and have no permanent inlet or outlet.  Seasonal pools are filled by rain and snow melt, which typically dry-up for a period of time during the summer season.  They are considered essential since they support a number of species that require temporary wetland habitats for survival.  
Setback Requirements: The setback requirements as established for any building or structure within the applicable Zoning District for which it is located. 
Sewage Facilities Plan: The Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by Cumru Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537), as may be amended from time to time. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 28 Article 2: Definitions 
Shade Tree: A deciduous tree, which normally grows with a single trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters sunshine during specific seasons during the year. 
Shopping Center or Shopping Mall: The multiple use of a single property for a planned group of non-residential uses, including retail operations, personal services, offices, financial institutions, medical and dental clinics, restaurants, family entertainment centers, taverns, night clubs, and similar planned uses as determined by the Zoning Officer, where the permitted uses exceed a cumulative total of 30,000 gross square feet of floor area and are owned and maintained by an individual, corporation, partnership or organization.  All shopping centers shall be planned and designed as an integrated unit or converted as such, with common off-street parking facilities, stormwater management facilities and utility services. 
Sidewalk Sale: A seasonal or occasional sale conducted on the sidewalk or outside of the front or side of the principal building or establishment, whereas, goods are offered for sale to the public, provided that all such sales shall comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sign: Any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or other representations utilized for announcement, direction, identification or advertisement.  The word "sign" includes the word "billboard", but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional signs. 
Accessory Sign:  A subordinate sign locate on the same property of the principal use, which is erected to further describe the products or services available to the general public. 
Animated Sign: A sign or any device designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement by mechanical, electrical or natural means.  
Banner:  A promotional sign for special community events including, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, cultural, municipal, fraternal, religious, or similar community events as determined by the Zoning Officer, whereas the promotional sign or banner shall be considered as temporary for a period of time not to exceed 30 cumulative days in a calendar year.  All such signs or banners shall be made of nylon, canvas, or similar all-weather material.  
Billboard:  An off-premises sign erected by a professional sign company or by the outdoor advertising industry, on which advertisement space is leased for a fixed period of time. 
Business or Non-Residential Sign:  An on-premises sign designated for a permitted business or non-residential use, which identifies the written name, type of business, commodity sold, services, trademark and/or symbol. 
Canopy Sign: A non-illuminated sign made of cloth, canvas, aluminum, metal, wood, or similar materials, which is affixed to a building and projects outward, whereas the sign or message is painted on, sewed, fastened or applied.  All such signs may or may not be fixed or equipped with a mechanism for raising or holding the canopy or awning in a retracted position against the building. 
Charitable or Community Service Sign:  An on-premises sign identifying the charitable or community service organization, including religious facilities, volunteer fire companies, or other non-profit organization.  All such signs may include supplemental information concerning hours, events, activities or messages.  
Development Sign: An on-premises sign indicating that the property is actively in the process of subdivision or land development for residential or non-residential uses. 
Directional Sign:  An informational or functional on-premises sign, containing only information pertaining to direction, entrance, exit, off-street loading spaces, service areas, service lanes, fire lanes, handicapped parking spaces, and off-street parking areas.  All such directional signs shall contain no advertisement messages. 
Double-Faced Sign: A sign with two (2) faces that is parallel, facing opposite directions, and matching in size and shape. 
Flashing Sign: A type of sign in which the illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times of use, and which exhibits sudden, times or marked changes in lighting effects.  Unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, flashing signs shall be prohibited. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 29 Article 2: Definitions 
Freestanding Sign:  An on-premises sign displaying information pertaining to the existing use for which it is located, and is supported by, or suspended from a freestanding column or other support(s) located in or upon the ground surface.   
Ground Sign:  An on-premises sign displaying information pertaining to the existing use for which it is located, and is placed upon, supported by, and anchored to the ground.  A ground sign shall not be considered as a freestanding sign or portable sign. 
Identification Sign: An on-premises sign identifying a medical facility, hospital, school, institutional use, religious facility, municipal facility, recreational use, farm, historical site, or similar use. 
Illuminated Sign:  A sign designed to project or reflect artificial light from an internal or external source, which may be directly, indirectly illuminated, or through transparent or translucent material.  Illuminated signs may include, billboards, freestanding signs, ground signs, or signs affixed to a building or structure, as permitted under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Marquee Sign: An on-premises sign attached to a building façade, which may include changeable letters, messages or displays. 
Municipal or Official Sign: A sign erected by Cumru Township, Berks County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or other governmental organization.  
Off-Premises Sign: A permitted sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, institution, or other use, which is offered elsewhere other than upon the premises where the sign is located. 
On-Premises Sign: A permitted sign, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, institution, or other permitted use, which is offered on the same property or tract of land where the sign is located. 
Portable Sign: A temporary sign designed to be moved from place to place, which is not affixed or anchored to the ground, structure or building.  Portable signs shall not be utilized or displayed for more than 48 cumulative hours over any 30 consecutive day period of time. 
Projecting Sign: An on-premises sign mounted upon a building so that its principal face is a right angle or perpendicular to the wall of the building.  All such projecting signs shall extend at least one (1) foot from the building but no more than twelve (12) feet from the building. 
Real Estate Sign: An on-premises sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located. 
Roof Sign: An on-premises sign, which is erected or displayed upon the roof of a building or exceeds the height of the building.  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a roof sign shall be prohibited. 
Special Event or Seasonal:  A temporary sign, anchored or mounted to the ground by a cylinder or sleeve by which periodical advertisement of specials can be displayed during certain segments of the year in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sports Facilities Business Sign: A business sign, erected and maintained only for a non-profit organization or entity organized to promote youth sports teams, advertising a business, service, product, or organization, restricted as to purpose and location, and conforming to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, border trim or framing, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be determined by calculating the smallest rectangle, which encompasses all of the letters and symbols used for the sign, regardless of the actual shape created by the letters and symbols. 
Sign Height:  The height of the sign, as measured at the location of the sign from the ground elevation to the highest and lowest parts of the sign. 
Special Use or Temporary Sign: A permitted on-premises sign erected for a temporary period in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 30 Article 2: Definitions 
Vehicle Sign: A sign affixed or painted on a vehicle, trailer or similar device. 
Wall Sign or Parallel Sign:  An on-premises sign posted on, suspended from, or otherwise affixed to the wall, facade, or vertical surface of a building, which does not project or extend more than twelve (12) inches from the wall, facade, or vertical surface of the building to which it is attached.  A wall signs may partially extend above the roofline by more than 20 percent of the sign height, as measured at the point where such sign are attached to the building. 
Window Sign:  A temporary or permanent on-premises sign, affixed to or visible through a window of a building. 
Silo: A tall cylindrical structure that is typically located on a farm for non-residential uses. 
Single and Separate Ownership:  The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, whereas the ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining land areas. 
Slope: Topographic conditions in which the percentage of vertical to horizontal relief is computed utilizing standard rise over run calculations and/or as defined by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Soil Survey: The Soil Survey of Berks County. 
Solicitor:  The legal consultant or attorney appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Solid Waste: Waste, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials. 
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities: A site in which engineering principles are utilized to bury, dispose, reduce, eliminate and/or incinerate deposits of solid waste without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances, pollution or environmental degradation. All such facilities may include sanitary landfills, solid waste landfills, low level radioactive waste disposal facilities, resource recovery facilities, recycling centers and transfer stations. 
Special Exception:  A use by which the Zoning Hearing Board may grant permission to an applicant within a particular zoning district for the occupancy or use of land or water for a specific purpose, as specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 
Stable:  A building or structure in which horses, llamas, donkeys, and other similar animals, which are kept for remuneration, hire, sale or other lawful uses. 
State: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its designated agencies. 
Steep Slopes: Areas of land in which the topographical conditions exceed a certain slope in pre-development conditions, as further defined under this Zoning Ordinance.  The following slope categories are hereby defined as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District: 
Category 1 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 8 and 15 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 8 and 15 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 2 Slopes:  All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 15 and 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 3 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre­development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes exceeds 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category prevail. 
Steep Slope Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined by Section 504 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 31 Article 2: Definitions 
Steeple: A tall tapering architectural feature of a structure that is that is located on the roof of or is part of the superstructure of a permitted non-residential use. 
Stormwater: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation in the form of rain, snow, sleet, hail or ice. 
Stormwater Management:  A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a defined area or development, while promoting the protection and conservation of surface water, groundwater and groundwater recharge. 
Stormwater Management Facilities: Those controls and measures including, by not limited to, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, storm sewers, basins, infiltration systems, swales, watercourses, and floodplains, used to implement a storm water management regulations. 
Story:  That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above, including basements and mezzanines, and as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by Cumru Township. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties.  The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway and similar terms.  The functional classification of existing streets has been defined as follows: 
Expressways:  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide, interstate, or regional travel and movements between major urban areas. Expressways contain the most heavily traveled routes (10,000 to 100,000 trips per day) and including multi-lane roadways.  This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities.  The system is designed for relatively high speeds (50 to 65 MPH) with a minimum of interference to through traffic.  Expressways facilitate truck transport by providing optimum conditions.  Mobility is the principal function and accessibility should be limited to carefully planned interchanges to preserve the functional classification of expressways. 
Arterials (Minor and Major Arterial):  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide or regional travel and movements between major urban areas.  Arterial routes contain heavily traveled routes (5,000 to 25,000) including multi-lane roadways.   This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities. The system is designed for relatively high speeds (35 to 55 MPH) with a minor interference to through traffic. Arterial routes facilitate truck transport by providing favorable conditions. Mobility is the major function and accessibility should be limited to preserve the functional classification. 
Collectors (Minor and Major Collector):  Routes that serves primarily regional or intra-county trips and represents those routes with shorter travel distances than arterial routes.  Collector roads contain well-traveled roads (500 to 10,000 trips per day) leading to specific destinations or to expressways and arterial routes.  The system is designed for moderate speeds (25 to 45 MPH) with some interference with designed intersections to permit through traffic.  Depending upon its structural integrity and design, collector routes can facilitate lightweight truck transport. Mobility is a significant function and accessibility should be limited to street intersections and driveways in order to preserve the functional classification of collector roads. 
Minor Streets or Local Access Streets: Roads that primarily serve local trips and represents those routes with shorter travel distances than collector routes.  Local roads contain low volume to moderately traveled roads (less than 500 trips per day) leading to collector and arterial routes.  The system is designed for lower speeds (25 to 35 MPH) with interference with a number of designed intersections.  Local roads are typically designed to facilitate lightweight truck transport for local deliveries.  Mobility is a minor function and accessibility to street intersections, driveways and adjacent land areas is significant for local roads. 
Marginal Access Roads: Roads that serve specific land uses, which are parallel or adjacent to an expressway, arterial or major collector roads.  Marginal access roads are typically designed to accommodate the use(s) they directly serve.  Accessibility between selective points is an essential design element with control at the point of destination. Many marginal access roads are privately owned and maintained. 
Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other end. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 32 Article 2: Definitions 
Internal Street: A minor street used for circulation and access within a development involving multi-residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses. 
Service Street (Alley): A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or more properties. 
Public Street:  An improved cartway within a dedicated right-of-way that is owned and maintained by Cumru Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Private Street:  An improved cartway within a defined right-of-way that is not owned and maintained by Cumru Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Pedestrian Path: An improved lane, sidewalk, trail or path, which is specifically designated for pedestrian use either along a street or contained within a park, common open space area, off-street parking area and/or other areas approved for community use.  
Bicycle Lane:  An improved travel lane, trail or path, which is specifically designated for persons riding bicycles and other permitted non-motorized vehicles. 
Street Frontage: The lot dimension measured along the street line or right-of-way line of any one street or highway abutting a lot. 
Street Line: The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary of a public street, road or highway right-of-way legally open or officially mapped by a municipality or higher governmental authority, between a lot and the outside boundary of a street shown on a recorded subdivision or land development plan, or between a lot and a private street or road over which the owners or tenants of one or more lots held in single and separate ownership have a right-of-way. 
Structure:  Any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.  The term structure shall include, but not limited to, buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages, flagpoles, windmills, water towers, silos, solar energy collectors, and similar structures. 
Permanent Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for more than one (1) year, provided the structure complies with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Temporary Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for less than one (1) year, provided the structure complies with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Subdivision: The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.  The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted. 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009, as initially adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 687. The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 690. 
Substantial Damage:  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its previous condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, addition, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement to a structure, whereby the cost of such improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvements occurred. 
Subterranean Buildings: A building covered by land on at least 50 percent of the combined surface of its walls and roof. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 33 Article 2: Definitions 
Surface Mining:  The extraction of minerals, rock and other products of the earth by activities conducted upon the surface of the land which require the removal of the overburden, strata or material overlying, above or between the minerals, rock and other products of the earth, or by otherwise exposing and retrieving the minerals from the surface. Mining activities carried out beneath the surface by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mine openings are not included in this definition. 
Surveyor: An individual registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land, establish locations, and perform the requirements of a survey. 
Swimming Pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over twenty-four 
(24) inches deep, including in-ground swimming pools, above-ground swimming pools, on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and similar structures, which are further defined and regulated by Cumru Township. 
Tavern or Taproom: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are served to the general public as the primary portion of the trade in accordance with local and state laws. 
Telecommunications: The science or technology of communications by electronic transmission of impulses as by telegraph, cable, cellular, telephone, radio, television, microwave, earth station broadcast/cable television communications and other similar technology not otherwise enumerated and as may evolve after enactment of this Ordinance. 
Telecommunication Facility: A structure, building, tower, antennae and other types of facilities utilized as primary or accessory uses for telecommunications.  The following sub-definitions of telecommunication facilities are provided as follows:  
Colocation: The location of more than one (1) communications antenna on a communication tower, support structure, building, public utility transmission tower, or other similar structure. 
Communications Antenna: A device used to receive and/or transmit wireless communications or radio signals, including panels, microwave dishes, wires, signal poles, whips, or similar communication devices. 
Communications Support Structure or Tower:  Any monopole or lattice structure designed and intended to be used for the support and attachment of one (1) or more commercial communications antennas, appurtenant communications equipment, or similar devices. 
Communications Antenna Height:  The vertical distance as measured from the base of the commercial communications antenna support structure at the undisturbed grade to the top of the highest point of the structure. If a commercial communications antenna support structure is located on a sloped grade, the average grade between the highest and lowest elevations on either side of the support structure shall be utilized to calculate the height. 
Directional Antenna: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. 
Lattice Tower:  A guyed or self-supporting three (3) or four (4) sided open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
Micro-Cell: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility used to provide increased capacity in high call demand areas or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage.  Micro-cells communicate with the primary low power mobile radio service facility in a coverage area via fiber optic cable or microwave.  Coverage area for a micro-cell is typically a one (1) mile radius or less. 
Microwave Antenna: A dish-like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. 
Monopole: A structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications equipment. 
Omni Directional Antenna:  An antenna that is equally effective in all directions, and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it is designed. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 34 Article 2: Definitions 
Repeater: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility that extends coverage of a cell or service area to areas not covered by the originating cell or service area. 
Whip Antenna: An antenna that is cylindrical in shape, which can be directional or omni-directional.  Their size varies based upon the frequency and gain for which they are designed. 
Wireless Communications Equipment Building: A building or cabinet in which electronic receiving, relay or transmitting equipment for a wireless communications facility is housed.  The equipment building shall be considered as a component of the commercial communications facility. 
Wireless Communications Facility: The communications antenna(s), support structure, communications equipment building, if any, parking and/or other structures and equipment involved in receiving or transmitting wireless communications or radio signals.  A wireless communications facility shall also be considered as a commercial communications facility.  
Terrace: A hard-surfaced area of ground that is generally contiguous to a dwelling and utilized for outdoor living. 
Therapeutic Massage: A legal method of applying pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of any part of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or spa apparatus. 
Therapeutic Spa or Hot Tub:  Any structure intended for relaxation, physical therapy, bathing or wading containing over a depth exceeding twenty-four (24) inches as further regulated within Section 920 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Third Party Utility:  A basic utility service located on a property, which has the capacities to serve other properties. 
Tourist Home: The temporary use and occupancy of a single-family detached dwelling for the purpose of accommodating transient guests for rent. 
Township: Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Township Engineer:  The Cumru Township Engineer appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Tract: One or more lots assembled for the purposes of subdivision or land development. 
Transient: The temporary passing or crossing from one thing or person to another, or from place to place, provided the passing or crossing is temporary and not permanent.  
Truck Service Establishment: A commercial service establishment to clean, service, repair and maintain trucks, tractor trailers and other commercial vehicles. 
Use:  The specific purpose for which land, water, signage, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, to be utilized, occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, residence, business or operation, which may be carried on thereon or therein.  The term "permitted use" or any equivalent term utilized within this Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use. 
Permanent Use:  A permitted use conducted on a lot for more than one (1) year, provided the permanent use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Seasonal or Special Use: A permitted use conducted on a lot during certain defined segments of the year, provided the seasonal use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Temporary Use: A permitted use conducted on a lot for less than a one (1) year period of time, provided the temporary use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 35 Article 2: Definitions 
Utility: A service, facility, apparatus or use, which provides electric, telephone, cable, sewer, water, natural gas, and similar utility services, to customers within a defined service area, grid, neighborhood region, or municipality.  
Community Utility: A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a public utility provider, municipality, municipal authority, homeowners association, or private agency for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area. 
Private Utility: A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a private or independent utility provider for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area 
Public Utility:  A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a public utility provider for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area. 
Variance. Relief granted by the Zoning Hearing Board from the terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance where literal enforcement would create unnecessary hardship and when granting of the relief would not be contrary to the public interest. 
Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for any lawful use, which is properly licensed and inspected in accordance with all local, state and federal laws. 
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic: A professional use operated by a doctor of veterinary medicine used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of domesticated animals, including dogs, cats, reptiles and birds, which may include the provision for a medical laboratory, operating theater and overnight boarding accommodations. 
Warehouse or Freight Terminal: A building or group of buildings primarily utilized for storage, transfer, loading and unloading of certain products or commodities, but shall not include retail uses or trucking establishment, unless such use is specifically permitted in that district.   
Waste:  A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.  The term waste shall also include and apply to waste that may be considered as either hazardous, contaminated, toxic, residual, municipal or recyclable, as further defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and/or other agency having jurisdiction. 
Water Supply System: A system designed to transmit water from the source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state agencies and the Township. 
On-Lot Water Supply System: A water supply system, which transmits water from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community Water Supply System: A temporary water supply system which transmits from a common source to more than one (1) dwelling, principal use and/or lot within a single neighborhood.  A community water supply system may be permitted on a temporary basis for developments, which are to be permanently serviced by a public water supply system. All such community water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Public or Municipal Water Supply System: A system of water collection, storage, transmission and delivery, which are to service a community, but not confined to a neighborhood.  All such public or municipal water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Optional System Requirement: A special or unique use of land, which because of its water supply requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot water supply methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal water supply system.  The selected method for water supply shall be consistent with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Water Tower:  A structure owned an operated by a company, which is regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, which is utilized to store water. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 36 Article 2: Definitions 
Watercourse: A perennial or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, channel, swale, pond, lake, or other body of surface water carrying or holding water, whether natural or artificial. 
Watershed:  The total land area where water drains into a particular watercourse.  
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.  The major characteristics of wetlands include vegetation, soil and hydrology. 
Wetlands Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of wetlands, hydric soils and high water table soils with hydric components, as further defined and regulated under Section 503 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Wholesale and Distribution Uses: A commercial or industrial use involving the sale of merchandise in large quantities or transactions of commodities to retailers, contractors, businesses, and their agents, but are not generally sold to the general public. 
Woodlands: An area of land in which one (1) or more contiguous acres are mostly occupied or covered by healthy mature trees (12 inches in caliper).  The area of the woodlands shall be measured from the drip line of the outer trees.  
Woodland Extraction: The clear cutting of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliper) to provide area for development on an individual lot. 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of woodlands and forested areas, which includes separate provisions for the following activities: woodland extraction and replacement; forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging; tree protection and replacement; and other activities, which are further defined and regulated under Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure(s), which lies between the structure(s) and a lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted.  
Front Yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between a structure and the front lot line.  On lots abutting more than one public street other than an alley the front yard requirement shall apply fronting each public street. 
Rear Yard:  A yard extending the full width of the lot between a structure and a rear lot line. 
Side Yard:  A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a structure and the nearest side lot line. 
Yard Sale: An occasional and temporary use contained on a residential lot, wherein the occupants display and offer personal possessions for sale in accordance with the provisions specified by Section 814 of this Zoning Ordinance  This term includes “garage sale,” “moving sale,” and similar terms and activities. 
Zoning: Division of all of the land of an entire political subdivision into districts having different regulations pertaining to use of land; height, area, bulk and use of buildings; yard requirements; and in some states density of population. Zoning is affected by local ordinance under the police power of the state granted by specific legislation generally termed an "enabling act". 
Zoning Hearing Board:  The Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board, as established and appointed by the Board of Commissioners to hear matters in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance. 
Zoning Map: The Cumru Township Zoning Map. 
Zoning Officer:  The agent or official designated by the governing body to administer and enforce this Zoning Ordinance, as appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Zoning Ordinance: The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, as initially adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 686.  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009 as part of Cumru Township Ordinance 689. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 37 Article 2: Definitions 
Article 3: Zoning Map and Zoning Districts 
Section 301:   Establishment of Zoning Districts and Overlay Districts 
(A) 	For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, Cumru Township is hereby divided into nine (9) base zoning districts, which shall be designated as follows: 
AG: Agricultural District 
RC: Rural Conservation District 
LR: Low Density Residential District 
MR: Medium Density Residential District 
HR: High Density Residential District 
LC: Local Commercial District 
HC: Highway Commercial District 
OC Office Commercial District 
GI: General Industrial District 

(B) 	For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the following Conservation Overlay Districts shall be established in accordance with the provisions of Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance: 
Floodplain Overlay District 
Wetlands Overlay District 
Steep Slope Overlay District 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 
Riparian Buffer Overlay District 

Carbonate Geology Overlay District 
(C) 	For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the following Special Overlay Districts shall be established in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of this Zoning Ordinance 
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District 
Airport Overlay District 
Historical Preservation Overlay District 


Section 302:   Official Zoning Map  
(A) 	
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be depicted on the Zoning Map of Cumru Township.  The Zoning Map and all notations, references and data illustrated thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this Zoning Ordinance.  The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be labeled as the Cumru Township Zoning Map and shall identify the signatures of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, attested by the Secretary of said Board of Commissioners, and bear the seal Cumru Township under the following words: 

"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on June 16, 2009, as part of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009”. 

(B) 	
If changes are made to district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and the changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Board of Commissioners.  No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map, or matter thereon shown, except in conformity with the applicable procedures established in this Zoning Ordinance.  All changes shall be noted by date with a brief description of the nature of the change. 

(C) 	
The Official Zoning Map shall be located in a place designated by the Board of Commissioners, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water area in Cumru Township regardless of unofficial copies, which may have been made or published from time to time. 

(D) 	
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map.  The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Board of Commissioners, attested by the Secretary, and bear the seal of Cumru Township under the following words: 

"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map of the Township of Cumru supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of Ordinance No._______ of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania". 

(E) 	
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all applicable records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 


Section 303:   Interpretation of District Boundaries 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the base districts as indicated on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules and guidelines, as provided within this section shall be applicable. 
(A) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with the centerlines of streets, highways, lanes, alleys, railroad tracks, rivers or creeks, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(B) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding with lot lines or deed lines, which were in effect at the date of this Zoning Ordinance, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(C) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding or municipal boundary lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 

(D) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center or right-of-way lines of streets or highways, lanes, alleys, railroad tracks, rivers or creeks, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to the center or right-of-way lines at such distance as is indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 

(E) 	
Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being perpendicular to the right-of-way lines. 

(F) 	
Where district boundaries are referenced by a distance or measurement from a specific feature, such distance shall be measured in feet and the district boundaries shall follow the specified setback.  Where distances or measurements are not specifically referenced on the Official Zoning Map, the scale of the Official Zoning Map shall determine the unspecified setback. 

(G) 	
Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the effective date of this Ordinance, at the election of the property owner, the regulations of either zoning district may be extended a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet beyond the district boundary line onto the remaining portion of the lot. 

(H) 	
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are inconsistent with those indicated on the Official Zoning Map, or when circumstances not covered within the context of this Section apply, the Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret the district boundaries. 


Section 304: Application of District Boundaries 
The following standards indicated within this section shall be utilized for the generalized application of the base district regulations in association with this Zoning Ordinance. 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise provided by law or the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, no building, structure or land area shall be used or occupied except for a permitted use in the zoning district within which the building, structure or land area is located. 

(B) 	
Any legally established use of a building structure, lot, land area, or part thereof, which constitutes a conforming use under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, may be continued. 

(C) 	
Any legally established use which occupies a building structure, lot or land area prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or amendment thereto, but does not comply with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto, may be continued as a nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The regulations established within this Zoning Ordinance shall apply uniformly to building, structures or uses, unless otherwise specified by other codes or ordinances, as adopted by Cumru Township. 

(E) 	
Permitted uses shall adhere to the dimensional requirements for lot area, lot width, yard, height and coverage as specified for the zoning district to which the use is located, unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
No building, structure or area of land shall be occupied without the issuance of a Certificate of Use and Occupancy by the Zoning Officer or other code official designated by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
No part of a yard, common open space, other open space, off-street parking area, or loading space required in connection with any structure, building or use of the land shall be included as part of a yard, common open space, open space, off-street parking area, or loading space similarly required for any other structure, building or use of the land, except as permitted or required by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance, which meets the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.  A yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be further reduced below the minimum requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Where district regulations specify a minimum lot width at the street line, the minimum lot width shall be provided contiguous along the street line of one (1) street.  It is prohibited, when calculating the width of a lot, to add widths along the street lines of two (2) or more streets.  In the case of a corner lot, the minimum lot width must be provided along each street on which the lot fronts. 

(J) 	
In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the Zoning Officer shall designate or assign the front, side and rear yards, as considered appropriate for the configuration and conditions. 

(K) 	
All territory or land area, which may be annexed to Cumru Township shall be considered to be zoned in the same manner as the contiguous territory inside the previous municipal limits until otherwise classified. 




Article 4: Zoning District Regulations 
Section 401: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance is to assign a list of uses, which are permitted by right, special exception and conditional use for each Zoning District, as well as establish the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for each permitted use.  Where appropriate, special provisions shall be designated to the permitted uses by reference to other sections of this Zoning Ordinance 

(B) 	
The provisions of Article 4 are intended to be generally consistent with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan of 2005, as may be revised or amended. 

(C) 	
Uses not permitted or recognized by this Zoning Ordinance may be permitted and included as part of the municipal zoning ordinance(s) that have been adopted by Brecknock Township, Kenhorst Borough, Mohnton Borough and/or Shillington Borough.  Should a use not be permitted or recognized within any of the zoning ordinances, an application should be made to the Zoning Officer to consider in accordance the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 402: Agricultural (AG) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The AG Zoning District generally contains areas with existing agricultural, woodlands, stream valleys and residential uses.  The presence of active and productive agricultural lands is a significant land resource within Cumru Township.  The purpose of the AG Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate the continuation of agriculture as a land use within Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
To accommodate agricultural development and other development of a type and density that will have the least possible conflict with existing and potential agricultural areas. 

(3) 	
To encourage the appropriate utilization of lands characterized by prime agricultural soils, recognizing that such soils are a precious, irreplaceable natural resource. 

(4) 	
To provide for residential uses in a rural setting. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the AG Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Cluster Design for the AG District, subject to the provisions of Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 804.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 804.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Horseback Riding School and Stables, subject to Section 828 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the AG Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 713 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Secondary Housing, subject to Section 714.1 and 714.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Intensive Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 804.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Farm-Support Business, subject to Section 804.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Mushroom Production Uses, subject to Section 811.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Commercial Greenhouse, subject to Section 813 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Home Day Care, subject to Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Game Preserve, subject to Section 825 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Golf Course, subject to Section 826 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Private Kennels, subject to Section 832.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(15) 	
Veterinary Hospitals or Animal Clinics, subject to Section 853 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 1 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the AG Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 1, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the AG Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the AG Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the AG Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the AG District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the AG Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the AG Zoning District. 


AG Zoning  District: Utility  and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental Matrix Chart 1)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  2 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Cluster Design for the AG District  By Right  Optional  Optional  20 acres  Refer to Section 706 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 804.1 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 804.3 for additional requirements  
Horseback Riding School and Stables  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 828 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  3 acres  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 710 for additional requirements  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Secondary Housing  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 714.1 and 714.2 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Intensive Agricultural  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 804.2 for additional requirements  
Farm-Support Business  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 804.4 for additional requirements  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Mushroom Production  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 811.2 for additional requirements  
Comm. Greenhouse  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 813 for additional requirements  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 44 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations  

AG Zoning  District: Utility  and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental Matrix Chart 1)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  2 acres  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Game Preserve or Regulated Hunting  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  50 acres  Refer to Section 825 for additional requirements  
Golf Course  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  100 acres  Refer to Section 826 for additional requirements  
Private Kennels  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 832.1 for additional requirements  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  

Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 45 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 403: Rural Conservation (RC) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The RC Zoning District generally contains areas with existing agricultural, woodlands, stream valleys and rural residential uses.    The purpose of the RC Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To preserve and enhance ecologically fragile and aesthetically valuable environments of the Township. Specific environmental features to be preserved and enhanced include, but are not necessarily limited to streams, stream valleys, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, groundwater, steep slopes, woodlands, scenic vistas, and scenic corridors. 

(2) 	
To permit development of a type and density, which will has minimal adverse effects upon the natural features and the surrounding properties. 

(3) 	
To provide a clearly defined limits between residential uses, densities and developments within Cumru Township. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the RC Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Cluster Design for the RC District, subject to the provisions of Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 804.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Farm-Related Business, subject to Section 804.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Horseback Riding School and Stables, subject to Section 828 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the RC Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 713 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Secondary Housing, subject to Section 714.1 and 714.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 713.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Farm-Support Business, subject to Section 804.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Home Day Care, subject to Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Game Preserve, subject to Section 825 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Golf Course, subject to Section 826 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Private Kennels, subject to Section 832.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Veterinary Hospitals or Animal Clinics, subject to Section 853 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 2 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the RC Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 2, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the RC Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the RC Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the RC Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the RC District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the RC Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the RC Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 46 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 47 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 48 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 49 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
RC Zoning District: Utility and  Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  2)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  3 acres  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Cluster Design for the RC District  By Right  Optional  Optional  30 acres  Refer to Section 707 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 804.1 for additional requirements  
Farm-Related Business  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 804.3 for additional requirements  
Horseback Riding School and Stables  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 828 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  3 acres  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 710 for additional requirements  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Secondary Housing  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 714.1 and 714.2 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Farm-Support Business  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 804.4 for additional requirements  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Game Preserve or Regulated Hunting  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  50 acres  Refer to Section 825 for additional requirements  

RC Zoning District: Utility and  Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  2)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Golf Course  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  100 acres  Refer to Section 826 for additional requirements  
Private Kennels  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  10 acres  Refer to Section 832.1 for additional requirements  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  

Section 404: Low Density Residential (LR) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose: The LR Zoning District generally contains areas with existing agricultural, woodlands, stream valleys and low density residential uses.  The purpose of the LR Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To allow low-density residential development as well as related community facilities and services within the context of the rural environment, including both large-lot residential uses and village-type residential uses. 

(2) 	
To encourage sensitive treatment of ecologically fragile areas by those building or developing within the district. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the LR Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
General Agricultural Uses, subject to Section 804.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the LR Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Bed and Breakfast, subject to Section 713 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Secondary Housing, subject to Section 714.1 and 714.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Home Day Care, subject to Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Educational Use, subject to Section 820 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(D) 
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 3 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the LR Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 50 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 3, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 
(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the LR Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the LR Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the LR Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the LR District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the LR Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the LR Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 51 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 52 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
LR Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  3)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  30 feet  50 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
General Agricultural  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  Refer to Section 804.1 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  3 acres  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 710 for additional requirements  
Bed and Breakfast, Tourist Est.  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Secondary Housing  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 714.1 and 714.2 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  3 acres  200 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 %  20 %  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  


Section 405: Medium Density Residential (MR) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The MR Zoning District generally contains areas with developments containing medium density residential uses.    The purpose of the MR Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate the expansion of suburban development in those areas best-suited for medium density residential development. 

(2) 	
To preserve groundwater quality and quantity by encouraging new development to connect with or extend public or community water supplies and sanitary sewage systems. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the MR Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 703 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 	
Cluster Development for the MR District, subject to Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the MR Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Age-Qualified Retirement Community, subject to Section 711 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home, subject to Section 712 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(4) 	
Secondary Housing, subject to Section 714.1 and 714.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Home Day Care, subject to Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Educational Use, subject to Section 820 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 4 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the MR Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 4, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the MR Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the MR Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the MR Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the MR District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the MR Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the MR Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 53 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 54 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 55 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
MR Zoning  District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  4)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
On-Lot  Public  1 acre  150 feet  50 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Public  On-Lot  30,000 sq.feet  125 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  35 feet  10 feet  20 feet  35 feet  30 %  40 %  
Single Family Semi-Detached Units  By Right  Public  Public  7,000 sq.feet  50 feet  35 feet  10 feet  20 feet  35 feet  40 %  50 %  
MR Cluster Development  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 708 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 710 for additional requirements  
Age-Qualified Development  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 711 for additional requirements  
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Secondary Housing  Special Exception  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  Refer to Section 714.1 and 714.2 for additional requirements  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  


Section 406: High Density Residential (HR) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The HR Zoning District generally contains areas with developments containing medium to high density residential uses.    The purpose of the HR Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate suburban and urban density residential development upon lands best-suited for such use, as determined by the accessibility of public water supply and sewage disposal as well as access to arterial and collector roads. 

(2) 	
To encourage development, which could allow for the efficient utilization of municipal services. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the HR Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Single Family Semi-Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 703 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 	
Cluster Design for the HR District, subject to Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the HR Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Multi-Family Townhouse Development, subject to Section 705 of this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Multi-Family Apartment Development, subject to Section 706 of this Ordinance 

(3) 	
Group Home, subject to Section 710 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Age-Qualified Retirement Development, subject to Section 711 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home, subject to Section 712 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Educational Use, subject to Section 820 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 5 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the HR Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 5, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures:  Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the HR Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the HR Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the HR Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the HR District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the HR Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the HR Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 56 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 57 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 58 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
HR Zoning  District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  5)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  Public  Public  5,000 sq.feet  60 feet  30 feet  10 feet  20 feet  35 feet  40 %  50 %  
Single Family Semi-Detached Units  By Right  Public  Public  4,000 sq.feet  40 feet  30 feet  10 feet  20 feet  35 feet  50 %  60 %  
HR Cluster Development  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 709 for additional requirements  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Non-Commercial Recreational Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Multi-Family Townhouses  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 704 for additional requirements  
Multi-Family Apartments  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 705 for additional requirements  
Group Home  Special Exception  Public  Public  5,000 sq.feet  Refer to Section 708 for additional requirements  
Age-Qualified Development  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 711 for additional requirements  
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Educational Use  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  


Section 407: Local Commercial (LC) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose: The LC Zoning District generally contains areas a mixture of residential, commercial and institutional uses in a village setting. The purpose of the LC Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To provide for residential buildings, retail shops, and services designed to meet the day-to-day needs of the residents of the community. 

(2) 	
To provide a full range of commercial services to the residents of the community with optimum convenience within commercial nodes along arterial and collector roads. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the LC Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Single Family Detached Dwelling Units, subject to Section 702 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Banks and Financial Institutions, subject to Section 807 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Business and Professional Office, subject to Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Commercial Outdoor Sales and Uses, subject to Section 814 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Convenience Stores, subject to Section 818 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Commercial Day Care Center, subject to Section 819.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Emergency Services Operation, subject to Section 821 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners, subject to Section 833 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services, subject to Section 835 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Mini-Malls, subject to Section 836 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Governmental Uses, subject to Section 838.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 839 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 840 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(20) 	
Restaurants, subject to Section 846 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(21) 	
Retail Business Uses, subject to Section 847 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(22) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the LC Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment, subject to Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care, Convalescent Home or Nursing Home, subject to Section 712 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Category 2 Home Occupation, subject to Section 715.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.2 

(4) 	
Mixed-Use Commercial and Residential Developments, subject to Section 716 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Home Day Care, subject to Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Automobile Service Establishments, subject to Section 806.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Car Washing Facilities, subject to Section 806.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Commercial Drive-Through Establishments, subject to Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Funeral Home, subject to Section 824 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Research Facility, subject to Section 845 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Veterinary Hospitals or Animal Clinics, subject to Section 853 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 6 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the LC Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 6, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the LC Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the LC Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the LC Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 59 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 60 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the LC District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the LC Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the LC Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 61 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 62 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 63 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
LC Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  6)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Single Family Detached Units  By Right  On-Lot  On-Lot  1 acre  150 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
On-Lot  Public  1 acre  150 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  15 %  25 %  
Public  On-Lot  20,000 sq.feet  125 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  20 %  30 %  
Public  Public  5,000 sq.feet  60 feet  30 feet  10 feet  20 feet  35 feet  40 %  50 %  
Category 1 Home Occupation  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.1 for additional requirements  
Banks /Financial Institutions  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Drive-Through Est.  By Right  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Outdoor Sales  By Right  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Convenience Stores  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Day Care Center  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Emergency Services Operations  By Right  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Mini-Malls  By Right  Public  Public  3 acres  Refer to Section 836 for additional requirements  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Governmental Uses  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Nursery or Landscape Center  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  

LC Zoning District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  6)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Personal Services Establishment  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Non-Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Restaurants  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Retail Business Use  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 602 for additional requirements  
Personal Care, Assisted Living Care  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Category 2 Home Occupation  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 715.2 for additional requirements  
Mixed-Use Developments  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  Refer to Section 716 for additional requirements  
Home Day Care  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 819.1 for additional requirements  
Automobile Service Station  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Car Washing Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Funeral Home  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Research Facility  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  


Section 408: Highway Commercial (HC) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The HC Zoning District generally contains areas with a mixture of commercial uses located within close proximity of highways. The purpose of the HC Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate those commercial uses, which are oriented to automobile drivers, serving local and transient residents within a large geographic area. 

(2) 	
To safely provide for large-scale commercial uses by permitting them in close proximity to collector roads, arterial roads and expressways, which are capable of accommodating large traffic volumes. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the HC Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Automobile Sales, subject to Section 806.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Automobile Service Establishments, subject to Section 806.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Banks and Financial Institutions, subject to Section 807 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Business and Professional Office, subject to Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Commercial Outdoor Sales and Uses, subject to Section 814 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Construction Services, subject to Section 817 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Convenience Stores, subject to Section 818 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Commercial Day Care Center, subject to Section 819.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Home Center, subject to Section 827 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Hotel or Motel, subject to Section 829 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners, subject to Section 833 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services, subject to Section 835 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Mini-Mall, subject to Section 836 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Governmental Uses, subject to Section 838.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Nursery or Landscape Center, subject to Section 839 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 840 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(20) 	
Printing or Publishing Establishment, subject to Section 842 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(21) 	
Non-Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 64 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
(22) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(23) 	
Restaurants, subject to Section 846 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(24) 	
Retail Business Uses, subject to Section 847 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(25) 	
Shopping Centers or Shopping Malls, subject to section 848 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(26) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(27) 	
Wholesale and Distribution Facilities, subject to Section 855 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the HC Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment, subject to Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Car Washing Facilities, subject to Section 806.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Commercial Drive-Through Establishments, subject to Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Conference Center or Convention Center, subject to Section 816 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Fabrication and Finishing Uses, subject to Section 822 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(7) 	
Places of Worship and Religious Uses, subject to Section 842 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Research Facility, subject to Section 845 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(9) 	
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Veterinary Hospitals or Animal Clinics, subject to Section 853 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 7 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the HC Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 7, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures:  Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the HC Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the subdivision and land development provisions of Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the HC Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the HC Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 65 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
(H) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the HC District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the HC Zoning District. 

(J) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the HC Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 66 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
HC Zoning  District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  7)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Automobile Sales  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Automobile Service Station  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Banks /Financial Institutions  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Outdoor Sales  By Right  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  
Construction Services  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Convenience Stores  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Day  Care Center  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Home Center  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Hotel or Motel  By Right  Public  Public  3 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Mini Mall  By Right  Public  Public  3 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Governmental Uses  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Nursery or Landscape Center  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Personal Services Establishment  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Printing or Publishing Establishment  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 67 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations  

HC Zoning  District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  7)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Non-Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Section 844.1 for additional requirements  
Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Restaurants  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Retail Business Use  By Right  Public  Public  10,000 sq.feet  80 feet  40 feet  20 feet  30 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Shopping Centers  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 848.1 for additional requirements  
Wholesale and Distribution   By Right  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 602 for additional requirements  
Car Washing Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Drive-Through Est.  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Conference Center or Convention Center  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Fabrication and Finishing  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Places of Worship Religious Uses  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  30 %  50 %  
Research Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  Special Exception  Public  Public  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  35 feet  40 %  60 %  

Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 68 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Section 409: Office Commercial (OC) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose: The OC Zoning District generally contains areas with a mixture of professional office and commercial uses located within close proximity of highways.    The purpose of the OC Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate larger scale office-type development, including research laboratories and similar ancillary facilities, as well as professional schools and banks. 

(2) 	
To accommodate retail centers to meet the needs of those employed within the district. 

(3) 	
To encourage high-quality office development that will be a fiscal and aesthetic asset to the community by prohibiting industrial, residential, and regional-scale commercial uses within this district. 

(4) 	
To protect the residents within the community from excessive traffic volume on local roads by locating these uses in close proximity to expressways and arterial roads. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the OC Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Banks and Financial Institutions, subject to Section 807 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Business and Professional Office, subject to Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Business and Professional Office Parks, subject to Section 809 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(6) 	
Commercial Day Care Center, subject to Section 819.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services, subject to Section 835 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Mini-Mall, subject to Section 836 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Governmental Uses, subject to Section 838.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Personal Service Establishment, subject to Section 840 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(12) 	
Printing or Publishing Establishment, subject to Section 842 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Restaurants, subject to Section 846 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the OC Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 
Airports, Heliports and Helistops, subject to Sections 603 and 805 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters, subject to Section 810 of this Zoning Ordinance. 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 69 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
(3) 
Conference Center or Convention Center, subject to Section 816 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 
Research Facility, subject to Section 845 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(5) 
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 8 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the OC Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 8, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures:  Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the OC Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the provisions of the Cumru Township Code, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the OC Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Master Site Plan:  The permitted uses within the OC Zoning District may be designed as individual uses on separate lots and/or multiple uses within buildings designed as a professional business and office campus.  All permitted uses within the OC Zoning District shall be considered by Cumru Township as part of an overall master site plan. 

(H) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the OC Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the OC District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the OC Zoning District. 

(K) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the OC Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 70 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 71 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
OC Zoning  District: Utility and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  8)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 and Section 804.7 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Banks /Financial Institutions  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Business/Professional Office Parks  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 809 for additional requirements  
Commercial Day Care Center  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Medical, Dentist, Vision, Counseling  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Mini Mall  By Right  Public  Public  3 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Governmental Uses  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Personal Service Establishments  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Printing or Publishing Establishment  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Restaurants  By Right  Public  Public  20,000 sq.feet  100 feet  40 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Airports, Heliports and Helistops  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Sections 603 and 805 for additional requirements  
Club, Lodge or Social Quarters  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  30,000 sq.feet  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Conference Center or Convention Center  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  300 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Research Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  

Section 410: General Industrial (GI) Zoning District 
(A) 	
Purpose:  The GI Zoning District generally contains areas with a mixture of commercial and industrial uses located within close proximity of highways. The purpose of the GI Zoning District is as follows: 

(1) 	
To accommodate commercial and industrial uses, which may be conducted on individual lots with sufficient infrastructure. 

(2) 	
To protect the residents within the community from excessive traffic volume on local roads by locating these uses in close proximity to expressways and arterial roads. 

(3) 	
To locate and cluster certain non-residential uses that may be considered offensive to residential uses. 



(B) 	
Uses by Right: The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, provided that: the use is approved by the Zoning Officer; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Conservation Uses, subject to Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Forestry, subject to Section 505 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Business and Professional Office, subject to Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Business and Professional Office Parks, subject to Section 809 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Construction Services, subject to Section 817 of this Zoning Ordinance 

(6) 	
Fabrication and Finishing Uses, subject to Section 822 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Food Processing Facilities, subject to Section 823 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Home Center, subject to Section 827 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Industrial Parks, subject to Section 830 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Manufacturing Uses, subject to Section 834 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Municipal Uses, subject to Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Printing or Publishing Establishment, subject to Section 842 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Commercial Recreation Uses, subject to Section 844.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Restaurants, subject to Section 846 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Retail Business Uses, subject to Section 847 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
Truck Service Establishment, subject to Section 851 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Public Utilities, subject to Section 852.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(18) 	
Warehousing and Freight Terminal Uses, subject to Section 854 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
Wholesale and Distribution, subject to Section 855 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Uses by Special Exception:  The following principal uses and their accessory uses are permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, provided that: a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board; only one (1) principal use is permitted per lot meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements; and the use complies with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment, subject to Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Adult Business Uses, subject to Section 803 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Airports, Heliports and Helistops, subject to Section 603 and 805 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Commercial Composting, subject to Section 811.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Commercial Water Resource Use, subject to Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Junk Yards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facilities, subject to Section 831 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Commercial Kennels, subject to Section 832.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Mini-Warehouse and Self-Storage Units, subject to Section 837 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Quarry and Mining Operations, subject to Section 843 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Research Facility, subject to Section 845 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities, subject to Section 849 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Telecommunication Facilities, subject to Section 850 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Private Utilities, subject to Section 852.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Veterinary Hospitals or Animal Clinics, subject to Section 853 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Undefined Uses, subject to Section 856 of this Zoning Ordinance 



(D) 	
Utility and Dimensional Requirements: Matrix Chart 9 on the following page provides the basic utility and dimensional requirements for all permitted uses within the GI Zoning District.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all permitted uses shall comply with these requirements.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 9, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and/or structures to the permitted uses of the GI Zoning District shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the principal use; they are clearly subordinate to the principal use; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a permit, subdivision, land development, special exception, conditional use, or other approval requirements; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township. Accessory uses and structures may also include transportation facilities and utility provisions that have been approved by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction and that they are necessary to support the principal use. 

(F) 	
Subdivision and Land Development Requirements: Where required to comply with the provisions of the Cumru Township Code, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for any permitted use within the GI Zoning District.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Master Site Plan:  The permitted uses within the GI Zoning District may be designed as individual uses on separate lots and/or multiple uses within buildings designed as a commercial or industrial campus.  All permitted uses within the GI Zoning District shall be considered by Cumru Township as part of an overall master site plan. 

(H) 	
Off-Street Parking and Loading: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the GI Zoning District shall comply with the off-street parking and loading requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Signs: Where applicable, all permitted uses within the GI District shall comply with the requirements for signs, as specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Supplemental Regulations: Where applicable, all sections of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply as supplementary regulations and specifications for permitted uses within the GI Zoning District. 

(K) 	
Nonconformities: Principal uses that are classified as nonconforming shall comply with the general provisions specified under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the GI Zoning District. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 72 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 73 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 74 	Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 75 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 76 Article  4:  Zoning District Regulations 
GI Zoning  District: Utility  and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental Matrix Chart 9)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Conservation Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  1 acre  Refer to Article 5 and Section 804.7 for additional requirements  
Forestry  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 505 for additional requirements  
Business and Professional Offices  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Business/Professional Office Parks  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 809 for additional requirements  
Construction Services  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Fabrication and Finishing  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Food Processing Facility  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Home Center  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Industrial Parks  By Right  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 830 for additional requirements  
Manufacturing  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Municipal Uses  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 838.1 for additional requirements  
Printing or Publishing Establishment  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Commercial Recreation Use  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  40 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Restaurants  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Retail Business Use  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Research Facility  By Right  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Truck Service and Washing Facility  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Public Utilities  By Right  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 852.3 for additional requirements  
Warehouse and Freight Terminal  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  

GI Zoning  District: Utility  and Dimensional Requirements (Supplemental Matrix Chart 9)  
Use  Procedural Requirement  Utility Requirements  Minimum Net Lot Area  Minimum Lot Width  Minimum Yard Requirements  Maximum Height  Maximum Coverage  
Sewer  Water  Front  Side (each)  Rear  Building  Lot  
Wholesale and Distribution  By Right  Public  Public  2 acres  200 feet  60 feet  50 feet  50 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment  Special Exception  Public  Public  Variable  Refer to Section 602 for additional requirements  
Adult Business Use  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Airports, Heliports and Helistops  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Sections 603 and 805 for additional requirements  
Commercial Composting  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 811.1 for additional requirements  
Commercial Water Resource Use  Special Exception  Public  Public  10 acres  Refer to Section 815 for additional requirements  
Junk/Salvage Yards, Impoundment Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  25 acres  Refer to Section 831 for additional requirements  
Commercial Kennels  Special Exception  Public  Public  25 acres  Refer to Section 832.2 for additional requirements  
Mini-Warehouse and Self-Storage Units  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 837 for additional requirements  
Quarrying and Mining Operation  Special Exception  Public  Public  50 acres  Refer to Section 843 for additional requirements  
Research Facility  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction  Special Exception  Public  Public  50 acres  Refer to Section 849 for additional requirements  
Telecommunication Facilities  Special Exception  Optional  Optional  Variable  Refer to Section 850 for additional requirements  
Private Utilities  Special Exception  Public  Public  25 acres  Refer to Section 852.2 for additional requirements  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  Special Exception  Public  Public  1 acre  150 feet  60 feet  40 feet  40 feet  50 feet  40 %  60 %  
Undefined Uses  Special Exception  Public  Public  5 acres  Refer to Section 856 for additional requirements  



Article 5: Conservation Overlay Districts 
Section 501: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	The purpose and objective of the Conservation Overlay Districts is to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan and the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program, which pertain to conservation management, environmental resource protection, natural resources, and open space preservation.  In order to strategically implement theses goals, objectives and policies, the following Conservation Overlay Districts are hereby established: 
Floodplain Overlay District 
Wetlands Overlay District 
Steep Slope Overlay District 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 
Riparian Buffer Overlay District 
Carbonate Geology Overlay District 

(B) 	
The Conservation Overlay Districts incorporated under this Article include provisions to supplement and enhance the existing underlying district regulations for certain land areas and water features.  These supplemental regulations should not replace the existing underlying zoning district regulations.  In cases where the Conservation Overlay Districts should overlap, the more restrictive standards and specifications shall apply. 

(C) 	
The land and water areas encompassed by the Conservation Overlay Districts shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 

(D) 	
Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of the boundaries or limits of those land or water areas encompassed by the Conservation Overlay Districts, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board.  In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the person appealing the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 


Section 502: Floodplain Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Floodplain Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Floodplain Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To promote the general health, welfare and/or safety of the community. 

(2) 	
To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future. 

(3) 	
To minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage. 

(4) 	
To reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community, governmental or municipal units, and its resident, by preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding. 

(5) 	
To require all those uses, activities and development that do occur in flood-prone areas to be protected and or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage. 

(6) 	
To comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements. 

(7) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as endorsed by the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan (2005). 



(B) 	
The Floodplain Overlay District shall include the land or water areas, which are inundated or contained within such flood-prone features including: the Floodway Area (FW); the Floodway Fringe Area (FF); the General Floodplain Area (FA); and the 100-year floodplain.  These flood-prone features are further defined and depicted as part of the Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance that was adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 552 on November 18, 1997. 

(C) 	
Pursuant to the provisions of Cumru Township and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance may be updated and amended from time to time. 

(D) 	
The limits of the Floodplain Overlay District are identified in the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, as prepared and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

(E) 	
All proposed uses, site improvements and development requirements shall conform to the provisions specified within the Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance.  In addition to these provisions, the following requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
The net lot area for any permitted use or development within Cumru Township shall not include land or water areas that are included within the Floodway Area (FW). 

(2) 	
No subdivision or land development plan activities shall be permitted that would cause any increase in the one hundred (100) year flood elevation. 

(3) 	
No new construction or land development activities shall be located within fifty (50) feet landward or upland from the top-of-bank of any perennial stream, unless a permitted by the local, state and/or federal agency having jurisdiction. 

(4) 	
All proposed site improvements and construction activities within the Floodplain Overlay District shall adhere to the policies, recommendations and requirements of the Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan and the Cumru Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. 



(F) 	
All other application procedures, administrative controls, technical provisions, permitted land uses, activities requiring special exceptions, existing or non-conforming provisions, variance procedures, and technical definitions involving the Floodplain Overly District are specified within the Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance. 



Section 503: Wetlands Overlay District 
(A) 
The Wetlands Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Wetlands Overlay District Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To direct growth, development and revitalization efforts by considering environmentally sensitive land areas and ecological habitats. 

(2) 	
To achieve and sustain a high quality natural resource system and to protect a natural diversity of ecosystems. 

(3) 	
To provide aquatic habitats, which are essential breeding, rearing and feeding grounds for many species of fish, plants and other wildlife. 

(4) 	
To develop a protective zone to serve as a natural filter in the removing of pollutants such as bacteria, acid and sediment from groundwater and surface water. 

(5) 	
To implement an effective hydrological and stormwater management program that adequately addresses surface drainage, groundwater recharge and soil erosion control measures 

(6) 	
To implement Best Management Practices. 

(7) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(8) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
The Wetlands Overlay District shall include the following land and water features: 

(1) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools on the most recent National Wetlands Inventory Maps as prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 

(2) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools by a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands. 

(3) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands and/or seasonal pools by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as part of a Jurisdictional Determination. 

(4) 	
All areas containing hydric soils, as defined, described and mapped as part of the Soil Survey of Berks County. 



(C) 	
All uses permitted within the underlying zoning districts shall be permitted as part of the Wetlands Overlay District, provided that the land area intended to facilitate the proposed use and related site improvements has not been delineated as a wetlands area by Cumru Township, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the Berks County Conservation District, or by a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands. 

(D) 	
For all subdivision or land development applications involving areas with hydric soils and/or areas considered to be wetlands, a qualified professional or soil scientist with experience in delineating wetlands shall conduct a field investigation and delineate the limits of the wetlands on the parcel of land being subdivided or developed.  As part of this requirement, a report containing the field investigation notes, wetland data sheets, summary, conclusions and resume of the person(s) responsible for the field investigation shall be issued to Cumru Township for review and consideration.   Further, the subdivision plan or land development plan shall contain a certification note that has been endorsed by the qualified person(s) responsible for the field investigation and the wetlands delineation, as accurately depicted on the subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(E) 	
The maximum disturbance area or encroachment area on lands that have been delineated as wetlands shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total area delineated as wetlands, unless otherwise permitted by a United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or other agency with jurisdictional authority.  

(F) 	
For all areas that have been delineated as a wetlands area, the following provisions and restrictions shall specifically apply: 

(1) 	
No wetland encroachment or earth disturbance activities shall be permitted unless the appropriate permits or approvals have been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 

(2) 	
If a Jurisdictional Determination has been issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, a twenty-five (25) foot buffer zone shall be applied to all areas that have been delineated as wetlands, as measured from the perimeter of the wetlands area.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, no encroachment or earth disturbance activities shall be permitted within the required buffer zone. 

(3) 	
If a Jurisdictional Determination has not been issued by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, a fifty (50) foot buffer zone shall be applied to all areas that have been delineated as wetlands, as measured from the perimeter of the wetlands area.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, no encroachment or earth disturbance activities shall be permitted within the required buffer zone. 

(4) 	
Cumru Township may allow a reduction in the dimensions or limits of the required buffer zone provided that the applicant can sufficiently demonstrate that there will be no degradation or negative impacts to the wetlands as a result of the reduction of the buffer zone. 

(5) 	
All areas delineated as wetlands within Cumru Township are subject to the land use restrictions and controls, as specified by Cumru Township, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Where encroachments or earth disturbance activities 




are proposed for any improvements, the required approvals or permits must be obtained by the applicant from the appropriate governing agency. 
(G) 	Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, a wetlands delineation shall be conducted for all areas in which earth disturbance activities or improvements are proposed within the Wetlands Overlay District. 

Section 504: Steep Slope Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Steep Slope Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Steep Slope Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To protect certain land areas classified as “steep slopes” from inappropriate subdivision and land development activity, which could result in accelerated erosion, increased volume and velocity of stormwater, and degradation of surface waters. 

(2) 	
To permit only those uses of steep slopes, which are compatible with the conservation of the natural conditions, habitats and environment by maintaining existing topographical conditions and minimizing earth disturbance activities. 

(3) 	
To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction and land development practices. 

(4) 	
To direct growth, development and revitalization efforts by considering environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(6) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
The Steep Slope Overlay District shall include the following three (3) slope categories: 


Category 1 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 8 and 15 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 8 and 15 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 2 Slopes:  All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 15 and 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 3 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre­development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes exceeds 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category prevail. 
(C) 	
All uses permitted within the underlying zoning districts shall be permitted as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District, provided that the lot or parcel intended to facilitate the proposed use and related site improvements does not conflict with the provisions of the Steep Slope Overlay District. 

(D) 	
The following subdivision and land development provisions shall apply to all lots or parcels, regardless of their size, whereas at least 10 percent of the lot or parcel includes Category 1 Slopes: 

(1) 	
Where feasible, the principal building and use shall not be located on Category 1 Slopes.  In situations where the entire lot consists of Category 1 Slopes or greater, the applicant shall develop a plan to mitigate excess grading and erosive conditions.  

(2) 	
The maximum building coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 10 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum building coverage for a residential lot is 20 percent and the lot contains Category 1 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 10 percent reduction would limit the maximum building coverage to 18 percent for that residential lot. 

(3) 	
The maximum lot coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 10 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum lot coverage for a residential lot is 30 percent and the lot contains Category 1 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 10 percent reduction would limit the maximum lot coverage to 27 percent for that residential lot. 

(4) 	
The maximum disturbance area of lands that have been exclusively identified as Category 1 Slopes shall be limited to 70 percent of the total area of the Category 1 Slopes on the lot or property being developed. 



(E) 	
The following subdivision and land development provisions shall apply to all lots or parcels, regardless of their size, whereas at least 10 percent of the lot or parcel includes Category 2 Slopes: 

(1) 	
The principal building and use may be located on Category 2 Slopes provided that a professional engineer, architect or surveyor, licensed within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, submits plans and supporting documentation to Cumru Township as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or building permit to demonstrate that the proposed construction methods shall mitigate any adverse impacts associated with steep slopes, hydrology, landscaping, erosion and stabilization.  All such plans, designs and supporting documentation shall be signed and sealed by the professional engineer, architect or surveyor, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
Accessory buildings, uses and driveways may be located on or traverse through Category 2 Slopes. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 15 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum building coverage for a commercial lot is 40 percent and the lot contains Category 2 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 15 percent reduction would limit the maximum building coverage to 34 percent for that commercial lot. 

(4) 	
The maximum lot coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 15 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum lot coverage for a commercial lot is 60 percent and the lot contains Category 2 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 15 percent reduction would limit the maximum lot coverage to 51 percent for that commercial lot. 

(5) 	
The maximum disturbance area of lands that have been exclusively identified as Category 2 Slopes shall be limited to 40 percent of the total area of the Category 2 Slopes on the lot or property being developed. 

(6) 	
Municipal, utility and conservation uses shall be permitted on Category 2 Slopes.  



(F) 	
The following subdivision and land development provisions shall apply to all lots or parcels, regardless of their size, whereas at least 10 percent of the lot or parcel includes Category 3 Slopes: 

(1) 	
The principal building and use shall not be located on Category 3 Slopes. 

(2) 	
All accessory buildings, uses and driveways may be located on or traverse through Category 3 Slopes. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 20 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum building coverage for a residential lot is 20 percent and the lot contains Category 3 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 20 percent reduction would limit the maximum building coverage to 16 percent for that residential lot. 

(4) 	
The maximum lot coverage for the proposed use, as specified by the zoning district requirements, shall be reduced by 20 percent from the conventional standard. 

Example:  If the maximum lot coverage for a residential lot is 30 percent and the lot contains Category 3 Slopes as the highest delineated slope category, than the 20 percent reduction would limit the maximum lot coverage to 24 percent for that residential lot 

(5) 	
The maximum disturbance area of lands that have been exclusively identified as Category 3 Slopes shall be limited to 10 percent of the total area of the Category 3 Slopes on the lot or property being developed. 

(6) 	
Municipal, utility and conservation uses shall be permitted on Category 3 Slopes. 



(G) 	
Applications involving a subdivision and/or land development plan shall include a topographical analysis, which includes a depiction of the slope categories drawn to scale.  The Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall review the accuracy of the topographical analysis.  Where necessary, field verification shall be conducted by the applicant to verify the accuracy of the topographical analysis. 

(H) 	
If required by Cumru Township, applications involving a zoning permit or building permit shall include a topographical analysis, which depicts the slope categories drawn to scale. 



Section 505: Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To protect areas classified as woodlands from inappropriate subdivision, land development and conservation management activities. 

(2) 	
To acknowledge that woodlands are a vital resource and provide a number of community benefits including: minimizing erosion on areas of steep slopes and stream banks; improving groundwater quality and quantity by filtering out pollution and sediment; providing wildlife habitats for plants and animals; providing effective stormwater management and erosion control; providing shade from direct sunlight and reduces temperatures; stabilizing adverse climate conditions by providing buffer and wind breaks; providing active and passive recreation opportunities; enhancing the scenic characteristics; and reducing air pollution by absorbing airborne pollutants. 

(3) 	
To establish forestry and timber regulations that will effectively promote good forest stewardship, protect the rights of adjoining property owners, and minimize the potential of adverse environmental impacts created by inappropriate timber harvesting. 

(4) 	
To minimize the clear cutting of woodlands and other earth disturbance activities, which may create adverse environmental and ecological impacts. 

(5) 	
To permit the sale of forestry products as an economic value and to appreciate that forestry is a leading industry within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(7) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
The Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District shall include the following activities: 


(1) 	
Forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging regulations, which apply to all operations involved with the cutting down of trees and removal of logs from woodlands or forests for the primary purpose of sale and commercial processing into wood products, shall be subject to Section 505.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Woodland extraction, which applies to all earth disturbance activities including all subdivision and land development activities, shall be subject to Section 505.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Tree protection and replacement regulations, which apply to all earth disturbance activities including subdivision and land development activities, shall be subject to Section 505.3 of this Zoning Ordinance 


Section 505.1: Forestry, Timber Harvesting, Tree Harvesting and Logging 
(A) 	
Forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and/or logging shall be permitted within all underlying zoning districts, provided it is conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A permit shall be required from Cumru Township for any forestry, logging, timber harvesting and/or tree harvesting activities, whereas ten (10) or more healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) per acre are removed from any lot or parcels per year.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and/or logging on any lot or parcel of land within Cumru Township without first submitting a forest management plan and securing the proper permits.  Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, the following permit application procedures and requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
A complete application and filing fee shall be submitted by the applicant or person engaged with the proposed forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging activities, as imposed by resolution by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 

(2) 	
A forest stewardship plan of the property where the proposed forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging activities shall be prepared considering the guidelines established by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Bureau of Forestry, and the Penn State Cooperative Extension.  At a minimum, the following information shall be required:  

(a) 	
An identification of the concerned property; the legal owners of the property; the mailing address(s) and phone number(s) of the legal property owners, operators, and applicant, at which they can be reached during normal business hours. 

(b) 	
A plan drawn to scale depicting the property boundaries, the areas of the site on which the work is to be performed, the topographic features, soils, existing vegetation, watercourses, man-made features, the affected watersheds and other natural features.  The use of tax maps, topographic maps, aerial photography and soils maps may be utilized to prepare the plan. 

(c) 	
A description of the planned forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation as well as a description of the planned replanting of the lot, as prepared and submitted by a forester or qualified person. Where no replanting is planned, a statement shall be provided describing the reasons why, in his opinion, the characteristics of the lot and vegetation situate thereon make natural regeneration appropriate or why such replanting is not otherwise necessary. 

(d) 	
An estimated starting and completion date for the timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging activities. 

(e) 	
The location of the proposed temporary off-street parking and loading spaces, which shall be located outside the street right-of-way, constructed as a mud-free condition, and provide at least one (1) space per vehicle on the site of the timber harvesting activities. 

(f) 	
Other information that may be required to develop a complete forest stewardship plan, as determined appropriate by the Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council. 



(3) 	
A soil erosion and sediment control plan of the property where the proposed forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging activity shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(4) 	
A complete copy of any other permits or licenses, as may be required by federal or state laws. 

(5) 	
Tree farms shall be considered exempt from these requirements. 



(C) 	
Where applicable, a separate application shall be required for each permit. Three (3) copies of all permit and plan documents, as referred to in this section shall be submitted with each application, one (1) of which, at the discretion of the Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council, Engineer or Zoning Officer shall be submitted to the Berks County Conservation District for review and comment. 

(D) 	
The following specific regulations shall apply to all forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging operations within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Felling or skidding on or across any public road is prohibited without the express written consent of Cumru Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible for maintenance of the public road. 

(2) 	
No tops or slash shall be left within twenty-five (25) feet of any public road right-of-way. 

(3) 	
All tops and slash, between twenty-five (25) and fifty (50) feet from a public road right-of-way or private road providing access to adjoining residential property or within fifty (50) feet of adjoining residential property, shall be lopped to a maximum height of four (4) feet above the surface of the ground. 

(4) 	
No tops or slash shall be left on or across the boundary of any property adjoining the operation. 

(5) 	
Trash, litter and other unnatural materials resulting from the forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation shall be removed from the property at least once every seven (7) days. 

(6) 	
All holes created in the course of any tree harvesting operation shall be filled and/or graded. 

(7) 	
No timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation shall occur within one hundred (100) feet of any perennial watercourse, wetlands area or seasonal pools. 

(8) 	
All land areas and properties, which are used for timber harvesting, tree harvesting or a logging operation, shall be reseeded in compliance with the forest management plan and erosion and sediment control plan. 

(9) 	
Tree farms shall be considered exempt from these requirements. 



(E) 	
The following provisions for inspections, permit fees, and permit approval shall apply to all forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging operations within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for all permit applications required this Zoning Ordinance. The required fee shall be submitted with the application, which shall not be considered for approval until the application fee is paid. 

(2) 	
The Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council in conjunction with the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall review the applicant's permit application, together with all plans, surveys, schedules, design criteria and other documents submitted or required to be submitted as part of the permit application procedure, together with any and all amendments thereto, and shall prepare a report of his findings and recommendations with respect to the same, as he shall determine necessary prior to the issuance of any permit or permits. The applicant shall pay an application fee to cover the cost of the plan reviews and site inspections. 

(3) 
To ensure payment of all review and inspection fees, at the time of application, the applicant shall deposit with Cumru Township, a sum sufficient to cover the costs of such plan review, together with the cost of any inspections by the Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council, Engineer and/or Zoning Officer. 

(4) 	
The Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council in conjunction with the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer shall approve and issue all permits and no work shall commence without the issuance of such permit approval. 

(5) 	
Where necessary, the Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council, Engineer and/or Zoning Officer may consult with a qualified professional to review the forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging operations. 



(F) 	
Any permit issued under this section may be revoked or suspended by the Cumru Township after notice to the permit holder for: 

(1) 	
Violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operations. 

(2) 	
Any conditions or activities conducted on the property, which constitutes or creates a nuisance, hazard or endangers human life or the property of others. 



(G) 	
The landowner and the operator shall be responsible for repairing any excess damage to public or private roads caused by traffic associated with a timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation. Pursuant to Title 67 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 189, the landowner or operator shall furnish a bond in an amount determined by the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer to guarantee the repair of such damages. 

(H) 	
The landowner and/or operator shall clean any mud or debris that is tracked onto public roads and shall be responsible for repairing berms, shoulders, swales and/or stormwater management facilities on public roads, which may be damaged due to the timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation. All soil and debris washed or carried onto public streets during timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operations shall be cleaned immediately after the occurrence. 

(I) 	
The Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Council, Engineer and/or Zoning Officer may inspect the property where any forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting or logging operation is occurring to determine if the requirements of this section and of the permit, including conditions thereof, or to the plans and specifications submitted with the permit application, including modifications thereof, or to the approved runoff and erosion control plan are being followed. 

(J) 	
If Cumru Township determines that the landowner IS not complying with permit application, supporting plans, or other provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance, Cumru Township shall send a written notice to the landowner, which notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time within which corrections shall be made.  If the landowner fails to comply with the notice in the time specified, the landowner shall be considered in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, in which case Cumru Township may seek all appropriate remedies by law, including the penalty provisions established by Cumru Township. 


Section 505.2: Woodland Extraction for Subdivision and Land Development 
(A) 	
Woodland extraction shall be permitted within all underlying zoning districts, provided it is conducted in a manner to facilitate all necessary site improvements, as identified on an approved subdivision plan, land development plan, erosion and sedimentation control plan, and/or building permit.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “woodland extraction” is hereby defined as the clear cutting or removal of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height), to provide sufficient area for site improvements on an individual lot or parcel of land, as the mature trees exist in pre-development conditions. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, all proposed subdivision and land development activity shall comply with the following criteria for woodland extraction: 

(1) 	
Woodland extraction may be permitted in order to facilitate municipal site improvements including: areas within the street right-of-way; areas for stormwater management facilities; areas for public utilities; areas for active park and recreation uses; and other areas that may be required to complete the municipal site improvements in accordance with the approved subdivision or land development plan. 

(2) 	
Woodland extraction shall be limited to 125 percent of the total area designated as the building envelope, which shall be identified on the approved subdivision or land development plan in order to facilitate internal lot improvements including: the area of the building(s); the area for the driveway; the area for the sanitary sewage facilities, water supply facilities and other public utilities; areas for stormwater management facilities; and other areas considered necessary by the landowner, provided that the total cumulative area does not exceed 125 percent of the designated building envelope. 

(3) 	
If additional trees (other than those designated on the approved subdivision or land development plan) are removed or extracted for the purposes of grading or municipal improvements during the construction sequence, the applicant shall replace all such trees at a ratio of three (3) replacement trees (3 inches or more in diameter from the ground surface) for each healthy mature tree (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) that has been incidentally timbered and/or cleared.  The type and location of all such replacement trees shall be subject to the approval of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 



(C) 	
The approved subdivision and land development plan shall be utilized to regulate and control woodland extraction during the following phases: the initial construction activities required for the municipal site improvements; the building permit; and all other future site improvements that may be initiated by the prospective landowner.   If a violation of the woodland extraction requirements should occur during any phase, the developer and/or landowner may be subject to fines, penalties and/or other enforcement remedies. 

(D) 	
Compliance with the provisions for woodland extraction does not relieve the applicant representing a subdivision or land development plan of the requirements specified for landscaping and tree replacement, which are specified under Section 505.3(D) and 914 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as Sections 520 and 521 of the Subdivision and land Development Ordinance. 


Section 505.3:  Tree  Protection and Replacement 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section is to provide specific standards for tree protection and replacement, which should complement and not replace other provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, the following provisions shall be included on a landscape plan: 

(1) 	
The location of existing tree canopy within the parcel boundaries. 

(2) 	
The location of individual trees with a diameter of more than twelve (12) inches, as identified by size and species within the area of development or limits of disturbance. 

(3) 	
The location of individual trees and their respective drip lines noted for preservation within the area of development or limits of disturbance.  A ten (10) foot buffer shall be maintained from the drip line and the area designated for site improvements. 

(4) 	
The location of all required replacement trees, buffer yards and other landscaping requirements. 

(5) 	
The identification of the area(s) intended for tree and vegetation removal. 

(6) 	
Tree protection materials along with the appropriate details and limit of disturbance line. 

(7) 	
All other pertinent information and requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(C) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, the following provisions shall apply to the construction phase of subdivision or land development plans: 

(1) 	
Tree protection measures and the limit of disturbance line shown on the landscaping plan shall be provided at the lot or site being developed with snow fencing or other durable material.  The location of the limits of disturbance shall be verified by the Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
Protective barriers shall not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting barriers, which shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and shall last until construction is complete. 

(3) 	
If required by Cumru Township, a chain link fence shall be required as the barrier for tree protection. 

(4) 	
The barrier utilized or tree protection shall be firmly secured along a minimum of ten (10) feet from the drip line, as measured outward from the tree or cluster of trees it is protecting. 

(5) 	
The topography or the grade of the land located within the drip line shall not be raised or lowered, unless the change of topography or grade has been reviewed by a landscape architect and that the developer has guaranteed tree replacements in the event the tree(s) do not survive. 

(6) 	
No soil stockpiling or storage of building materials, construction equipment or vehicles shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of the drip line of the tree(s) that are to be protected. 

(7) 	
Any earth disturbance activities within the drip line, shall be completed by hand-operated equipment. 

(8) 	
Where a tree designated for preservation is severely damaged and unable to survive, tree replacement provisions shall be required. 



(D) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, the following provisions shall apply to tree replacement: 

(1) 	
Replacement tree(s) shall be of nursery grade quality, balled and burlapped.  Where replacement trees are required but not suitable for the particular site prescribed due to the size of the site or other special limitations, the trees shall be utilized for planting on lands designated by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
The type of replacement tree(s) should be compatible to the species removed from the site.  The use of invasive species shall not be permitted for tree replacement efforts.  

(3) 	
All replacement trees shall be nursery grown within the same USDA hardiness zone as the lot or tract of land being developed. 

(4) 	
Species of replacement plantings shall reflect careful site evaluation, which shall include the existing and proposed site conditions and their suitability for the tree species, based on topography, geology, hydrology, soil, and microclimate. 

(5) 	
The planting of all replacement trees shall be done by or supervised by a person with horticultural training in tree care and planting methods. 



(E) 	
Compliance with the provisions for tree protection does not relieve the applicant for a subdivision or land development plan of the requirements for landscaping and tree replacement, which are specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as Section 520 and 521 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 



Section 506: Riparian Buffer Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To achieve and sustain a high quality natural resource system and to protect a natural diversity of ecosystems. 

(2) 	
To provide biodiversity corridors enabling wildlife habitats to prosper, migrate, breed and feed within close proximity to surface water features. 

(3) 	
To develop a protective zone to serve as a natural filter in the removing of pollutants such as bacteria, acid and sediment from surface water. 

(4) 	
To implement an effective hydrological and stormwater management program that adequately addresses surface drainage, groundwater recharge and soil erosion control measures 

(5) 	
To implement Best Management Practices. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(7) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall apply to all perennial stream corridors within Cumru Township.  The following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
The limits of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be recognized as a conservation overlay as part of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance.  The design standards and specifications for the Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Properties located along or adjacent to a perennial stream corridor, which are not subject to subdivision and land development activity shall be subject to a education and volunteer effort, whereas, the landowner may implement the design standards contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  All such efforts may be coordinated with local, county, state or federal agencies, provided that such efforts enhances, restores, stabilizes and/or maintains the integrity woodland and vegetation within the of the Riparian Buffer Overlay. 

(3) 	
Properties located along or adjacent to a perennial stream corridor, which are subject to subdivision and land development activity shall be subject to a mandatory  effort, whereas, the landowner or developer shall be required to implement the design standards contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  All such efforts may be coordinated with local, county, state or federal agencies, provided that such efforts enhances, restores, stabilizes and/or maintains the integrity woodland and vegetation within the of the Riparian Buffer Overlay. 

(4) 	
All land uses and site improvements should be located, designed and conducted in a manner that meets the design standards contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Where appropriate, Cumru Township may consider design waivers or modifications in accordance with the provisions of the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Volunteer and mandatory efforts should be reviewed by the Berks County Conservation District to determine if the selected landscape materials will implement the overall purpose and objective of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District. 





Section 507: Carbonate  Geology  Overlay  District 
(A) 	
The Carbonate Geology Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Carbonate Geology Overlay District is outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To identify and protect certain land and water areas in which the underlying geological formations contain limitations for subdivision and land development activity. 

(2) 	
To develop safeguards for land and water areas, which have the potential for sinkhole development, subsidence, bedrock pinnacles, and groundwater infiltration and groundwater contamination. 

(3) 	
To protect the water resources associated with carbonate geologic formations from land use and development patterns, which would threaten their quality and quantity as a result of pollution and the alteration of natural drainage patterns. 

(4) 	
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, property owners, and business owners. 

(5)	
 To encourage the utilization of appropriate construction and land development practices. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, conservation management and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The Carbonate Geology Overlay District shall include limestone and dolomite formations, which are described within the Engineering Characteristics of the Rock of Pennsylvania and depicted on the Geological Map of Pennsylvania.  These carbonate geological formations are commonly known as the Buffalo Springs Formation (Cbs), Millbach Formation (Cm), Richland Formation (Cr), Limestone Fanglomerate (Trfl) and Leithsville Formation (Clv), which are principally located in the northern lowland areas of Cumru Township.   

(C) 	
In reviewing all applications involving subdivision, land development, building and construction, Cumru Township shall make its review on the basis of carbonate geological formation boundaries, as depicted on the Geological Map of Pennsylvania and/or any other reliable geological resource. 

(D) 	
Within the Carbonate Geology Overlay District, alteration and/or development of land may be hazardous with respect to foundation stability, water seepage into basements, the safety of structures, the creation of unstable land as a result of changes in drainage, and the contamination of ground and surface waters.  Based upon the information available at the time of review of certain applications, Cumru Township will attempt to make reasonable judgments as to the compliance with the standards and specifications established for the Carbonate Geology Overlay District. However, under no circumstances shall the approval of any subdivision or land development plan, or its approval of any building permit create, any liability on the part of Cumru Township for any damage that may result from an applicant's or any interested party's reliance upon the regulations specified in this Zoning Ordinance or any decisions made by Cumru Township in the administration of such regulations. 

(E) 	
Except for those uses, structures and development exempted from this section, no structure, land or water shall be used or developed, and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the procedures and standards established for the Carbonate Geology Overlay District. The following activities are exempted from these standards and procedures: 

(1) 	
The construction and/or alternation of a single family detached dwelling, or structure accessory thereto, on a lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter and a permitted on-lot sanitary sewer system to serve such dwelling.  

(2) 	
One below ground tank for the storage of not more than 1,000 gallons of home heating oil intended to serve a single family dwelling. 

(3) 	
Subdivisions of land containing two (2) or fewer lots, whereas the proposed use is limited to one (1) single-family detached dwelling per approved lot. 



(F) 	
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the carbonate geological formations, the following procedures and requirements shall be applied: 

(1) 	
Unless other reliable geological documentation, maps or studies are submitted to Cumru Township, the geological formations, as described within the Engineering Characteristics of the Rock of Pennsylvania and depicted on the Geological Map of Pennsylvania shall apply. 

(2) 	
Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, an initial determination of the exact boundary of the carbonate geological formations shall be made by the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer, based upon the information submitted by an applicant seeking subdivision or land development approval.  Any applicant or person seeking such determination shall submit a geological study of the area in question or other pertinent documentation for consideration.  The Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer shall make a written report of the results of his determination within thirty (30) days of such submission. 

(3) 	
Any party aggrieved by any such determination of the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.  The applicant or person contesting the location of the carbonate geological formations district boundary shall have the burden of proof in case of any such appeal. 



(G) 	
Unless otherwise exempted from the carbonate geological requirements of this Code, all persons or applicants seeking building, construction, subdivision and/or land development approval shall submit an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Report to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  At a minimum, the EIA Report shall be prepared in accordance with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Unless otherwise directed by Cumru Township, the format and contents of the EIA Report should be as follows: 

(a) 	
Statement of purpose:  This section shall indicate the design standards specified by this section of the Code have been addressed and whether the applicant is attempting to demonstrate compliance or justify noncompliance with those design standards. 

(b) 	
Description of existing conditions:  This section shall present a description of existing characteristics of the property, including geology, topography, ground and surface water hydrology, soils, vegetation and existing improvements and uses. 

(c) 	
Description of the proposed action:  This section shall describe the proposed action, including types, locations and phasing of proposed site disturbances and construction, together with proposed future ownership and maintenance of the property and the proposed improvements. A description of the proposed action must either be included within or accompany the environmental assessment report.   

(d) 	
Proposed mitigation measures:  This section shall describe all measures proposed by the applicant to control potential and adverse environmental impacts, which may occur as a result of the proposed action and as identified by the Cumru Township Engineer in his report on the application. 

(e) 	
List of professional and qualifications: The names, addresses, telephone numbers, resumes and qualifications of the persons directly responsible for preparing the EIA Report shall be provided. 

(f) 	
Appendixes. Any additional information, which the applicant wishes to provide may be included in one or more appendixes to the report.  



(2) 	
The EIA Report shall include a map of the size and scale specified by the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  The map should accurately depict the location of the property and the plan showing all proposed improvements thereon and their geographic relationship to the Carbonate Geology Overlay District.  Unless otherwise approved by Cumru Township, the applicant shall utilize the carbonate geological boundaries depicted on the Geological Map of Pennsylvania. 

(3) 	
For areas proposed for grading and/or the construction of buildings, structures and/or other improvements of any kind, the EIA Report shall identify and map all known or reasonably determinable data for such areas, gathered and prepared by a professional geologist or soils scientist, indicating the presence of any carbonate geological features including, but not limited to: depressions; fissures, lineaments, faults or 

fracture traces; "ghost lakes" occurring after rainfall events; outcrops of bedrock; seasonal high-water tables; sinkholes; lineaments; soil types and soil mottling; and springs and/or surface drainage entering the ground.  All such data shall be based on field surveys and/or published data, but in either case shall be supported by an explanation of its source, including the qualifications of the individuals directly responsible for preparing such data. 

(4) 	
As part of the EIA Report, the applicant shall furnish a detailed plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 128 indicating existing and proposed drainage conditions, the locations of existing private and public wells on adjoining properties, as well as the location and extent of all proposed uses and improvements applicable to the design standards established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Where required as a result of the condition of the property, the EIA Report should provide additional information, which is sufficient to demonstrate: that the applicant can comply with all design standards established within this section; that one or more of such standards is not applicable because of the conditions of the property or existing uses thereon; and/or that because the applicant's proposed action poses no discernible threat to land, buildings, structures and other improvements existing or proposed from any condition arising from their location in the Carbonate Geology Overlay District. 

(6) 	
The Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall review the EIA Report and other submitted materials as part of the application, and shall make a site inspection of the property. 

(7) 	
Following such site inspection, the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall submit a written report to the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners presenting his findings with respect to the applicant's compliance with the procedures and standards established as part of the Carbonate Geology Overlay District. 



(H) 	
No structure, land area or water body shall be used or developed, and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered, within the Carbonate Geology Overlay District unless it conforms with the following standards and regulations: 

(1) 	
The below-ground storage of heating oil, gasoline, chemical solutions or other substances, which, if released, would constitute pollutants to ground or surface waters, is prohibited. The applicant may be authorized to place a tank underground in a concrete vault, install other impervious liners and/or install monitoring devices if the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer determine that there exists no probability of leakage.  This limitation shall be in addition to demonstrated compliance by the applicant with all applicable laws and the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) governing such facilities. 

(2) 	
The use of fill containing any material, which would represent a potential contamination hazard to ground or surface water are prohibited.  Such prohibited materials shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, wastes identified as "hazardous" by state and federal laws and by regulations promulgated by the PADEP and the Environmental Protection Agency.  

(3) 	
Above-ground storage, handling, processing or disposal of toxic materials, liquid fuels or other hazardous liquids or any other substance with the potential to contaminate ground and surface waters shall be prohibited unless contained within an area having impermeable surfaces such as concrete or other impervious material under the storage and handling areas to confine and prevent groundwater contamination.  Additionally, aboveground storage tanks shall comply with the requirements of any and all regulations promulgated for the Pennsylvania Storage Tank and Spill Prevention Act (PA Act No. 32) as may be amended or any other state or federal laws. Underground storage tanks shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 

(4) 	
Land grading or construction of structures or other site improvements, which would directly or indirectly diminish the flow of natural springs, surface waters or naturally existing underground drainage channels is prohibited. In determining the potential adverse affect of any proposed grading, site disturbance or construction activities, the applicant shall provide the Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer with geology and water table data from observation wells, test borings and other accepted sources, as deemed necessary by the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer using accepted engineering practice. 

(5) 	
The installation of individual water supply wells which would directly or indirectly affect water supply, water volume, the water table or underground aquifers, groundwater or the watershed ("natural water supplies") is permitted, subject to the applicant's submission of a groundwater study sufficient to conclude that the installation of any such well shall not create an adverse impact on any of the foregoing natural water supplies and shall not result in ground subsidence or damage to any existing or proposed structures or improvements. Any water supply involving water supplied from a community well shall be prohibited within the Carbonate Geology Overlay District. 

(6) 	
No stormwater management basin or other associated facilities shall be placed in or over the following features: sinkholes, closed depression, fracture traces, lineament, ghost lake, springs or disappearing streams (places where surface drainage enters the ground). Where necessitated by proximity to such features, basins may be required to be lined or otherwise constructed to preclude the opening of sinkholes and depressions arising as a consequence of water infiltration into carbonate formations. 

(7) 	
Buildings and structures proposed to be constructed within the influence of a sinkhole, closed depression, lineament, fracture trace, spring, ghost lake or disappearing stream shall be designed so as to provide adequate control and dispersal of water in order to reduce the hazard of building damage due to collapse or subsidence.  All measures proposed to be used by the applicant to control adverse impacts shall be described to the satisfaction of the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer. 

(8) 	
All underground sewer and water utilities, roadbeds, curbs, sidewalks and culverts proposed to be constructed and installed in areas evidencing carbonate formations shall be adequately protected from collapse, leakage and other hazards that contribute to or arise from collapse or subsidence, as required by the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer. 



(I) 	
Should Cumru Township find that an applicant may create a significant risk to the public's health or safety, in spite of taking all reasonable actions to minimize such risk, or should Cumru Township determine that the applicant has not taken all reasonable actions to minimize such risk, Cumru Township may deny the application in accordance with the provisions established by this Zoning Ordinance or impose reasonable conditions deemed appropriate by the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer to mitigate such risks. 

(J) 	
Following receipt of the report from the Cumru Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer shall either approve the building permit application, approve it with conditions, or reject it, and shall do so within forty-five (45) days of submission of the permit application, unless a request to extend the time period is requested or agreed upon, in writing, by the applicant. 

(K) 	
Where compliance with this section of the Zoning Ordinance is required as part of an application for subdivision or land development plan approval, the decision on whether compliance has been achieved shall be made at the time of the decision on the subdivision or land development plan application. 

(L) 	
Where the application is a part of a request for a zoning permit, the Zoning Officer shall issue no such permit until the requirements of this section of the Zoning ordinance and any conditions imposed upon the use of the property at the time of subdivision or land development approval are satisfied.  




Article 6: Special Overlay Districts 
Section 601: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	The purpose and objective of the Special Overlay Districts is to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, which pertain to land use planning, historic preservation, land use, construction and economic development.   In order to strategically implement theses goals, objectives and policies, the following Special Overlay Districts are hereby established: 
Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District 
Airport Overlay District 

Historical Preservation Overlay District 
(B) 	
The Special Overlay Districts incorporated under Article 6 include provisions to supplement and enhance the existing underlying district regulations for certain land areas and zoning districts.  These supplemental regulations should not replace the existing underlying zoning district regulations.  In cases where the Special Overlay Districts should overlap, the more restrictive standards shall apply. 

(C) 	
The land and water areas encompassed by the Special Overlay Districts shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 



Section 602: Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District 
(A) 
The Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District shall be a special overlay to the existing commercial and industrial uses within the underlying Local Commerce (LC) District, Highway Commercial (HC) District and General Industrial (GI) District.  The objectives of this special overlay district are outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To permit the planned reuse, division and/or redevelopment of existing non-residential buildings, structures and land areas within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to specific design criteria and procedural requirements. 

(2) 	
To retain and expand existing businesses to preserve a sound tax base and provide employment opportunities. 

(3) 	
To provide incentives to occupy vacant commercial and industrial land uses. 

(4) 	
To pursue economic development targets that will build upon the existing commercial and industrial base. 

(5) 	
To maintain a positive relationship with the local business community. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning land use planning and economic development, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
The provisions for adaptive reuse and redevelopment, as specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to all non-residential uses, buildings and land areas within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, which have been abandoned, unoccupied or not utilized for a period of (1) year or more.  

(C) 	
The permitted land uses within the Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District shall be subject to the following criteria: 

(1) 	
The land uses permitted by right, special exception or conditional use within the LC or HC Zoning Districts shall be permitted by special exception as part of the Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District, provided that the uses are located within the LC or HC Zoning Districts.  As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider a combination of non-residential uses within the existing buildings on the property, provided that such combination of non-residential uses 

are generally compatible with the existing land use characteristics of other properties within 500 feet of the property being considered for adaptive reuse. 

(2) 	
The land uses permitted by right, conditional use and/or special exception within the underlying GI Zoning District shall be permitted by special exception as part of the Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District, provided that the uses are located within the GI Zoning District.  As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider a combination of non-residential uses on the property or within the existing buildings on the property, provided that such combination of non­residential uses are generally compatible with the existing land use characteristics of other properties within 500 feet of the property being considered for adaptive reuse. 

(3) 	
The following land uses shall not be permitted or considered as part of a special exception application under the guidelines of the Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment Overlay District: adult business or entertainment uses, commercial composting and mushroom production uses; intensive agricultural uses; quarry or mining operations; and solid waste disposal and reduction facilities. All such uses are defined and permitted within certain underlying zoning districts. Specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The provisions for Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment may apply to historical resources or historically significant structures that are located within the Historic Preservation Overlay District. 



(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to any proposed use, which is intended to convert and occupy an abandoned non-residential building: 

(1) 	
The existing building may be expanded to accommodate the new permitted use provided it conforms to all dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district. 

(2) 	
Where the existing building is considered nonconforming based upon its lot area, height or building coverage, the existing building may be enlarged by no more than 20 percent, provided that the expansion is completed within five (5) years from the date of the adaptive reuse has been approved. 

(3) 	
Where the existing building is considered nonconforming based upon its proximity to property lines, the existing building may be enlarged by no more than 20 percent, provided that the expansion does not further violate the yard requirement of the underlying zoning district and that expansion is completed within five (5) years from the date of the adaptive reuse has been approved. 

(4) 	
Where the existing building is considered nonconforming based upon lot coverage, the existing building may be enlarged by no more than 20 percent, provided that the expansion is conducted on other impervious surfaces and that the expansion is completed within five (5) years from the date of the adaptive reuse has been approved. 

(5) 	
The total number of off-street parking and loading spaces for each use may be reduced by no more than 25 percent of the minimum requirements specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the total number of proposed off-street parking and loading spaces can safely and efficiently accommodate the employees and patrons on the largest shift. 



(E) 	
All projects considering adaptive reuse and redevelopment, which involve the division of any parcels of land, shall be subject to all pertinent subdivision requirements, as specified under the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  The perimeter of all subdivided parcels of land shall be accurately described by bearings and distances. 

(F) 	
All projects considering adaptive reuse and redevelopment, which involve the division of any internal building or structural space, shall be subject to all pertinent subdivision and land development requirements, as specified under Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  All deeds or lease agreements shall contain a description of the occupied land area, the existing and proposed facility improvements, a maintenance agreement, a list of restrictive covenants, and all other relevant documentation required by the Cumru Township Solicitor.  The deed or lease agreement shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township and shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(G) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, a subdivision and/or land development plan shall be required to satisfy all pertinent provisions specified under Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. This provision may be waived by the Board of Commissioners if the applicant demonstrates: 

(1) 	
The project does not involve the subdivision of land or the division of any internal building or structural space. 

(2) 	
The project does not impose any significant impacts or improvements associated with traffic, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, off-street parking and loading, sanitary sewage facilities, water supply facilities, or other significant impacts and improvements determined by the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer. 

(3) 	
The project does not involve any zoning conflicts or variances.   



(H) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all commonly owned land uses, buildings or subcomponents of building areas considering adaptive reuse and redevelopment shall be required to have separate sanitary sewer connections, water supply connections, and all other utilities servicing the property.  All utility connections shall be installed in accordance with all specifications adopted by Cumru Township and the public utility company providing service to the use. 

(I) 	
All uses shall be planned and designed to minimize and reduce light, noise and air emissions onto adjacent properties. Where feasible, buffer yards and landscaping enhancements should be established around the perimeter of the property. 

(J) 	
All uses shall comply with the minimum building code requirements, as specified by Cumru Township and by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.  Prior to the issuance of a Use and Occupancy Permit for the proposed use, the applicant shall provide evidence to Cumru Township that all plans and permits have been approved by all pertinent local, state and federal agencies. 

(K) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(L) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 603: Airport Overlay District 
(A) 	
Pursuant to the provisions and authority by the Airport Zoning Act, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as well as other applicable state and federal laws, Cumru Township has established a special overlay of land, water and air space, which has been originally established in July of 1981 through the adoption of Cumru Township Ordinance 363. 

(B) 	
The general purpose of the Airport Overlay District is to establish and identify a variety of features and zones including: runways, runway approach zones; transitional zones, horizontal zones; and conical zones.  Height limitations and land use restrictions are also established to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the aircraft as well as those residents and buildings located on the ground.  

(C) 	
All provisions relating to land use and height restrictions are further specified and contained within Cumru Township Ordinance 363, which may be amended from time in accordance with state and federal guidelines. 



Section 604: Historical Preservation Overlay District 
(A) 	
The Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be a special overlay to the underlying zoning districts within Cumru Township.  The objectives of this special overlay district are outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To establish a zone that emphasizes the preservation of selected areas that have historical significance. 

(2) 	
To establish effective historical enhancement provisions, which consider provisions for buffer yards, scenic vistas, landscaping, signs and other visual enhancements. 

(3) 	
To initiate a process of public and technical review prior to the demolition or relocation of historic buildings and structures. 

(4) 	
To promote tourism within this historical region of Berks County. 

(5) 	
To provide for adaptive reuse and redevelopment alternatives as a means of encouraging their preservation and use. 

(6) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning historic preservation, cultural resource recognition, and land use planning, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan 



(B) 	
The Historical Preservation Overlay District shall include the land areas within Cumru Township that are located within 250 feet of an historical resource or historic site, as referenced by: the National Register of Historical Places; the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission; and/or by Cumru Township.  Where necessary, the limits of the Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be determined by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
All proposed land uses, developments and/or site improvements within the Historical Preservation Overlay District shall be reviewed by Cumru Township prior to the issuance of any permits for demolition. 

(D) 	
All permitted land uses within the underlying zoning district to which the historical resource or historically significant structure is located may be permitted by right within the Historic Preservation Overlay District.  All other land uses that are not permitted in the underlying zoning district, but are listed as an adaptive reuse and redevelopment of a historical buildings and structure (refer to Section 604.E of this Zoning Ordinance) may be permitted by special exception. 

(E) 	
The following land uses may be permitted as part of the adaptive reuse and redevelopment of historical buildings and structures: 

(1) 	
The provisions for Adaptive Reuse and Redevelopment, as specified under Section 602 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall apply to historical resources or historically significant structures that are located within the Historic Preservation Overlay District. 

(2) 	
Banks and financial institutions excluding drive through facilities, subject to Section 807 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Bed and Breakfasts, subject to the provisions of Section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Business and professional offices, subject to Section 808 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Educational uses, subject to the provisions of Section 820 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Medical, dental, vision and counseling clinics, subject to Section 835 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Places of worship or religious uses, subject to the provisions of Section 841 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Restaurants, excluding drive through facilities, subject to Section 846 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(9) 	
Retail business establishments, subject to Section 847 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
As part of the special exception application, alternative uses permitted by the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board, which has been determined to be: compatible with the adjacent land uses; enables the preservation, restoration or rehabilitation of the historical resource or historical structure; and meets the overall purpose statements and objectives of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
As part of all future subdivision and land development applications within the Historical Preservation Overlay District, the following design requirements and site improvements shall be considered: 

(1) 	
All proposed buildings or structures located within the Historical Preservation District shall be reviewed by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
All proposed buildings or structures, which are permitted within the Historical Overlay District, shall be designed to consider the architectural characteristics of the existing properties within the Historical Preservation Overlay District.  Where appropriate, the developer shall utilize building materials that are either compatible to these existing properties or will compliment the historical character of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Where feasible, street trees and other aesthetic landscaping improvements should be incorporated into the design of the subdivision or land development plan. 

(4) 	
The total number and size of all signs within the Historical Preservation Overlay District should be limited to avoid clutter and to serve the basic needs of the use.  All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise directed by the utility company providing service, all proposed utilities shall installed underground and within a utility easement or right-of-way. 

(6) 	
All proposed developments shall be designed with regard to the topographic and natural features of the site. The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are preserved and protected to the extent that it is not necessary to disturb the site in order to implement the criteria and standards of this Zoning Ordinance. All natural features not proposed for disturbance, as otherwise permitted by the objective standards and criteria of this Zoning Ordinance shall be preserved and incorporated into the final landscaping and open space design of the development. 

(7) 	
All proposed developments and site improvements shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features. Where feasible, the development shall incorporate, locate and identify scenic vista points, which will remain after construction of the proposed residential dwellings, other permitted uses, and related site improvements, and which will provide visual amenities to the development.  The vista points may include unobstructed views looking into the development from adjacent public roads and unobstructed views within the development, each incorporating open space and/or other preserved natural features. 



(G) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the demolition or relocation of historical resources and historically significant structures: 

(1) 	
No historical resource or historically significant structure shall be demolished and/or relocated until it has been reviewed by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
The landowner or applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the historical resource or historically significant structure can not be rehabilitated, revitalized, reused or redeveloped as a viable land use within the community. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall consider all proposals involving the demolition or relocation of historical resources and historically significant structures within the Historical Overlay District. If acceptable, the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall authorize the Cumru Township Zoning Officer to issue the appropriate permits. 






Article 7: Residential Land Use and Development  Requirements 
Section 701: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 7 is to develop certain land use and development requirements for the residential uses within Cumru Township.  The provisions of Article 7 are intended to supplement and not replace the zoning district regulations, which are further specified under Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “residential uses” shall include all single family detached dwelling units, single family semi-detached dwelling units, townhouse units, apartment units, condominiums, multi-family units, manufactured homes, secondary housing, or other residential land use designation specified within under this Zoning Ordinance, whereas, residential occupancy shall apply to the existing or proposed use. 

(C) 	
The regulations established under Article 7 shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these supplementary regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 702 Single Family Detached Residential Uses 
(A) 	
Single family detached residential units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All single family detached dwelling units shall be located on approved residential lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the single family detached residential unit is located or the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provides the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for single-family detached dwelling units: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached dwellings shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Single-family detached dwellings shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving single-family detached dwellings shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 



(D) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for a single family detached residential use.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(E) 	
All typical accessory uses and structures to a single family detached residential unit shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the single family detached unit; they are clearly subordinate to the single family detached residential unit; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a building permit, subdivision plan or land development plan; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township.  



Section 703: Single Family Semi-Detached Residential Uses 
(A) 	
Single family semi-detached residential units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by right within the MR and HR Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All single family semi-detached dwelling units shall be located on individually approved residential lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the zoning district to which the single family semi-detached residential unit is located. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provides the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for single-family detached dwelling units: 

(1) 	
Single-family semi-detached dwellings shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Single-family semi-detached dwellings shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving single-family detached dwellings shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 



(D) 	
Each residential semi-detached unit shall be considered as a principal use and shall comply with the individual dimensional and utility requirements for a semi-detached unit.  Each residential lot shall be accurately described by bearings and distances, which shall be recorded as a separate deed. 

(E) 	
The common wall separating the residential semi-detached units shall be considered the common lot line, as extended from the front property line to the rear property line.  The side yard setback requirements shall not apply to any part of the principal residential use, however, the side yard setback requirement for all accessory buildings and/or uses should be measured at least five (5) feet from the common lot line.  

(F) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township, a subdivision plan and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, prior to the issuance of a building permit for a single family semi-detached residential use.  If a subdivision or land development plan is required, the plan shall be prepared to comply with the appropriate provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(G) 	
All typical accessory uses and structures to a single family semi-detached residential unit shall be permitted provided: they are located on the same lot as the single family semi-detached unit; they are clearly subordinate to the single family semi-detached residential unit; they have been properly addressed as part of the application for a building permit, subdivision plan or land development plan; and/or they comply with all other supplemental development and design requirements specified by Cumru Township.  


Section 704: Multi-Family Townhouse Uses and Developments 
(A) 	
Multi-family townhouse units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the HR Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The minimum amount of land contained within a townhouse development shall as follows: 

(1) 	
For townhouse developments containing less than 2 acres of contiguous land area, the provisions specified under Sections 704.C and 704.D of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 

(2) 	
For townhouse developments containing between 2 acres and 10 acres of contiguous land area, the provisions specified under Section 704.C through 704.F of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 

(3) 	
For townhouse developments containing more than 10 acres of contiguous land area, the provisions specified under Section 704.C through 704.J of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply.  

(4) 	
Contiguous land area shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties.  Cumru Township may consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the multi-family townhouse unit development can be strategically planned and designed as a townhouse community. 



(C) 	
The multi-family townhouse development shall comply with the following general requirements: 

(1) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
The maximum permitted residential density (townhouse units per gross acre) for multi-family townhouse unit developments shall not exceed eight (8) townhouse units per gross acre. 



(D) 	
The multi-family townhouse unit development shall be designed to comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum width of a townhouse unit shall be twenty (20) feet per unit. 

(2) 	
The minimum building setback lines should be established twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line and forty (40) feet from all other external property lines, which are not owned by the applicant in pre­development conditions. 

(3) 	
The number of townhouse units, attached in a common row, shall not exceed eight (8) attached townhouse units. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of a townhouse unit shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 

(5) 	
No more than thirty (30) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings. 

(6) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(E) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of townhouse units within the development shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
The separation shall be twenty (20) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to side. 

(2) 	
The separation shall be thirty (30) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to rear. 

(3) 	
The separation shall be forty (40) feet when the townhouse unit groups are rear to rear. 



(F) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(G) 	
The multi-family townhouse unit development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The development shall be designed with regard to the topographic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are preserved and protected to the extent that it is not necessary to disturb the site in order to implement the land development plan utilizing the objective criteria and standards of Cumru Township relating to the housing types, street locations and required infrastructure and their intended location within the site. 

(2) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identifying the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the multi-family townhouse unit development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, tree masses and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(3) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the special exception application. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the applicant shall provide two 

(2) new trees per townhouse unit.  The trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(4) 	
The multi-family development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) should be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(5) 	
Townhouse units should be constructed utilizing mansards, gables and/or hip roofs as part of the architectural design.  The front building lines or facade of any two (2) adjoining townhouse units shall be staggered or offset, so that each townhouse unit will have a minimum horizontal separation (front to back at full height) of two (2) feet. 

(6) 	
The internal access drives and common off-street parking areas and access drives shall be designed considering the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The parking areas shall not be designed or located to require cars to back into streets in order to leave the parking areas.  All dead-end parking lots shall provide adequate areas in which emergency and commercial vehicles can safely maneuver. 

(b) 	
Common parking areas and access drives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all structures and from the exterior lot lines of the development. Common parking areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all street rights-of-way and exterior lot lines of the development. 

(c) 	
The entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas. 

(d) 	
Parking areas shall be designed to prevent through traffic to other parking areas. No more than sixty (60) off-street parking spaces shall be accommodated in any one (1) parking area. All common parking areas shall be sufficiently screened and landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(e) 	
The points of ingress and egress from common parking areas within the development shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the point of a street intersection, as measured from the nearest street curb lines. 



(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be completely screened from view on three (3) sides by fencing and landscaping.  All trash and rubbish shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. 



(H) 	
The design of the land or water areas designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the multi-family townhouse unit development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 3 Slopes. 

(3) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities, as further described under Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Existing and/or proposed roads may bisect the areas designated as common open space, provided a cross walk at grade is safely designed to link the common open space areas.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the special exception application. 

(5) 	
Significant natural features shall be incorporated into the overall schematic of the design as common open space areas whenever possible. 

(6) 	
An integrated system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall be provided by utilizing sidewalks, trails and/or bicycle lanes. 

(7) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(8) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 



(10) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(I) 	
In addition to the townhouse units, the proposed multi-family development may contain the following non­residential uses, provided they are considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(2) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the multi-family townhouse unit development. 

(3) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space. 



(J) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and/or land development plan. 

(K) 	
Unless otherwise specified by the Cumru Township, the special exception application and land development plan application may run concurrently in order for the applicant to gain a complete technical review under the provisions of Cumru Township.  The applicant shall be responsible for the submitting a complete application in advance of the required submission dates. 



Section 705: Multi-Family Apartment Uses and Developments 
(A) 	
Multi-family apartment units, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the HR Zoning District. 

(B) 	
All multi-family apartment unit developments shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be five (5) contiguous acres.  Contiguous land area shall be defined as a parcel of land that is owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties.  Cumru Township may consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the multi-family apartment unit development can be planned and designed as a multi-family community. 

(2) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The maximum permitted residential density (apartment units per gross acre) for multi-family apartment unit developments shall be ten (10) apartment units per gross acre. 

(6) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the multi-family apartment unit development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  



(C) 	
The multi-family apartment development shall be designed to comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(1) 	
The total number of individual apartment units contained within a single building shall not exceed thirty 

(30) apartment units. 

(2) 	
The building setback line should be established fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line or sixty (60) feet from the curb line. 

(3) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of apartment units within the development shall be as follows:  

(a) 	
The separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the apartment unit groups are side to side. 

(b) 	
The separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the apartment unit groups are side to rear. 

(c) 	
The separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the apartment unit groups are rear to rear. 



(4) 	
The maximum length of any building occupying individual apartment units shall not exceed two hundred 

(200) feet. 

(5) 	
The maximum depth of any building occupying individual apartment units shall not exceed one hundred 

(100) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum height of the building shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 

(7) 
All apartment units within the development shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(8) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings. 

(9) 	
No more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(D) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The multi-family apartment unit development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The development shall be designed with regard to the topographic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are preserved and protected to the extent that it is not necessary to disturb the site in order to implement the conditional use plan utilizing the objective criteria and standards of Cumru Township relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure and their intended location within the site. 

(2) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the multi-family apartment unit development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, tree masses and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the multi-family development.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design shall be provided and considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the special exception application. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the applicant shall provide two 

(2) new trees per apartment unit.  The trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The multi-family development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) should be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
Apartment units shall be constructed utilizing courtyards, common porticos, mansards, gables and/or hip roofs as part of the architectural design.  Where feasible, the front building lines or facade of the common apartment building should be staggered or offset. 

(7) 	
The access drives and common off-street parking areas shall be designed considering the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance as well as the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The parking areas shall not be designed or located to require cars to back into streets in order to leave the parking areas.  All dead-end parking lots shall provide adequate areas in which emergency and commercial vehicles can safely maneuver. 

(b) 	
Common parking areas and access drives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all buildings and structures within the development. Common parking areas shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all street rights-of-way and exterior lot lines of the development. 

(c) 	
The entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the areas. 

(d) 	
Parking areas shall be designed to prevent through traffic to other parking areas. No more than sixty (60) off-street parking spaces shall be accommodated in any one (1) parking area. All 

common parking areas shall be sufficiently screened and landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(e) 	
Entrances to and exits from common parking areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred 


(100) feet from the point of intersection of the nearest street curb lines. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be enclosed and screened from view on three (3) sides by fencing and landscaping.  All trash and rubbish shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. 



(F) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the development tract shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas classified as Category 3 Slopes. 

(3) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities, as further described by the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Existing and/or proposed roads may bisect the areas designated as common open space, provided a cross walk at grade is safely designed to link the common open space areas. Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the special exception application. 

(5) 	
Significant natural features shall be incorporated into the overall schematic of the design as common open space areas whenever possible. 

(6) 	
A system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall be provided by utilizing sidewalks and trails. 

(7) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the multi-family apartment unit development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(8) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(10) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(G) 	
In addition to the proposed apartment units, the proposed multi-family development may contain the following non­residential uses, provided they are considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the multi­family apartment unit development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(2) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the multi-family apartment unit development. 

(3) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space 



(H) 	
The owner of the apartment building shall provide Cumru Township with a list of tenants who reside within the apartment building.  Any change in tenancy shall be reported to Cumru Township on a semi-annual basis. 

(I) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and/or land development plan. 

(J) 	
Unless otherwise specified by the Cumru Township, the special exception application and land development plan application may run concurrently in order for the applicant to gain a complete technical review under the provisions of Cumru Township.  The applicant shall be responsible for the submitting a complete application in advance of the required submission dates. 



Section 706: Cluster Design for the AG Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Cluster Design for the AG Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:   

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure; 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(3) 	
To protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(4) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(6) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
For the purposes of Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance, Cluster Design for the AG Zoning District shall also be referenced as “AG Cluster Development”.  

(C) 	
AG Cluster Developments containing single family detached residential units, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the AG Zoning District. 

(D) 	
AG Cluster Developments shall be designed to comply with the following design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be twenty (20) contiguous acres of land, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. Cumru Township shall consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the AG Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Single family dwelling units including their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within the AG Cluster Development. Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  

(4) 	
If on-lot sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized for the AG Cluster Development, a primary and secondary area designated for on-lot sewage shall be provided within the lot for each residential use.  The common open space shall be designated as a third option for on-lot sewage disposal should the primary and secondary sites for on-lot sewage fail.  

(5) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the AG Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density provision for the AG Cluster Development shall be 0.50 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within the AG Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached residential uses shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be one (1) acre. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be one hundred-fifty (150) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet.  Cumru Township may allow an architectural projection of five (5) feet into the required front yard, provided that the architectural projection is not part of the garage area for the dwelling. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifteen (15) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent for each lot. 



(2) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space, as per the requirements specified by this section as well as those specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
The AG Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan shall show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be reserved or designated as common open space.  This shall be considered the initial step in the site design process. 

(3) 	
The minimum lot area required for each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, areas within utility easements or rights-of-way, and/or areas defined as Category 2 or 3 Slopes. 

(4) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the AG Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(5) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the AG Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(6) 	
No more than four (4) residential dwelling units shall be permitted around the circumference of any cul­de-sac bulb or turnaround. 

(7) 	
No more than two (2) segments with two hundred (200) combined linear feet of road surface, as measured along the centerline of the road(s) within the AG Cluster Development shall be constructed upon the areas defined as Category 3 Slopes. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for designing, permitting and constructing of all site improvements that are required by Cumru Township to accommodate the proposed AG Cluster Development. 

(9) 
The applicant should give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the AG Cluster Development.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design may be provided and considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(10) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each single family detached residential lot within the AG Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces contiguous to the garage and located no closer than five feet to the side lot line. The proposed off-street parking spaces shall not exceed a grade of eight (8) percent. 

(11) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the AG Cluster Development as part of the application for subdivision and land development plan approval. 



(G) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(H) 	
The AG Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The AG Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the AG Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot or use within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The AG Cluster Development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Board of Commissioners.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
The AG Cluster Development should be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 



(I) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(4) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be incorporated into the overall design of the common open space. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the AG Cluster Development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(8) 	
The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of Commissioners. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(J)	
 The AG Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following procedural requirements: 

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 706 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(2) 	
The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan, which shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the AG Cluster Development.  If requested, the applicant may be required to provide a presentation of the proposed site improvements as they relate the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(4) 	
Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer may issue recommendations concerning the sketch plan for the AG Cluster Development. 

(5) 	
If a favorable recommendation has been issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer, a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
If the preliminary subdivision and land development plan is approved by Cumru Township, a final subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(K) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 707: Cluster Design for the RC Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Cluster Design for the RC Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows: 

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure; 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(3) 	
To protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(4) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(6) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
For the purposes of Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance, Cluster Design for the RC Zoning District shall also be referenced as “RC Cluster Development”.  

(C) 	
RC Cluster Developments containing single family detached residential units, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the RC Zoning District. 

(D) 	
RC Cluster Developments shall be designed to comply with the following design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be thirty (30) contiguous acres of land, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. Cumru Township shall consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the RC Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Single family dwelling units including their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within the RC Cluster Development. Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 

537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
If on-lot sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized for the RC Cluster Development, a primary and secondary area designated for on-lot sewage shall be provided within the lot for each residential use.  The common open space shall be designated as a third option for on-lot sewage disposal should the primary and secondary sites for on-lot sewage fail 

(5) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the RC Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density provision for the RC Cluster Development shall be 0.33 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within the RC Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached residential uses shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be one (1) acre. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be one hundred-fifty (150) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet.  Cumru Township may allow an architectural projection of five (5) feet into the required front yard, provided that the architectural projection is not part of the garage area for the dwelling. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifteen (15) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be twenty-five (25) percent for each lot. 



(2) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space, as per the requirements specified by this section as well as those specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
The RC Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be reserved or designated as common open space.  This shall be considered the initial step in the site design process. 

(3) 	
The minimum lot area required for each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, areas within utility easements or rights-of-way, and/or areas defined as Category 2 or 3 Slopes. 

(4) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the RC Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(5) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the RC Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(6) 	
No more than four (4) residential dwelling units shall be permitted around the circumference of any cul­de-sac bulb or turnaround. 

(7) 	
No more than two (2) segments with two hundred (200) combined linear feet of road surface, as measured along the centerline of the road(s) within the RC Cluster Development shall be constructed upon the areas defined as Category 3 Slopes. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for designing, permitting and constructing of all site improvements that are required by Cumru Township to accommodate the proposed RC Cluster Development. 

(9) 	
The applicant should give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the RC Cluster Development.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design may be provided and considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(10) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each single family detached residential lot within the RC Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces contiguous to the garage and located no closer than five feet to the side lot line. The proposed off-street parking spaces shall not exceed a grade of eight (8) percent. 

(11) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the RC Cluster Development as part of the application for subdivision and land development plan approval. 



(G) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(H) 	
The RC Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The RC Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the RC Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot or use within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The RC Cluster Development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Board of Commissioners.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
The RC Cluster Development shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 



(I) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than thirty (30) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(4) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be incorporated into the overall design of the common open space. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the RC Cluster Development containing no less than thirty (30) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(8) 	
The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(J)	
 The RC Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following procedural requirements:  

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 707 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(2) 	
The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan, which shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the RC Cluster Development.  If requested, the applicant may be required to provide a presentation of the proposed site improvements as they relate the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(4) 	
Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer may issue recommendations concerning the sketch plan for the RC Cluster Development. 

(5) 	
If a favorable recommendation has been issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer, a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
If the preliminary subdivision and land development plan is approved by Cumru Township, a final subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(K) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 708: Cluster Design for the MR Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Cluster Design for the MR Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:   

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure; 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(3) 	
To protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(4) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(6) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
For the purposes of Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance, Cluster Design for the MR Zoning District shall also be referenced as “MR Cluster Development”.  

(C) 	
MR Cluster Developments containing single family detached residential units, as further defined under Article 2 and permitted under the provisions of Section 708 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the MR Zoning District. 

(D) 	
MR Cluster Developments shall be designed in accordance with the following general design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be ten (10) contiguous acres of land, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. Cumru Township shall consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the MR Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Single family dwelling units including their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within a MR Cluster Development. Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the MR Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Unless otherwise permitted, the maximum permitted base residential density provision for the MR Cluster Development shall be 6.00 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within the MR Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single-family detached residential uses shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be 5,000 square feet. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be sixty (60) feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be thirty (30) feet.  Cumru Township may allow an architectural projection of five (5) feet into the required front yard, provided that the architectural projection is not part of the garage area for the dwelling. 

(d) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be eight (8) feet, as measured on each side. 

(e) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be forty (40) percent for each lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50) percent for each lot. 

(i) 	
All proposed single family detached residential units within the cluster development shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 



(2) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the MR Cluster Development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(3) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the MR Cluster development. 

(4) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space, as per the requirements specified by this section as well as those specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
A density bonus of 0.25 dwelling units per gross acre may be added to the base residential density requirements for each design objective (as contained within this sub-section) achieved as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The maximum permitted density bonus shall not exceed 1.0 dwelling unit per gross acre. As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, Cumru Township may consider a density bonus for the following design objectives: 

(1) 	
The MR Cluster Development provides consideration for active recreation facilities on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the MR cluster development. 

(2) 	
The MR Cluster Development provides for passive recreation, educational and/or ecological opportunities that are considered schematically planned, contiguous and/or integrated with other passive recreation areas on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the MR cluster development. 

(3) 	
The MR Cluster Development is designed as an adult or age-qualified residential community. 

(4) 	
The MR Cluster Development is designed with a village atmosphere with unique or enhanced architectural value, including utilizing natural building products for the building face (brick, wood, stone or masonry products) and rooflines (mansards, gables or hip roof designs). 

(5) 	
The MR Cluster Development provides additional open space areas beyond the minimum requirement of fifty (50) percent of the gross tract area, regardless of configuration, whereas a 0.25 residential density bonus shall be incrementally applied for each additional five (5) percent of the gross tract area that is designated as open space within the MR Cluster Development.  The maximum density bonus for this provision shall not exceed 1.0 dwelling units per acre. 



(G) 	
The MR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be reserved or designated as common open space.  This shall be considered the initial step in the site design process. 

(3) 	
The minimum lot area required for each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, areas within utility easements or rights-of-way, and/or areas defined as Category 2 or 3 Slopes. 

(4) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the MR Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(5) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the MR Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(6) 	
No more than four (4) residential dwelling units shall be permitted around the circumference of any cul­de-sac bulb or turnaround. 

(7) 	
No more than two (2) segments with two hundred (200) combined linear feet of road surface, as measured along the centerline of the road(s) within the MR Cluster Development shall be constructed upon the areas defined as Category 3 Slopes. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for designing, permitting and constructing of all site improvements that are required by Cumru Township to accommodate the proposed MR Cluster Development. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the MR Cluster Development.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design shall be provided and considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(10) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each single family detached residential lot within the MR Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces contiguous to the garage and located no closer than five feet to the side lot line. The proposed off-street parking spaces shall not exceed a grade of five (5) percent. 

(11) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the MR Cluster Development as part of the application for subdivision and land development plan approval. 



(H) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(I) 	
The MR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The MR Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the MR Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot or use within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The MR Cluster Development shall provide a 20 foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the Board of Commissioners. The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
The MR Cluster Development shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 



(J) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(4) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be incorporated into the overall design of the common open space. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the MR Cluster Development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(8) 	
The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(K)	
 The MR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following procedural requirements:  

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 708 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(2) 	
The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan., which shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the MR Cluster Development.  If requested, the applicant may be required to provide a presentation of the proposed site improvements as they relate the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(4) 	
Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer may issue recommendations concerning the sketch plan for the MR Cluster Development. 

(5) 	
If a favorable recommendation has been issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer, a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
If the preliminary subdivision and land development plan is approved by Cumru Township, a final subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(L) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 709: Cluster Design for the HR Zoning District 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development and design standards for Cluster Design for the HR Zoning District.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:   

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach to community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and infrastructure; 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space. 

(3) 	
To protect environmentally sensitive areas and ecological habitats. 

(4) 	
To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices. 

(5) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing, and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(6) 	
To implement the goals and objectives of the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 



(B) 	
For the purposes of Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance, Cluster Design for the HR Zoning District shall also be referenced as “HR Cluster Development”.  

(C) 	
HR Cluster Developments containing single family detached residential units, townhouse units, apartment units or condominium units, as further defined under Article 2 and permitted under the provisions of Section 709 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the HR Zoning District. 

(D) 	
HR Cluster Developments shall be designed in accordance with the following general design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be ten (10) contiguous acres of land, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. Cumru Township shall consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the HR Cluster Development can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Residential uses containing single-family dwelling units, townhouse units, apartments, and their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within a HR Cluster Development. Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All 

sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the HR Cluster Development shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Unless otherwise permitted, the maximum permitted base residential density provision for the HR Cluster Development shall be 10.00 dwelling units per gross acre. 



(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within a HR Cluster Development: 

(1) 	
Single family detached residential uses, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
At least fifty (50) percent of the residential uses contained within the HR Cluster Development shall be designed as single-family detached residential uses. 

(b) 	
The minimum net lot area for each individual residential lot shall be 4,000 square feet. 

(c) 	
The minimum lot width for each individual residential lot shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(d) 	
The minimum front yard setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.  Cumru Township may allow an architectural projection of five (5) feet into the required front yard, provided that the architectural projection is not part of the garage area for the dwelling. 

(e) 	
The minimum side yard setback shall be five (5) feet, as measured on each side. 

(f) 	
The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(h) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifty (50) percent for each lot. 

(i) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be seventy (70) percent for each lot. 



(2) 
Townhouse units, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The maximum number of townhouse units within the HR Cluster Development shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total number of permitted residential uses or units. 

(b)	
 The minimum width of a townhouse unit shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(c) 	
The building setback line should be established twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line or thirty (30) feet from the curb line. 

(d) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of townhouse units within the development shall be as follows: the separation shall be twenty (20) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to side; the separation shall be thirty (30) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to rear; and the separation shall be forty (40) feet when the townhouse unit groups are rear to rear. 

(e) 	
All townhouse units within the development shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(f) 	
The number of townhouse units, attached in a common row, shall not exceed eight (8) attached townhouse units provided that the front building lines or facades of any two adjoining townhouse units are offset by a minimum of two (2) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum height of a townhouse unit shall be thirty-five (35) feet. The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 



(3) 	
Apartment or condominium units, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The maximum number of apartment or condominium units within the HR Cluster Development shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total number of permitted residential uses or units. 

(b) 	
The total number of individual residential units contained within a single complex or building shall not exceed thirty (30) apartment units or condominium units. 

(c) 	
The building setback line should be established fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line or sixty 

(60) feet from the curb line. 

(d) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of buildings within the development shall be as follows: the separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the buildings are side to side; the separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the buildings are side to rear; and the separation shall be eighty (80) feet when the buildings are rear to rear. 

(e) 	
The maximum length of any building occupying individual apartment units or condominium units shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum depth of any building occupying apartment units or condominium units shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum height of the building shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 

(h) 	
All apartment units or condominium units within the development shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 



(4) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the HR Cluster Development and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(a) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the HR Cluster development. 

(b) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space, as per the requirements specified by this section as well as those specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(c) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(d) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 





(F) 	
A density bonus of 0.25 dwelling units per gross acre may be added to the base residential density requirements for each design objective (as contained within this sub-section) achieved as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The maximum permitted density bonus shall not exceed 2.0 dwelling unit per gross acre. As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, Cumru Township may consider a density bonus for the following design objectives: 

(1) 	
The HR Cluster Development provides consideration for active recreation facilities on at least twenty-five 

(25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the HR cluster development. 

(2) 	
The HR Cluster Development provides for passive recreation, educational and/or ecological opportunities that are considered schematically planned, contiguous and/or integrated with other passive recreation areas on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the HR cluster development. 

(3) 	
The HR Cluster Development is designed as an adult or age-qualified residential community. 

(4) 	
The HR Cluster Development is designed with a village atmosphere with unique or enhanced architectural value, including utilizing natural building products for the building face (brick, wood, stone or masonry products) and rooflines (mansards, gables or hip roof designs). 

(5) 	
The HR Cluster Development provides additional open space areas beyond the minimum requirement of fifty (50) percent of the gross tract area, regardless of configuration, whereas a 0.25 residential density bonus shall be incrementally applied for each additional five (5) percent of the gross tract area that is designated as open space within the HR Cluster Development.  The maximum density bonus for this provision shall not exceed 1.0 dwelling units per acre. 



(G) 	
The HR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:   

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be reserved or designated as common open space.  This shall be considered the initial step in the site design process. 

(3) 	
The area occupied by each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, and/or areas defined as Category 2 or 3 Slopes. 

(4) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the HR Cluster Development shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(5) 	
The proposed residential lots and dwelling units within the HR Cluster Development shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(6) 
No more than two (2) segments with two hundred (200) combined linear feet of road surface, as measured along the centerline of the road(s) within the HR Cluster Development shall be constructed upon the areas defined as Category 3 Slopes. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for designing, permitting and constructing of all site improvements that are required by Cumru Township to accommodate the proposed HR Cluster Development. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the HR Cluster Development.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design shall be provided and considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(9) 	
In addition to the interior parking spaces within garages, each residential use within the HR Cluster Development shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. 

(10) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the HR Cluster Development as part of the application for subdivision and land development plan approval. 



(H) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(I) 	
The HR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The HR Cluster Development shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the HR Cluster Development, depicting the proposed location thereof in relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The applicant shall provide three (3) new trees for each proposed residential lot or use within the development.  The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The HR Cluster Development shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
The HR Cluster Development shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 



(J) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(4) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be incorporated into the overall design of the common open space. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the HR Cluster Development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(8) 	
The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(K)	
 The HR Cluster Development shall be designed in accordance with the following procedural requirements:  

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 709 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The should plan shall show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(2) 	
The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan, which shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the HR Cluster Development.  If requested, the applicant may be required to provide a presentation of the proposed site improvements as they relate the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(4) 	
Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer may issue recommendations concerning the sketch plan for the HR Cluster Development. 

(5) 	
If a favorable recommendation has been issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer, a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
If the preliminary subdivision and land development plan is approved by Cumru Township, a final subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(L) 	
As part of the subdivision and/or land development plan. Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 710: Group Homes 
(A) 	
Group Homes, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception in the AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All group homes shall be designed and contained within a single-family detached dwelling unit located on an approved lot that complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the single-family dwelling and group home is located. 

(C) 	
The supplemental matrix charts contained within Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance provides the basic utility requirements (sewer and water facilities) for each permitted use by its assigned zoning district. The following specific provisions shall apply to utility provisions for group homes: 

(1) 	
Group homes shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Group homes shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving group homes shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  The applicant shall provide documentation from the utility provider that the services are capable of accommodating the needs of the group home. 



(D) 	
All group homes shall be designed in accordance with the following general standards and requirements: 

(1) 	
A site plan or land development plan shall be accurately prepared to scale depicting the location and the dimensions of the group home, off-street parking areas, private entrances, walkways, fencing and landscaping. 

(2) 	
Architectural plans shall be prepared to scale depicting the dimensions, intended use and square footage of each room and storage area within the group home. 

(3) 	
No group home shall be located within 1,500 linear feet of another group home. 

(4) 	
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided per employee computed on the basis of the estimated maximum number of employees that could be present at any given time, plus one (1) space for each two 

(2) persons within the group home.  Garage space shall not be used in calculating off-street parking. 

(5) 	
The premises at which the group home is located shall be owned or leased by the licensed social services agency sponsoring the group home. 

(6) 	
No more than two (2) live-in supervisors shall reside in a group home. 

(7) 	
The only physical changes or alterations to the dwelling shall be those required by state and federal law. When the group home use is abandoned, the dwelling shall be restored to a single-family dwelling unit. 

(8) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide documentation to Cumru Township that all building, fire, plumbing, heating, electrical and similar facilities meet the standards established by the Cumru Township and by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(9) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide documentation to Cumru Township that the group home has been certified as an approved use within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(10) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall be responsible for the physical safety and emotional support of the residents within the group home.  A point of contact and/or designated counselor should be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.  Likewise, immediate contact with the sponsoring social service agency should be made available to Cumru Township. 

(11) 	
The sponsoring social service agency shall provide Cumru Township with a list of tenants who reside within the group home.  Any change in tenancy shall be reported to Cumru Township on a semi-annual basis. 

(12) 	
No group home shall have more than five (5) unrelated residents at any given time period. 

(13) 	
An emergency management plan must be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan should be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration prior to the issuance of the use and occupancy permit.  The emergency management plan shall be posted and a copy shall be issued to the social workers and tenants of the group home. 

(14) 	
The rear yard of the property shall contain a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of land area, which shall be capable of accommodating six (6) persons at once. 



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may impose other requirements deemed necessary or appropriate. 

(F) 	
All group homes shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer. 



Section 711: Age-Qualified Retirement Community 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section of the Zoning Ordinance is to provide development standards for age-qualified retirement communities, containing townhouses, apartments and condominium units.  The objectives of these provisions are outlined as follows:  

(1) 	
To provide an optional approach for senior housing and community development with provisions to permit more efficient utilization of land and of community facilities and services. 

(2) 	
To encourage innovative residential land development that will conserve open space and protect environmentally sensitive areas. 

(3) 	
To efficiently utilize the remaining undeveloped land area within Cumru Township, while providing additional housing opportunities for persons over fifty-five (55) years of age. 

(4) 	
To implement the recommendations concerning natural features, development, utilities, transportation, housing and land use, as outlined within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 



(B) 	
Age-qualified retirement communities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the MR and HR Zoning Districts.  

(C) 	
Age-qualified retirements shall be developed, organized and operated in accordance with all state and federal laws relative to the housing of persons over 55 years of age.  All such developments shall be required to incorporate deed restrictions as part of a homeowners association or similar legal document to ensure that the age-qualified retirement community is securely managed.  All such deed restrictions shall be considered by Cumru Township and recorded with the approved land development plan. 

(D) 	
Age-qualified retirement communities shall be designed in accordance with the following general design and eligibility requirements: 

(1) 	
The minimum amount of land in the development shall be ten (10) contiguous acres of land, which shall owned under a single deed or parcels of land that are owned under multiple deeds, provided that the parcels of land are contiguous to each other having common deed boundaries and are not physically separated by parcels of land owned by other individuals or parties. Cumru Township shall consider contiguous parcels of land that are physically separated by existing public roads, utility easements or rights-of way, streams and/or other natural features, provided that the applicant demonstrate that the age-qualified retirement community can be strategically designed as a unified community. 

(2) 	
Residential uses containing townhouse units, apartments, condominiums and their accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within an age-qualified retirement community. Each residential use shall be located on land area that is most suitable for development in an effort to protect significant natural features and environmentally sensitive land areas. 

(3) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses contained within the development shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the age-qualified retirement community shall be set aside as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space.  The area designated as common open space shall comply with all provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Unless otherwise permitted, the permitted base residential density for the age-qualified retirement community shall be as follows: 

(a) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density shall be 8.00 dwelling units per gross acre for age-qualified development in the MR Zoning District. 

(b) 	
The maximum permitted base residential density shall be 10.00 dwelling units per gross acre for age-qualified development in the HR Zoning District. 





(E) 	
The following land uses shall be permitted uses within a age-qualified retirement community: 

(1) 
Townhouse units, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum width of a townhouse unit shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(b) 	
The building setback line should be established twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line or thirty (30) feet from the curb line. 

(c) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of townhouse units within the development shall be as follows: the separation shall be twenty (20) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to side; the separation shall be thirty (30) feet when the townhouse unit groups are side to rear; and the separation shall be forty (40) feet when the townhouse unit groups are rear to rear. 

(d) 	
All townhouse units within the development shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(e) 	
The number of townhouse units, attached in a common row, shall not exceed eight (8) attached townhouse units provided that the front building lines or facades of any two adjoining townhouse units are offset by a minimum of two (2) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of a townhouse unit shall be thirty-five (35) feet. The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 



(2) 	
Apartment or condominium units, subject to the following minimum and maximum development requirements: 

(a) 	
The maximum number of apartment or condominium units within the age-qualified retirement community shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total number of permitted residential uses or units. 

(b) 	
The building setback line should be established fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line or sixty 

(60) feet from the curb line. 

(c) 	
The minimum building separation from other groups of buildings within the development shall be sixty (60) feet regardless of the orientation of the building. 

(d) 
The maximum length of any building occupying individual apartment or condominium units shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet. 

(e) 	
The maximum depth of any building occupying apartment or condominium units shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of the building shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 

(g) 	
All apartment units or condominium units within the development shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or property, which is not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(h) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by buildings occupying apartment or condominium units. 

(i) 	
No more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the development shall be covered by impervious surfaces. 



(3) 	
Office space consisting of no more than 5,000 square feet and utilized for the purposes of conducting customary business, sales, meetings and/or maintenance, which are directly associated with the age-qualified retirement community and which are owned and operated by the developer or homeowners association. 

(4) 	
Indoor recreation and/or community center consisting of no more than 10,000 square feet and utilized exclusively by the residents of the age-qualified retirement community. 

(5) 	
Active and passive recreation uses conducted on the areas designated as common open space, as per the requirements specified by this section as well as those specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Municipal uses, subject to Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Category 1 Home Occupation Use, subject to Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(F) 	
A density bonus of 0.25 dwelling units per gross acre may be added to the base residential density requirements for each design objective (as contained within this sub-section) achieved as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application.  The maximum permitted density bonus shall not exceed 2.0 dwelling unit per gross acre. As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, Cumru Township may consider a density bonus for the following design objectives: 

(1) 	
The age-qualified retirement community provides consideration for active recreation facilities on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the development. 

(2) 	
The age-qualified retirement community provides for passive recreation, educational and/or ecological opportunities that are considered schematically planned, contiguous and/or integrated with other passive recreation areas on at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land area designated as open space within the development. 

(3) 	
The age-qualified retirement community is designed with a village atmosphere with unique or enhanced architectural value, including utilizing natural building products for the building face (brick, wood, stone or masonry products) and rooflines (mansards, gables or hip roof designs). 

(4) 	
The age-qualified retirement community provides additional open space areas beyond the minimum requirement of fifty (50) percent of the gross tract area, regardless of configuration, whereas a 0.25 residential density bonus shall be incrementally applied for each additional five (5) percent of the gross tract area that is designated as open space within the age-qualified retirement community.  The maximum density bonus for this provision shall not exceed 1.0 dwelling units per acre. 



(G) 	
The age-qualified retirement community shall be designed in accordance with the following site design, planning and engineering considerations:  

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development.  The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. 

(2) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be reserved or designated as common open space.  This shall be considered the initial step in the site design process. 

(3) 	
The area occupied by each residential use shall not include land areas that are classified as being within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands, and/or areas defined as Category 2 or 3 Slopes. 

(4) 	
All land and water areas that are not utilized for lots, streets, utilities, or other permitted uses within the age-qualified retirement community shall be set aside and maintained as common open space. 

(5) 	
The proposed residential units and uses within the age-qualified retirement community shall have suitable access to an existing public street. 

(6) 	
No more than two (2) segments with two hundred (200) combined linear feet of road surface, as measured along the centerline of the road(s) within the age-qualified retirement community shall be constructed upon the areas defined as Category 3 Slopes. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for designing, permitting and constructing of all site improvements that are required by Cumru Township to accommodate the proposed age-qualified retirement community. 

(8) 	
The applicant should give special attention to the main entrance(s) to the age-qualified retirement community.  The use of lighting, water and/or landscaping products in conjunction with a boulevard street design should be considered as a prominent feature of the development. 

(9) 	
Each residential use within the age-qualified retirement community shall provide a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. 

(10) 	
The design requirements and specifications contained within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be applied to the age-qualified retirement community as part of the application for subdivision and land development plan approval. 



(H) 	
The designated points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development shall be designed in accordance with the provisions established within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Age-qualified retirement communities shall be designed in accordance with following architectural, landscaping and exterior enhancement standards: 

(1) 	
The age-qualified retirement community shall be designed with regard to the topographic, hydrologic, geologic and natural features of the site.  The purpose of this provision is to insure that the natural features of the development are protected and preserved to the extent that it is required to avoid unnecessary disturbance of land in an effort to implement the planning criteria and site design standards relating to the proposed housing types, street locations and required infrastructure. 

(2) 	
A natural features plan shall be developed to identify the locations of floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features.  The natural features plan shall be submission requirement for the submission of a sketch plan and a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed to identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements within the age-qualified retirement community, depicting the proposed location thereof in 

relation to lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, woodlands and hedgerows.  Design components shall be implemented to minimize extensive earthmoving, utilizing typical planning and engineering practices. 

(4) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application. The applicant shall provide one (1) new tree for each proposed residential lot or use within the development.   The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(5) 	
The age-qualified retirement community shall provide a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard and planting screen along the property lines at the perimeter of the development tract to enhance the privacy of the adjacent property owners.  The design of the landscape and planting screen shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township.  The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) is encouraged and may be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
The age-qualified retirement community shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 



(J) 	
The design of the land or water areas, which are to be designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications:  

(1) 	
A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the gross area of the development shall be set aside and reserved as common open space, which shall be perpetually preserved by deed to restrict future residential development or other uses that may conflict with the integrity of the common open space. 

(2) 	
No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities. 

(3) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of the plan. 

(4) 	
Significant natural features including floodplains, surface waters, wetlands, Category 2 and 3 Slopes, woodlands, rock outcroppings, and other significant features shall be incorporated into the overall design of the common open space. 

(5) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than one hundred (100) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the age-qualified retirement community containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space. 

(6) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, which shall be recorded with the approved plan. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation management group or non-profit organization that has the capacities and resources to adequately maintain the common open space. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 

(e) 	
All such options involving the ownership, management and maintenance of land and water areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 



(8) 	
The land areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, as specified by Cumru Township, whereas, the applicant shall be responsible for all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with this development. 



(K) 	
The age-qualified retirement community shall be designed in accordance with the following procedural requirements:  

(1) 	
A sketch plan should be designed by the applicant considering all of the goals, objectives and design requirements of Section 711 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The sketch plan should show the tentative location of the lots, streets, stormwater management facilities as they relate to the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(2) 	
The sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan, which shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the age-qualified retirement community.  If requested, the applicant may be required to provide a presentation of the proposed site improvements as they relate the natural features and environmentally sensitive areas present on the site of the development. 

(4) 	
Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer may issue recommendations concerning the sketch plan for the age-qualified retirement community. 

(5) 	
If a favorable recommendation has been issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer and Engineer, a preliminary subdivision and land development plan application shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
If the preliminary subdivision and land development plan is approved by Cumru Township, a final subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township. 



(L) 	
As part of the subdivision and/or land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 712 Personal Care, Assisted Living Care Facilities, Convalescent Homes and Nursing Homes 
(A) 	
Assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes and nursing homes, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance as well as the following design standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing is located shall apply. 

(2) 	
The assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as prepared and adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the residential neighborhood from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(6) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for emergency management vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least 150 feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress.   All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of emergency response vehicles, buses and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line. 

(11) 	
All medical waste, bio-hazardous materials, equipment, red bag waste, and other similar items, which because of its potential health risks, shall be discarded in a manner specified by local, county, state and federal laws. 

(12) 	
Evidence shall be provided indicating that the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal regulations. Such evidence shall, at a minimum, include copies of contracts with waste haulers licensed to operate within Berks County, which have been contracted to dispose of the materials and wastes used or generated on-site or some other legal means of disposal.  The zoning permit for this use shall remain valid only so long as such contracts remain in effect and all materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regular basis.  Should the nature of the use change in the future, such that the materials used or wastes generated changes significantly either in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning Officer, and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued compliance with the requirements of this section. 

(13) 	
Only the processing of waste generated on-site is permitted. All processing and storage of waste shall be conducted within a completely-enclosed building.  All storage of waste shall be in a manner that is leak and vermin-proof.  No storage of waste shall exceed seven (7) days in length.  The incinerator shall be set back at least a distance equal to its height from all lot lines.  The applicant must demonstrate compliance, through a written statement, and continue to comply with all applicable local, county, state and federal standards and regulations. 

(14) 	
An emergency management plan must be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan should be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration prior to the issuance of the use and occupancy permit.  The emergency management plan shall be posted and a copy shall be issued to occupants of the facility. 

(15) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for consideration as part of the special exception application.  The applicant shall provide one (1) new tree for each proposed residential unit. The proposed trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface, and shall be planted either as street trees, as part of the buffer yard, or within the areas designated as common open space. 



(B) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the assisted living care facility, convalescent home and/or nursing home shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan. 

(D) 	
If the special exception application is approved, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by the Cumru Township. 



Section 713: Bed and Breakfast Establishments 
(A) 	
Bed and breakfast establishments, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts.  All bed and breakfast establishments shall be designed in accordance with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
The bed and breakfast establishment shall be contained within a single-family detached, owner-occupied dwelling unit.  The principal use shall remain that of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit. 

(2) 	
All tourist or bed and breakfast establishments shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the tourist or bed and breakfast establishment is located. 

(3) 	
The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment shall be a permanent resident of the establishment. 

(4) 	
A tourist or bed and breakfast establishments shall not have more than five (5) rental units and shall not house more than ten (10) guests. 

(5) 	
The principal residential use or single-family detached dwelling shall contain complete sanitary sewage disposal services, washing and bathing facilities, and a central kitchen with partial or complete cooking facilities to accommodate the occupants plus all of the guests.  No cooking facilities of any kind shall be permitted in any rental units. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall provide documentation to the Zoning Hearing Board, Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer that all plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, storm sewer, and similar facilities comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws of Cumru Township, Berks County and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(7) 	
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be required for the owners of the single-family detached dwelling plus one (1) space for each of the rental units.  The proposed off-street parking spaces shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and shall comply with the design requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  The off-street parking spaces shall be screened from the roadways and other adjacent properties with suitable landscaping materials. 

(8) 	
All external amenities provided for the guests, including swimming pools, whirlpool spas, tennis courts, gazebos, entertainment areas, and other common facilities shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines. 

(9)	
 Non-resident employees shall be limited to two (2) employees. 

(10) 	
A single decorative on-site sign, measuring four (4) square feet per side shall be permitted for the bed and breakfast establishment.  The proposed sign shall be subject to all other requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
An emergency management plan must be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan should be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration prior to the issuance of the use and occupancy permit.  The emergency management plan shall be posted at the establishment and a copy shall be issued to the each guest. 

(12) 	
The resident owner shall maintain a guest register list, which shall include the names, addresses and length of stay of all guests. 

(13) 	
The length of stay for any guest at a rooming or boarding house establishment shall not exceed fourteen 


(14) consecutive days. 

(B) 	
All bed and breakfast establishments shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer. 

(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may impose other requirements deemed necessary or appropriate. 



Section 714: Secondary Housing Unit 
(A) 	
The term “secondary housing unit”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall include guest houses and accessory apartments for relatives. 

(B) 	
The provisions for guest houses are further specified under Section 714.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for accessory apartments for relatives are further specified under Section 714.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 714.1 Guest Houses 
(A) 	
A guest house, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the AG, RC, LR and MR Zoning Districts. 

(B)
  A guest house shall comply with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
The guest house shall be located on an approved lot, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the guest house is located. 

(2) 	
A guest house shall be considered as an accessory use that is placed on a property for temporary occupancy by a relative or guest of the occupants of the principal dwelling. Unless otherwise subdivided in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township, the principal use shall remain that of a single-family detached residential dwelling unit and the guest house shall be an accessory use. 

(3) 	
The guest house shall not be occupied by guests or relatives for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days at any given time nor a total of one hundred and eighty (180) cumulative days during a calendar year. 

(4) 	
The guest house shall be occupied by a maximum of four (4) people. 

(5) 	
The guest house may be utilized by the occupants of the principal use as a bath house for a permitted swimming pool. 

(6) 	
The guest house may not have a gross floor area in excess of 1,500 square feet, including any enclosed garage and basement area. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning Hearing Board that the use of the existing sanitary sewage and water supply systems will have sufficient capacities to accommodate the principal building plus the guest house. 

(8) 	
Both residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(9) 	
Both residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(10) 	
All other utility provisions serving the residential uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(11) 	
The Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall review the existing and proposed utility connection. 

(12) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required to accommodate the principal use, a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the guest house, which shall be designed with unrestricted access to the public street. 

(13) 	
The guest house shall be installed and located only in the side or rear yards of the principal use, and shall conform to all side and rear yard setback requirements for principal uses, as required for the AG and RC Zoning Districts. 



(C) 	
Upon construction of the guest house, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit, which shall be reviewed every five (5) years to determine compliance with the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may impose other requirements deemed necessary or appropriate 


Section 714.2 Accessory Apartments for Relatives 
(A) 	
An accessory apartment for relatives, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the AG, RC, LR and MR Zoning Districts. 

(B)
  An accessory apartment for relatives shall comply with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives shall be considered an attached component or living area of a permitted single-family dwelling on an approved lot, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the accessory apartment for relatives is located. 

(2) 	
An accessory apartment for relatives shall be considered as an accessory use to the single-family dwelling, which shall only be utilized by the relatives of the occupants of the single-family dwelling. 

(3) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives shall be occupied by a maximum of two (2) people. 

(4) 	
The accessory apartment for relatives may not have a gross floor area in excess of 1,000 square feet of living space, which may include a living room, kitchen, bedroom and bathroom. 

(5) 	
All utility provisions, including sewage disposal and water supply that serve the accessory apartment for relatives shall be physically connected to those systems serving the principal dwelling.  No separate utility systems or connections shall be constructed or utilized.  All such utility connections shall comply with the provisions of Cumru Township and/or the public utility provider providing service. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning Hearing Board that existing on-lot sewage disposal system and well have sufficient capacities to accommodate the principal building plus the accessory apartment for relatives.  Where appropriate, the Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall review the existing and proposed utility connection. 

(7) 	
The residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(8) 	
The residential uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(9) 	
All other utility provisions serving the residential uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(10) 	
The Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall review the existing and proposed utility connection. 

(11) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required to accommodate the principal use, a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the accessory apartment for relatives, which shall be designed with unrestricted access to the public street. 

(12) 	
The entrance and living area associated with the accessory apartment may either be designed with common areas to the principal use or physically separated from the principal use.  



(C) 	
Upon construction of the accessory apartment for relatives, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit, which shall be reviewed every five (5) years to determine compliance with the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(D) 	
Upon the abandonment of the accessory apartment for relatives as an accessory or independent use, the area occupied by the accessory apartment must be converted back to common living space with the principal use.  Any physical separation or barriers must be removed as part of the conversion.  A plan for the eventual conversion shall be provided to the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and/or land development plan. 



Section 715: Home Occupation Regulations 
(A) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, the term “home occupation”, has been further defined and classified under two (2) separate categories for regulating home occupations as a use within Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions for a Category 1 Home Occupation are further defined and specified under Section 715.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for a Category 2 Home Occupation are further defined and specified under Section 715.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 715.1 Category 1 Home Occupation 
(A) 	
Category 1 Home Occupations, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right in the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted within an approved residential dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the zoning district to which the use is located. 

(2) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted only within the residential dwelling and may not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the residential dwelling unit.  Accessory buildings to the residential use may be utilized for storage space and should not account towards the occupancy of a home occupation use. 

(3) 	
The home occupation shall include only lawful uses, which shall be clearly secondary to the residential use and shall be compatible with surrounding residential uses. 

(4) 	
The home occupation shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling. 

(5) 	
There shall be no visual display or sale of retail goods. 

(6) 	
There shall be no stockpiling, storage or inventory of products of a substantial nature. 

(7) 	
There should be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights. 

(8) 	
The home occupation may not use any equipment or process, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood. 

(9) 	
The home occupation may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. 



(B) 	
If permitted, the applicant shall apply for a Business License, in accordance with Cumru Township Ordinance 633. The Business License shall be renewed by the applicant on a yearly basis. 

(C) 	
If permitted, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit, which shall be reviewed every year to determine if the Category 1 Home Occupation is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 715.2 Category 2 Home Occupation 
(A) 	
Category 2 Home Occupations, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception in the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted within an approved single-family detached dwelling unit, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the zoning district to which the use is located. 

(2) 	
The home occupation shall be conducted only within the dwelling or an approved accessory structure, which may not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of the single-family detached residential unit or no more than 1,000 square feet of an accessory structure. 

(3) 	
The home occupation shall include only lawful uses, which shall be clearly secondary to the residential use and shall be compatible with surrounding residential uses. The exterior appearance shall be maintained as a single-family detached residential use.   

(4) 	
The home occupation shall be limited to the family members residing within the dwelling plus two (2) additional persons to provide support services and assistance. 

(5) 	
There shall be no visual display or sale of retail goods. 

(6) 	
There shall be no stockpiling, storage or inventory of products of a substantial nature. 

(7) 	
The home occupation may not use any equipment or process, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable at the property lines. 

(8) 	
No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be performed in any open area.  All such activities shall be conducted in such a manner that they are not detectable or noticeable at or beyond the property line. 

(9) 	
The capacities of the public sewage disposal system or on-lot sewage disposal system shall be evaluated in terms of their abilities to serve the residential use along with the home occupation. Where appropriate, the provisions for additional sewage disposal capacities should be reserved, designed, installed and connected to accommodate the projected demand. 

(10) 	
The capacities of the public water supply system or on-lot well shall be evaluated in terms of their abilities to serve the residential use along with the home occupation. Where appropriate, the provisions 

for additional water supply capacities should be considered in order to provide a dependable supply of water without adversely affecting other uses. 

(11) 	
The home occupation may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood. 

(12) 	
No more than one (1) Category 2 Home Occupation shall be permitted per residential unit. 

(13) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the residential use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing within the dwelling; and no more than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to six (6) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the home occupation may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 



(B) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the zoning permit. 

(C) 	
If permitted, the applicant shall apply for a Business License, in accordance with Cumru Township Ordinance 633. The Business License shall be renewed by the applicant on a yearly basis 

(D) 	
If permitted, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit, which shall be reviewed every year to determine if the Category 2 Home Occupation is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and decision issued by the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 716:  Mixed-Use Commercial and Residential Developments 
(A) 	
Mixed-use commercial and residential developments, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are permitted by special exception within the LC Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Mixed-use developments containing a combination of commercial and residential uses shall be designed in accordance with the following general design requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net land area shall be required to accommodate the mixed-use commercial and residential development. 

(2) 	
The first floor of the mixed-use building shall be limited to commercial uses, which are permitted by right within the LC Zoning District.  The commercial use shall be considered as the principal use that is owned and managed by the owner of the permitted commercial use. 

(3) 	
The second and third floors of the mixed-use building shall contain no more than four (4) residential apartment units, which shall be considered subordinate uses to the first floor commercial use. 

(4) 	
A group of mixed-use buildings may be permitted on the same parcel being developed provided that the architectural and streetscape characteristics are similar. 

(5) 	
The permitted uses contained shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
The permitted uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(7) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide documentation or evidence that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses within the development without adversely affecting other adjacent land uses. 

(8) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the principal and subordinate uses within the mixed-use building shall have separate utility connections for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, electric, telephone, natural gas and cable services. 

(9) 	
All utility provisions serving the development shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(10) 	
The residential apartment units shall contain separate sanitary sewage disposal services, washing and bathing facilities, and a kitchen with cooking facilities to accommodate the tenants. 

(11) 	
The collection of solid waste and recyclable materials shall be a consolidated method between the uses and shall be the responsibility of the commercial use.  

(12) 	
The applicant shall provide documentation to Cumru Township that all plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, storm sewer, and similar facilities comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations and laws specified by Cumru Township and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(13) 	
Parking spaces shall be required to accommodate the permitted commercial uses and residential apartment units.  A plan for parking shall be submitted as part of the special exception application. 

(14) 	
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the applicant shall provide one (1) new tree per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area contained within the mixed-use buildings.  The trees should be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, as measured six (6) inches from the ground surface.  The required trees shall be planted as street trees, as part of a buffer yard, within the off-street parking area, or within the areas designated as common open space. 

(15) 	
The mixed-use development shall be designed to preserve and incorporate scenic, natural, historical and cultural features.  As part of the preliminary subdivision and land development plan application, the applicant shall apply the provisions for landscaping, recreation and open space to preserve and enhance the integrity of the development. 

(16) 	
An emergency management plan must be developed in the event of a catastrophic event resulting from flooding, fire, snow, ice, earthquake, utility outage, or other catastrophic event.  The emergency management plan shall be posted and a copy shall be issued to the tenants of the apartment units. 



(C) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to the mixed-use building: 

(1) 	
The building setback line should be established forty (40) feet from the street right-of-way line or fifty 

(50) feet from the curb line. 

(2) 	
The building shall be located at least forty (40) feet from all other property lines not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(3) 	
The minimum building separation from other buildings within the development shall be as follows: the separation shall be forty (40) feet when the buildings are side to side; the separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the buildings are side to rear; the separation shall be sixty (60) feet when the buildings are rear to rear. 

(4) 	
The maximum length of any mixed-use building shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet. 

(5) 	
The maximum depth of any mixed-use building shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be fifty (50) percent of the total land area of the mixed-use development. 

(7) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be seventy (70) percent of the total land area of the mixed-use development. 

(8) 	
The maximum height of the mixed-use building shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  The maximum height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet or three (3) floors provided that a sprinkler system shall be installed, provided that adequate water pressure and supply is available for fire suppression and protection. 



(D) 	
All mixed-uses shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer. 

(E) 	
The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a list of tenants who reside within the residential apartment units. Any change in tenancy within the house shall be reported to Cumru Township on a semi-annual basis. 

(F) 	
As part of the special exception application, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and/or land development plan. 

(G) 	
Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, the special exception application and land development plan application may run concurrently in order for the applicant to gain a complete technical review under the provisions of Cumru Township.  The applicant shall be responsible for the submitting a complete application in advance of the required submission dates. 


Article 8: Non-Residential  Land Use and Development Requirements 
Section 801: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The intent of Article 8 is to develop certain land use and development requirements for the permitted non-residential uses within Cumru Township.  The provisions of Article 8 are intended to supplement and not replace the zoning district regulations, which are further specified under Article 4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “non-residential uses” shall include all commercial, industrial, religious, institutional, educational, medical, agricultural, recreational, and other similar non-residential uses, whereas, primary occupancy for residential use does not apply to the existing or proposed use. 

(C) 	
The regulations established under Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these supplementary regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 802: Non-Residential Performance Standards and Controls 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise specified by other provisions adopted by Cumru Township, all non-residential uses shall comply with the performance standards and controls specified by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance, as determined appropriate by the Cumru Township Engineer, Zoning Officer, Sewage Enforcement Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer.  

(B) 	
With the exception of agricultural uses, the following requirements for air quality management shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Open burning shall only be permitted if it conducted in accordance with the provisions adopted by Cumru Township and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(2) 	
No gases, vapors, odors and/or particulates shall be emitted from any non-residential use, which are detrimental to persons, property, animals or vegetation. 

(3) 	
No toxic, radioactive or corrosive gases, vapors or fumes shall be released into the atmosphere. 

(4) 	
No odors causing annoyance or discomfort to the adjacent residents shall be detectable beyond the property lines of the non-residential use on which such odors originate. 

(5) 	
Any storage or spreading of manure, sludge, fertilizer, or other soil enrichment substances shall be conducted in a manner to limit odor.  Further, all such activities shall be conducted in manner required by all pertinent local, state and federal laws.  

(6) 	
All state and federal regulations concerning air pollution or air quality shall be considered as minimum standards for the control of smoke, dust, fumes and emissions. 



(C) 	
The following requirements for noise and vibration control shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Noise shall be regulated by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and/or by other municipal ordinances pertaining to noise. 

(2) 	
No physical vibration shall be perceptible without aid of instruments at or beyond the lot lines with the exception of temporary construction activity. 

(3) 	
No continuous noise in excess of the following limits shall be permitted at the property line of the site on which the noise sources originates: 

(4) 	
For noises that are considered smooth or continuous, the maximum permitted noise levels shall be measured over a period of ten (10) minutes.  The noise levels shall be measured by the Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer along any adjoining property line from which the noise originates.  Where the noise levels exceed the maximum permissible limits during the specified time period and time of day, the owner of the property shall be considered in violation of the maximum decibel limits permitted by this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
For those noises that are not smooth and continuous, the peak noise levels shall be measured over a period of one (1) minute to ten (10) minutes.  The noise levels shall be measured by the Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer along any adjoining property line from which the noise originates.  Where the noise levels exceed the maximum permissible peak limits during any 8 hour period of time, the owner of the property shall be considered in violation of the maximum decibel limits permitted by this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The maximum permissible noise levels specified by this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to the following conditions: 

(a) 	
General repair or construction work during the hours 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. provided that the activities are permitted by Cumru Township. 

(b) 	
Household power tools and equipment during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. provided that the activities are temporary. 

(c) 	
Blasting, providing it is conducted in association with construction activities, which have been permitted by local, state or federal agencies. 

(d) 	
Alarms or other devices used for the purposes of alerting people to the existence of an actual emergency or to warn people of an imminent danger. 

(e) 	
Municipal uses. 

(f) 	
Routine noises made by bells, chimes, carillons utilized for religious, educational or civic use. 

(g) 	
Licensed motor vehicles and authorized modes or transportation. 

(h) 	
Agricultural uses. 

(i) 	
Recreational uses. 

(j) 	
Quarrying and Mining uses. 

(k) 	
Solid Waste Management and Utility uses. 





(D) 
The following requirements for light, glare and heat control shall apply to all non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Any non-residential use or operation producing intensive light, glare and/or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such a manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the boundary lines. 

(2) 	
No luminaire, spotlight or other source that is within two hundred (200) feet of a residential use or residential district shall be placed at a height exceeding twenty (20) feet above the average surrounding ground level.  This limitation shall not apply to lights needed for air safety or lights intended to illuminate an architectural feature. 

(3) 	
All light sources utilized for non-residential uses shall be shielded or diffused to prevent the lighting from creating a nuisance to adjacent properties or prevent a distraction to motorist on adjacent public streets. 

(4) 	
Any flashing, flickering or strobe lighting shall be imperceptible from any point beyond the boundary lines. 

(5) 	
All non-residential uses shall also comply with the provisions specified under Section 919 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(E) 	
The following requirements for sewage disposal, wastewater management and water supply shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
In no case shall potentially hazardous effluent or waste from any non-residential use be discharged into the environment or public infrastructure. 

(2) 	
The effluent from any non-residential use shall comply with the regulations specified by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All non-residential uses shall comply with all pertinent provisions relating to sewage disposal, wastewater management and water supply, as adopted by Cumru Township. 



(F) 	
The following requirements for solid waste management and disposal shall apply to all non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
No storage of solid waste materials on the site shall be permitted in excess of ten (10) days. 

(2) 	
All solid waste materials awaiting transport shall be properly screened and concealed from the view of all adjacent properties.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin-proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate existing and projected volumes of solid waste. 

(3) 	
All solid waste management violations must be resolved within a twenty-four (24) hour period. 

(4) 	
Incineration for the purpose of reducing or disposing of liquid or solid waste material must comply with the appropriate provisions for open burning and incineration adopted by Cumru Township as well as all state and federal air quality standards. 

(5) 	
All non-residential uses shall comply with the appropriate provisions for garbage, refuse and rubbish disposal, as adopted by Cumru Township. 



(G) 	
The following requirements for outdoor storage shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
Outdoor storage of any type shall be prohibited, if such storage is considered and/or construed as malodorous, hazardous to the environment and potentially detrimental to the health and safety of the adjacent property owners. 

(2) 	
All storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a security fence and planting screen adequate to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent properties. 

(3) 	
No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such form or manner by which it can be transported off the site by natural causes or forces. 

(4) 	
No materials or substances, which have the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water shall be permitted to be stored outside unless the owner can provide safeguards, which are satisfactory to Cumru Township as well as all other state and federal agencies. 

(5) 	
Commercial outdoor sales shall comply with the provisions of Section 814 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(H) 	
The following utility and energy requirements shall apply to all existing and proposed non-residential uses: 

(1) 	
All non-residential uses requiring energy in the form of electric, diesel, gas, oil, or other common energy source shall comply with the most acceptable safety requirements recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and Industry and shall be so constructed and installed so as to be an integral part of the architectural features of the site. 

(2) 	
A buffer yard or coniferous planting arrangement shall properly conceal any utility or energy source. 

(3) 	
Electromagnetic radiation, which interferes with radio, telephone, satellite or television reception, or other communication equipment, shall be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the property lines. 

(4) 	
No injurious electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission shall be produced by any non-residential use.  All radioactive emissions shall meet federal and state standards. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utilities shall be installed underground. 



(I) 	
No building or structure may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may be used, for any activity which is continuously noxious, injurious or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, gas, effluent discharge, illumination or similar substances or conditions. 

(J) 	
Proprietors who have been cited for any violation(s) subject to this section of the Zoning Ordinance may be responsible for applicable costs incurred by Cumru Township through background investigations, legal proceedings, retributions and rectification measures in accordance with the Second Class Township Code or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Maximum Permissible Noise Levels (in decibels or dBA)  
Measurement taken along an adjoining property line within the following Zoning Districts  Time of Day (over a 10 minute time period)  Maximum Peak Limits Over any 8 hour period 
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.  7:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.  
AG, RC, LR, MR and HR  55 dBA  50 dBA  60 dBA less than 10 minutes  
70 dBA less than 1 minute  
LC, HC and OC  65 dBA  60 dBA  70 dBA less than 10 minutes  
75 dBA less than 1minute  
GI  70 dBA  65 dBA  75 dBA less than 10 minutes  
80 dBA less than 1 minute  

Section 803: Adult Business and Entertainment Uses 
(A) 	
Adult business and entertainment uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for adult businesses and entertainment uses are hereby incorporated within this Zoning Ordinance in order to accomplish the following objectives: 

(1) 	
Pursuant to the authority of the First Class Township Code, the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners has the power to prohibit nuisances and to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the citizens of Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
After the review of studies conducted by various cities and municipalities in the United States, as well as various court opinions where such studies are referenced and cited, including the United States Supreme Court decision, The City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), and the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit decision, Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment Establishments of the State of Delaware, 10 F.3d 123 (3rd Cir. 1993), the Board of Commissioners recognizes that adult entertainment uses have the tendency to cause adverse secondary effects that impact on the health, safety and general welfare of Cumru Township; 

(3) 	
The Board of Commissioners desires to restrict the location where adult entertainment uses can locate, to require a reasonable separation distance between such uses and other uses which are not compatible with adult-oriented businesses and to prevent an undue concentration and proliferation of such uses in a close proximity; and 

(4) 	
The Board of Commissioners is fully aware of and fully respects the fundamental constitutional guarantee of freedom of speech and realizes that restrictions on such freedom must be carefully drafted and enforced so that one’s right to speak is not curtailed beyond the point at which it is essential to further Cumru Township's interest in public health, safety and welfare. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to adult businesses and adult entertainment uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of net land area shall be required to accommodate an adult business and adult entertainment use.  In addition, the use shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements specified for an adult business and adult entertainment use under the GI District. 

(2) 	
Adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving adult businesses and adult entertainment uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zoning district, as measured from the property line to the residential zoning district line. 

(6) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any religious uses, educational uses, day care facilities and recreational uses, as measured from the property line. 

(7) 	
No adult business or entertainment use shall be located within three thousand (3,000) feet of an existing adult business or entertainment use, as measured from the property line. 

(8) 	
All storage and displays shall be located within the building occupying the adult business or entertainment use. 

(9) 	
All business transactions that are conducted on the premises shall be within an enclosed building. All adult business uses may operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 

(10) 	
All applications for adult business or entertainment uses shall be accompanied by a land development plan.  The minimum information required on the land development plan shall include: 

(a) 	
The proposed nature of the adult business or entertainment use. 

(b) 	
Architectural renderings of the proposed building elevations and plan views. 

(c) 	
The location and elevation of all buildings, structures, walls, fences and landscaping on the property. 

(d) 	
Off-street parking areas, loading areas and traffic circulation patterns. 

(e) 	
The location, dimensions and content of all signs, displays and advertising. 

(f) 	
A land use survey of all uses located within a one thousand (1,000) feet radius of the property. 



(11) 	
All applications for adult business and entertainment uses shall include a statement providing specific information on each individual, partner, store manager(s), corporate officer, corporate director or corporate stockholders owning more than three (3) percent of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate applicant.  At a minimum, the applicant shall identify the complete name, business address and telephone number. 

(12) 	
In the event of the proposed sale, resale or reassignment of interest of an adult business or entertainment use established under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, the Board of Commissioners and Zoning Officer shall be notified of such proposed change of ownership. Such notification shall include the documentation required by this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  Failure to notify the Board of Commissioners and Zoning Officer shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance, which could lead to the revocation of the use and certificate of occupancy. 

(13) 	
The following requirements pertaining to signs and other visual displays shall apply to each adult business or entertainment uses: 

(a) 	
The exterior of the building may include one (1) wall sign or parallel sign identifying the name of the adult business or entertainment use, which shall not exceed 20 square feet in size. 

(b) 	
Free standing signs, banners, directional signs, illuminated signs, portable signs, roof signs, seasonal signs and billboards shall be prohibited on the property. 

(c) 	
Window signs shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area and shall not include any graphic or pictorial depiction of material related to specific sexual activities or anatomical areas. 

(d) 	
Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials related to specific sexual activities or anatomical area shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building. 

(e) 	
All signs and visual displays shall be considered as part of the special exception application. 



(14) 	
The entrance of the adult business should include a sign warning all individuals that the premises are classified as an adult business use and/or adult entertainment use. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the adult business and/or adult entertainment use shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The subdivision and land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 804:  Agricultural Uses 
(A) 
The term “agricultural operation”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall include general agricultural uses, intensive agricultural uses, farm-related businesses, farm-support businesses, roadside stands, and all other principal or accessory agricultural uses. 

(B) 	
The provisions for general agricultural uses are further specified under Section 804.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for intensive agricultural uses are further specified under Section 804.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The provisions for farm-related business uses are further specified under Section 804.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The provisions for farm-support business uses are further specified under Section 804.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
The provisions for roadside stands are further specified under Section 804.5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 804.1: General Agricultural Uses 
(A) 	
General agricultural uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be a permitted use by right within the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
General agricultural uses may include the following uses: the cultivation of the soil for the raising and harvesting of the produce or crops; nurseries; greenhouses; horticulture operations; the raising of livestock and animal husbandry operations; silvicultural and aquacultural uses; and other general agricultural uses, as determined by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The raising and ownership of farm animals as a general agricultural use shall be limited based upon owned contiguous acres relating to animal units.  The number of animal units and weight classification shall be determined using the accepted methods of the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Law.  The following chart shall apply to general agricultural uses. 

(D) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to general agricultural uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for general agricultural uses shall be two hundred (200) feet. 

(3) 	
All principal buildings and structures that are utilized for general agricultural uses shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(5) 	
The total building coverage for general agricultural shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for general agricultural uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 



(E) 	
All general agricultural uses exceeding the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance shall be considered as intensive agricultural use, which are further regulated under Sections 804.2 and 811 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(F) 	
All general agricultural uses and activities shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning manure, management, nutrient management, fertilizer applications, biosolids, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and vehicular accessibility. 

(G) 	
Accessory uses may be permitted for the general agricultural uses, provided they are conducted on the same lot and are permitted by Cumru Township. 


General Agricultural Uses: Contiguous Acreage and Maximum Animal Unit Requirements  
Farm Animal  1.00 to 4.99 acres  5.00 to 9.99 acres  10.00 acres or more  
Poultry, fowl, rabbits and similar animals with weight that is less than 10 pounds per animal.  0.25 animal unit per acre  0.50 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Sheep, goats and similar animals with weight between 10 pounds and 200 pounds per animal  0.50 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Pigs, hogs, swine and similar animals with a weight between 200 pounds and 500 pounds per animal   0.25 animal unit per acre  0.50 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Horses, cattle and similar animals with a weight between 500 pounds and 2,000 pounds per animal  1.00 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
All other farm animals  0.50 animal unit per acre  1.00 animal unit per acre  2.00 animal unit per acre  
Note: The raising and ownership of farm animals as a general agricultural use shall be limited to the maximum permitted animal units per contiguous acre as well as the maximum permitted animals per acres as reference on this chart.  Where a discrepancy should exist concerning the weight of the farm animal, the more restrictive provision shall apply.   

Section 804.2: Intensive Agricultural Uses 
(A) 	
Intensive agricultural uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be a permitted use by special exception within the AG Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Intensive agricultural uses may include the following uses: specialized agricultural activities; mushroom production facilities; intensive livestock operations; intensive produce operations; poultry production facilities; intensive greenhouse operations; concentrated feed operations; concentrated animal operations; and other intensive agricultural uses, as determined by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The raising and ownership of farm animals as an intensive agricultural use shall be limited based upon owned contiguous acres relating to animal units.  The number of animal units and weight classification shall be determined using the accepted methods of the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Law.  The following chart shall apply to intensive agricultural uses containing farm animals. 

(D) 	
As pert of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit a twenty-five (25) percent increase to the maximum animal unit requirements specified under Section 804.2(C) of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that such increase does not impose any adverse effects to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 

(E) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to intensive agricultural uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate intensive agricultural uses and activities. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for intensive agricultural uses shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for intensive agricultural uses shall be located at least two hundred 

(200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
All intensive agricultural uses and facilities shall not be located within the floodplain and shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for intensive agricultural uses shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 

(6) 	
The total building coverage for general agricultural uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage for general agricultural uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 



(F) 	
The intensive agricultural use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage facilities or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities approved and permitted by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(G) 	
The intensive agricultural use shall be serviced by a private water supply system approved and permitted by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall demonstrate that the quantity of the water supply source will be sufficient to accommodate the intensive agricultural use. The methods utilized to verify if there is a safe and dependable supply of water shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(H) 	
All intensive agricultural uses relating to commercial composting and mushroom production uses shall be further regulated under the provisions of Sections 811 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  Areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(J) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, fly, rodent or pest problems.  All intensive animal operations shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 

(K) 	
All intensive agricultural uses and activities shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular accessibility.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the intensive agricultural use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(L) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the intensive agricultural use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 804.2.M) that should be completed as a prerequisite for the special exception application or completed as a condition of approval of the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the special exception application. 

(M) 	
If required by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application, the following assessment studies or plans shall be completed: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the intensive agricultural use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the intensive agricultural use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the intensive agricultural use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 

(3) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated. 

(4) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated. 

(5) 	
A Landscaping and Buffering Plan shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Landscaping and Buffering Plan should identify how potential visual, sound and odor impacts will be mitigated 



(N) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the intensive agricultural uses or activities shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(O) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan or building permit application. 

(P) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners may waive this requirement pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  


Intensive Agricultural Uses: Contiguous Acreage and Maximum Animal Unit Requirements  
Farm Animal  10.00 to 49.99 acres  50.00 to 99.99 acres  100.00 acres or more  
Poultry, fowl, rabbits and similar animals with weight that is less than 10 pounds per animal.  2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Sheep, goats and similar animals with weight between 10 pounds and 200 pounds per animal  3.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Pigs, hogs, swine and similar animals with a weight between 200 pounds and 500 pounds per animal   2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Horses, cattle and similar animals with a weight between 500 pounds and 2,000 pounds per animal  3.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
All other farm animals  2.00 animal unit per acre  4.00 animal unit per acre  6.00 animal unit per acre  
Note:  The raising and ownership of farm animals as an intensive agricultural use shall be limited to the maximum permitted animal units per contiguous acre as well as the maximum permitted animals per acres as reference on this chart. Where a discrepancy should exist concerning the weight of the farm animal, the more restrictive provision shall apply.   


Section 804.3: Farm-Related Business Uses 
(A) 	
Farm-related business uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the AG and RC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Farm-related business uses may include accessory uses and activities, as defined by this section of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the agricultural use is the primary use and the farm-related business use is a secondary or accessory use, which is compatible to the agricultural use.  The farm-related business use shall be conducted in a manner that the agricultural use retains the visual character of a farm. 

(C) 	
Uses that exceed the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance may be permitted by special exception under the provisions for farm-support business uses, which are further specified under Section 804.4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
All farm-related business uses should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged in an agricultural operation or use.  A farm-related business use may include the following subordinate uses: 

(1) 	
Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, repair and service of agricultural equipment, vehicles, or supplies; 

(2) 	
Blacksmith shops, farrier and harness making uses; 

(3) 	
Butcher shops and meat packaging uses; 

(4) 	
Processing and distribution of agricultural products; 

(5) 	
Feed supply and fertilizer distributors. 

(6) 	
Other uses of similar character as determined by the Zoning Officer. 



(E) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to an agricultural use with a permitted farm-related business use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the agricultural use and the farm-related business use. 

(2) 	
The maximum land area designated for the farm-related business shall be no more than three (3) acres. 

(3) 	
All building or structures utilized for the farm-related business use shall be located at least one hundred 

(100) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
Outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or other products utilized for the farm-related business shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
The maximum height for any building or structure utilized for the farm-related business use shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The total combined building coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-related uses shall be ten (10) percent.  The total combined lot coverage for the general agricultural uses and farm-related uses shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 

(7) 	
The total gross floor area of a building or structure utilized exclusively for a farm-related business use shall not exceed 4,000 square feet. 



(F) 	
Any building constructed for the use of a farm-related business shall be of a type or design that may be converted to an agricultural use in the event the farm-related business is discontinued. 

(G) 	
The farm-related business shall be owned and operated by the farmer in residence on the property.  No more than three (3) full time equivalent employees shall be employed at the farm for the farm-related business. 

(H) 	
No more than two (2) farm-support business uses shall be permitted on the farm.  A zoning or use permit must be acquired by the owner to operate each farm-related business. 

(I) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the principal agricultural use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing at the farm; and no more than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to eight (8) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(K) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the farm-related business is permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway.  All proposed signs shall comply with Article 11 if this Zoning Ordinance. 

(L) 	
The owner of the farm-related business shall conduct and manage all activities that will not create a nuisance in terms of excessive noise, light, dirt, and/or odor. Further, the farm-related business shall not result in the accumulation of trash or debris upon the property. 

(M) 	
Composting or other farm waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 

(N) 	
The land area of the accessory business operation shall not be subdivided from the farm property or principal agricultural use. 

(O) 
No construction or other improvements required to support a farm-related business use shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(P) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate. 



Section 804.4: Farm-Support Business Uses 
(A) 	
Farm-support business uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the AG and RC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Farm-support business uses may include accessory uses and activities, as defined by this section of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that the agricultural use is the primary use and the farm-support business use is a secondary or accessory use, which is not necessarily compatible to the agricultural use.  The farm-support business use shall be conducted in a manner that the agricultural use retains the visual character of a farm. 

(C) 	
All farm-support business uses should be directed at meeting the needs of those engaged in an agricultural operation or use.  A farm-support business use may include the following subordinate uses: 

(1) 	
Facilities for the manufacturing, warehousing, sales, repair and service of equipment, vehicles, or supplies; 

(2) 	
Processing and distribution of products; 

(3) 	
Veterinary offices subject to the provisions of Section 815 of this Zoning Ordinance; 

(4) 	
Uses that exceed the farm-related provisions contained under Section 804.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Uses that exceed the home occupation provisions contained under Section 715 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to an agricultural use with a permitted farm-support business use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the agricultural use and the farm-support business use. 

(2) 	
The maximum land area designated for the farm-support business shall be no more than three (3) acres. 

(3) 	
All building or structures utilized for the farm-support business use shall be located at least one hundred 

(100) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
Outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or other products utilized for the farm-support business shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any side or property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
The maximum height for any building or structure utilized for the farm-support business use shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum combined lot coverage for the agricultural uses and farm-support uses shall be 10 percent. 

(7) 	
The total gross floor area of a building or structure utilized exclusively for a farm-support business use shall not exceed 4,000 square feet. 



(E) 	
Any building constructed for the use of a farm-support business shall be of a type or design that may be converted to an agricultural use in the event the farm-support business is discontinued. 

(F) 	
Farm-support uses shall consider the character and appearance of other uses located within 1,000 feet of the property lines.  

(G) 	
The farm-support business shall be owned and operated by the farmer in residence on the property.  No more than three (3) full time equivalent employees shall be employed at the farm for the farm-support business. 

(H) 	
No more than one (1) farm-support business uses shall be permitted on the farm.  A zoning or use permit must be acquired by the owner to operate the farm-support business.  Further, a farm-support business shall not be operated in conjunction with a farm-related business. 

(I) 	
An off-street parking area shall be provided to meet the following requirements: two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the principal agricultural use; one (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee not residing at the farm; and no more than two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for guests or patrons.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be limited to eight (8) parking spaces, which shall not include any garage spaces and shall be designed to comply with the appropriate provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(K) 	
A sign displaying the name and address of the farm-support business may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 

(L) 	
The owner of the farm-support business shall conduct and manage all activities that will not create a nuisance in terms of excessive noise, light, dirt, and/or odor.  Further, the farm-support business shall not result in the accumulation of trash or debris upon the property. 

(M) 	
Composting or other farm waste storage facilities shall not be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 

(N) 	
The land area of the accessory business operation shall not be subdivided from the farm property or principal agricultural use. 

(O) 	
No construction or other improvements required to support a farm-support business use shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(P) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 804.5 Roadside Stands 
(A) 	Roadside stands, which are considered as an accessory use to a general agricultural use, shall be permitted by right in the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts. All such uses shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1) 	
At least fifty (50) percent of the agricultural products sold at the roadside stand shall be has been produced on farms within fifty (50) miles of the roadside stand. 

(2) 	
The total display area of the agricultural products sold at the roadside stand shall be limited to six hundred (600) square feet. 

(3) 	
The roadside stand shall be considered as a temporary and portable structure, which shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the cartway and two hundred (200) feet from any street intersection. In no case shall the roadside stand be placed within the street right-of-way. 

(4) 	
The portable roadside stand shall be removed during seasons when agricultural products are not sold or if the roadside stand becomes inactive for 180 consecutive days.    

(5) 	
Sufficient off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such off-street parking areas shall be maintained as mud-free conditions located outside of the street right-of-way and shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(6) 	
A total of two (2) off-street parking areas shall be provided for the initial one hundred (100) square feet of permitted display area plus one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each additional one hundred (100) square feet of display area.  The maximum number of off-street parking spaces shall be ten 

(10) off-street parking spaces. 

(7) 	
All proposed driveway openings shall be reviewed and permitted by Cumru Township (local roads) and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (state roads). 

(8) 	
A sign displaying the name or products for sale may be permitted, subject to the following requirements: no more than one (1) such sign shall be erected on the lot; the area of the sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in size; and the sign shall be either fixed flat on the main wall of the building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within ten (10) feet of the cartway. 


Section 805: Airports, Heliports and Helistops 
(A) 	
Airports, heliports and/or helistops, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the OC and GI Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to airports, heliports and/or helistops facilities: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) contiguous net acres of land shall be required to accommodate an airport, heliport or helistop facility. 

(2) 	
All proposed Airports, Heliports and/or Helistops shall comply with the Airport Overlay District and Cumru Township Ordinance 363, which may be amended from time in accordance with state and federal guidelines. 

(3) 	
All buildings, runways, landing strips, landing pads and/or other accessory structures related to the airport, heliport or helistops facility shall be located at least three (300) hundred feet from all property lines. 

(4) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(7) 	
All facility operations shall be reviewed and permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 



(C) 	
No construction or other improvements required to support an airport, heliport or helistop shall be permitted unless a land development plan has been submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 806: Automobile Sales and Automobile Service Stations 
(A)  The provisions for automobile sales are further specified under Section 806.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(B)  The provisions for automobile service stations are further specified under Section 806.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(C)  The provisions for car washing facilities, as a principal or subordinate use are further specified under Section 806.3  

of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 806.1 Automobile Sales 
(A) 	
Automobile sales establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the HC Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile sales establishments: 

(1) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the use. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the HC Zoning District shall apply to the automobile sales establishment. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
All sales shall be conducted within an enclosed building, which complies with the appropriate requirements for a commercial establishment within Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
General service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies the requirements for a commercial establishment and that they are considered as accessory uses to the automobile sales establishment. 

(7) 	
No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel or other materials used or discarded as part of the automobile sales establishment shall be permitted. 

(8) 	
All vehicles stored on the premises for sale shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and no closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line.  All such vehicles shall be in sound running condition meeting the general inspection and licensing requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(9) 	
All vehicles that have been brought in for service, maintenance or repair shall be in a state of active repair and shall not be permitted on the premises for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 

(10) 	
The demolishing of vehicles for salvage shall be prohibited. 

(11) 	
The sale of gasoline or fuel shall be prohibited. 

(12) 	
All vehicles sold on the premises shall be arranged in an orderly manner on an approved off-street parking facility that complies with the design requirements of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 806.2 Automobile Service Stations 
(A) 	
Automobile service stations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LC Zoning District and by right within the HC District. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile service station: 

(1) 	
A minimum of 20,000 square feet shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the LC or HC Zoning District shall apply. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
All general service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies the appropriate building code requirements for a commercial establishment within Cumru Township and that they are considered as accessory uses to the automobile sales establishment. 

(6) 	
The sale of gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene or other petroleum products shall be permitted, subject to the following criteria. 

(a) 	
The maximum number of fueling pumps shall be limited to twelve (12) fuel pumps or twenty four (24) fueling positions. 

(b) 	
The canopy covering the fuel pumps shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from ground level at its highest point and shall be of a peak-roof design.  As part of the special exception hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit a greater canopy height up to thirty (30) feet, if the design of the canopy considered as architectural enhancement. 

(c) 	
All proposed fueling positions shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line including the legal and ultimate right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
The total area of the canopy not exceed in area shall not exceed in total area of 10,000 square feet. In addition, the canopy shall be considered as part of the building coverage calculations. 

(e) 	
During non-daylight hours of operation, overhead lighting under the canopy shall illuminate all fueling positions. The canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface (ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush lens fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling.  Drop lens fixtures shall be prohibited.  Up-lens lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy structure above the level of gas pumps are permitted if they have the effect of reducing glare from the lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. All such canopy lighting over fuel dispensing positions shall not exceed an average of 20.0 maintained footcandles, unless a more stringent standard is specified by building code requirements. 

(f) 	
In no case shall illumination exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is specified by building code requirements. 

(g) 	
All gasoline and fuel sales associated with a convenience store or mini-market shall comply with the appropriate provisions of Section 818 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(7) 	
Automobile sales may be permitted as a subordinate use within the HC District, provided that it is deigned and approved in accordance with the requirements specified under Section 806.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Car washing facilities and services may be permitted by special exception as either a principal use or subordinate use in the LC and HC Districts, provided that it is deigned and approved in accordance with the requirements specified under Section 806.3 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
No outdoor storage of parts, equipment, lubricants, fuel or other materials used or discarded as part of the automobile service establishment shall be permitted.  All permitted material that are stored outdoors shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. 

(11) 	
All vehicles that have been brought in for service, maintenance or repair shall in a state of active repair and shall not be permitted on the premises for a period of more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. 

(12) 	
The demolishing of vehicles for salvage shall be prohibited. 



(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report. Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 806.3: Car Washing Facilities 
(A) 	
Car washing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LC and HC Districts. 

(B) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for automobile service stations with car washing facilities and services automobile service station: 

(1) 	
Car washing facilities may be permitted as a principal use or as a subordinate use to an automobile service station. 

(2) 	
A minimum of 30,000 square feet shall be required to accommodate the use.  In addition the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the LC or HC Zoning District shall apply. 

(3) 	
All structures housing washing apparatuses shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any property line including the legal and ultimate right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
The car washing facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from an existing residential use or residential zoning district, as measured from the property line. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(7) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(8) 	
Gray water recycling and treatment equipment is incorporated as part of the facility operations.  All such equipment shall include provisions for the collection of waste, grease, oil, soap, wax, and other materials that can’t be recycled or utilized as part of the operations. 

(9) 	
A post-washing drying area is provided for two (2) vehicles per car washing bay or unit. 

(10) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the commercial drive through establishment shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(11) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(13) 	
A stacking or pre-service lane, measuring at least ten (10) feet in width and eighty (80) feet in length shall be provided for each service lane or bay for the car washing facility.  Alternative designs may be accepted by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application, provided that the design does not interfere with internal or external traffic patterns. 

(14) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(15) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages, music or other audible sounds are reduced by eight (80) percent from the source to any property line. 

(16) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(18) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(19) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report. Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the special exception application or land development plan application. 

(D) 	
As part of the special exception or land development plan application, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 807: Banks and Financial Institutions  
(A) 	
Banks and financial institutions, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All banks and financial institutions shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the bank and financial institution is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for banks and financial institutions: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Banks and financial institutions with drive-through facilities shall be permitted by special exception under the provisions of Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the prevailing standards of Cumru Township. 



Section 808: Business and Professional Offices 
(A) 	
Business and professional offices, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Business and professional offices shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the principal use business and professional office is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for business and professional offices: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the prevailing standards of Cumru Township. 



Section 809: Business and Professional Office Parks 
(A) 	
Business and professional office parks, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the OC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses within a business and professional office park 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within business and professional office parks: 

(1) 	
Each use within the business and/or professional office park shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Each use within the business and/or professional office park shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the business and/or professional office park shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all uses within the office and business park shall have individual utility connections and services that shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses within a business and/or professional office park shall be limited to: professional offices; banks or financial institutions; governmental offices; municipal uses; medical, dental, vision, counseling and health care service providers; and/or other similar office uses, as determined appropriate by Cumru Township as part of the subdivision and land development plan. 

(5) 	
Subordinate uses within the business and/or professional office park office shall be limited to: restaurants or cafeterias; retail sales establishments; personal care or service establishments; meeting rooms; day care facilities; recreational uses; educational uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by Cumru Township as part of the subdivision and land development plan.  The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the business or professional office park.  The accessory uses shall be considered subordinate uses that directly benefit the principal uses within the business or professional office park. 

(6) 	
Drive-through establishments shall be a prohibited use within the business and/or professional office park. 

(7) 	
All principal uses shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line and fifty (50) feet from all other external property lines, which are not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(8) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each principal use within the business and/or professional office park: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area shall be 20,000 square feet per lot, whether it is for one individual use on a lot or for multiple permitted uses within a building on a lot. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet per lot. 

(c) 	
The front yard setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet, as measured from the right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
The side yard setback shall be at least forty (40) feet for each side. 

(e) 	
The rear yard setback shall be at least forty (40) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of the buildings shall be no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be no more than fifty (50) percent of the approved lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be no more than seventy (70) percent of the approved lot. 



(9) 	
Office or non-residential condominiums may be permitted on an individual lot within the office and business park, provided that each use is a permitted use as described in this Zoning Ordinance.  The permitted uses shall be designed as self-contained structures without common facilities, which comply with all pertinent requirements of Cumru Township.  In addition to these requirements, the following provisions shall apply to office or non-residential condominiums: 

(a) 	
The ownership of office condominiums shall be under single ownership, partnership, corporation, or under a guaranteed unified management control.  The office condominiums must have at least one (1) on-site manager or a designated individual whose office is located within one hundred (100) miles of Cumru Township.  The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of on-site managers or designated individuals on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name, mailing address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each designated individual responsible for the daily operation of all uses within the office or non­residential condominiums. 

(b) 	
The owner or manager shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of tenants located within office or non-residential condominium on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name of the tenant, business name, mailing address, telephone number, land use activity and scheduled hours of operation. 



(10) 	
The architectural features or building facade for the uses within the business or office park shall be harmoniously planned as a non-residential community.  As part of the subdivision or land development application, the applicant or developer shall identify the non-residential uses and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned considering their architectural appearance. 

(11) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the office and business park shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to these signs, no more than one (1) common on-premises free standing or ground sign shall be permitted along each street in which the office and business park has frontage and shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet per side. No portion of the common on-premises free standing sign shall be less than seven (7) feet or greater than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the mean ground elevation. 

(13) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(14) 	
The primary points of ingress and egress to the business or office park shall be along a collector or arterial street. The applicant shall mitigate all potential traffic impacts. 

(15) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(16) 	
Where permitted or required, security gates or security check points shall be located along an internal road within the development at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the right-of-way of an external public road. 

(17) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(18) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan. 



Section 810: Club, Lodge or Social Quarters 
(A) 	
Clubs, lodges and social quarters, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception in the AG, RC, LR, LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All clubs, lodges and social quarters shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the club, lodge or social quarters is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for clubs, lodges and social quarters: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Provisions for recreation facilities and uses shall comply with provisions specified under Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the prevailing standards of Cumru Township. 



Section 811: Commercial Composting and Mushroom Production Uses 
(A) 	
The provisions for commercial composting uses are further specified under Section 811.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for mushroom production uses are further specified under Section 811.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 811.1: Commercial Composting Uses 
(A) 	
Commercial composting uses and mushroom production uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Commercial composting uses may include the accumulation of biodegradable and organic materials from approved uses including landscaping uses, nursery uses, forestry uses, and other similar uses, as determined appropriate by Cumru Township, whereas, the composted materials and residual waste are packaged, processed and/or transported from the commercial composting facility and utilized for other applications. 

(C) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to commercial composting uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the commercial composting use. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for commercial composting use shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for commercial composting use shall be located at least two hundred 

(200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(4) 	
All commercial composting facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for commercial composting use shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6) 	
The total building coverage for commercial composting use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for commercial composting use shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 



(D) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for commercial composting uses: 

(1) 	
The commercial composting use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The commercial composting use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and on-lot water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish will be permitted within two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, rodent or pest problems.  All commercial composting uses shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 

(7) 	
Commercial composting shall not be permitted as a temporary operation in order to reduce, process and manufacture biodegradable and organic materials into composted materials for use at other locations. Biodegradable and organic material may be reduced in order to transfer the materials to the permitted location for the commercial composting use. 



(E) 	
All commercial composting uses shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular accessibility.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the intensive agricultural use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the commercial composting use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 811.G) that should be completed as a prerequisite for the special exception application or completed as a condition of approval of the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the special exception application. 

(G) 	
The following assessment studies or plans should be considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the commercial composting use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the commercial composting use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the commercial composting use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 

(3) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated. 

(4) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated. 

(5) 	
A Landscaping and Buffering Plan shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Landscaping and Buffering Plan should identify how potential visual, sound and odor impacts will be mitigated. 



(H) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the commercial composting use shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan or building permit application. 

(J) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners may waive this requirement pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 811.2: Mushroom Production Uses 
(A) 	
Commercial mushroom production uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the AG Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Mushroom production uses may include the accumulation of biodegradable and organic materials from permitted mushroom production uses, as determined appropriate by state and federal guidelines, whereas, the products and residual waste are packaged, produced, processed and/or transported from the facility and utilized for other applications. 

(C) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to mushroom production uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the mushroom production use. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for mushroom production uses shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All mushroom production and facilities shall be located within enclosed buildings and structures, which shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line and one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for mushroom production uses shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 

(5) 	
The total building coverage for the mushroom production use shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the lot area. The total lot coverage for the mushroom production use shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot area. 



(D) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for mushroom production uses: 

(1) 	
The mushroom production use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient 

capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The mushroom production use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and on-lot water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish will be permitted within two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
Solid and liquid waste shall be disposed of in a manner to avoid insect, rodent or pest problems.  All commercial composting uses shall develop an abatement plan to mitigate potential nuisances. 



(E) 	
All mushroom production uses shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, biosolids, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular accessibility.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate that the intensive agricultural use shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall consult with qualified professionals to assess potential adverse impacts associated with the mushroom production use and to provide assistance in the preparation of any assessment studies or plans (refer to Section 811.2.G that should be completed as a prerequisite for the special exception application or completed as a condition of approval of the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the recommendations of these qualified professionals as part of the special exception application. 

(G) 	
The following assessment studies or plans should be considered as part of the special exception application: 

(1) 	
A Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) shall be completed for the mushroom production use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The NMP should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with the mushroom production use will be mitigated. 

(2) 	
A Conservation Plan shall be completed for the mushroom production use in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.  The Conservation Plan should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with soil erosion and sedimentation control will be mitigated. 

(3) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated. 

(4) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated. 

(5) 	
A Landscaping and Buffering Plan shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Landscaping and Buffering Plan should identify how potential visual, sound and odor impacts will be mitigated. 



(H) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the mushroom production use shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan or building permit application. 

(J) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners may waive this requirement pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 



Section 812: Commercial Drive-Through Establishments 
(A) 
Commercial drive-through establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LC and HC Zoning Districts subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Commercial-drive through establishments shall be located on approved lots, which comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the commercial drive-through establishment or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within commercial-drive through establishments: 

(1) 	
Commercial drive-through establishments shall be limited to: restaurants; banks or financial institutions; car washes; retail uses; and other uses that are typically associated as having drive-through facilities, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The commercial drive-through facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from an existing residential use or residential zoning district, as measured from the property line. 

(6) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the commercial drive-through establishment shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(9) 	
A stacking or pre-service lane, measuring at least ten (10) feet in width and eighty (80) feet in length shall be provided for each service lane or bay for the drive-through establishment.  Alternative designs may be accepted by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application, provided that the design does not interfere with internal or external traffic patterns. 

(10) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(11) 	
All exterior speaker, microphone or intercom systems shall be designed in a manner so the messages or other audible sounds are reduced by eighty (80) percent from the source to any street line or property line. Non-essential communications or music shall be prohibited. 

(12) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 

(13) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(14) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 813: Commercial Greenhouses 
(A) 	
Commercial greenhouses that are intended to raise, grow or produce products for on-site commercial or retail sales as a principal use shall be permitted by special exception in the AG Zoning District.  Commercial greenhouses shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) contiguous acres of land area shall be required to accommodate any commercial greenhouse.  All such uses shall be located on approved lots, which shall comply with the following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements: 

(a) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the commercial greenhouse use shall be three hundred 

(300) feet. 

(b) 	
All buildings and structures utilized for commercial greenhouse use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(c) 	
All commercial greenhouse use shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all perennial streams or surface water. 

(d) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures utilized for the commercial greenhouse uses shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 

(e) 	
Greenhouses shall be considered as a structure, which should be accounted for as part of the building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the lot.  The total building coverage for commercial greenhouse use shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot area.  The total lot coverage for commercial greenhouse use shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot area. 



(2) 	
Commercial greenhouses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Commercial greenhouses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving commercial greenhouses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The storage of merchandise that is available for retail sales may be permitted outside of the principal building or structure provided that such storage is located at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(6) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
An off-street parking area consisting of at least one (1) parking space per five (500) square feet of gross floor and surface area of merchandise sale for guests or patrons plus one (1) parking space for each full time equivalent employee.  This provision may be reduced as part of the special exception application if the applicant provides documentation to support the reduction. 

(8) 	
At lease one (1) off-street loading space shall be provided for the commercial greenhouse.  The off-street loading space shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard.  

(10) 	
No more than one (1) common on-premises free standing or ground sign shall be permitted for the commercial greenhouse, which shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(B) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 814: Commercial Outdoor Sales 
(A) 	
Commercial outdoor sales, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance may be permitted by right within the LC and HC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Commercial outdoor sales may be permitted as either a principal use or a subordinate use. 

(2) 	
Commercial outdoor sales shall be conducted on an improved commercial lot exceeding 30,000 square feet of net area. 

(3) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales or visual display areas shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district to which the commercial use is located. 

(4) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales or visual display areas shall comply with the provisions for visibility at street intersections, as specified by Section 908 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All permitted commercial outdoor sales shall not compromise the safety of pedestrians or vehicular traffic by altering or obstructing their respective travel patterns.  

(6) 	
Provisions for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply and other utilities shall be considered as part of the principal use. 

(7) 	
Commercial outdoor sales may be permitted for those non-residential uses whose merchandise are customarily displayed outdoors, provided the use has been designated, approved and permitted as a temporary use and activity on the site. 

(8) 	
Seasonal or sidewalk sales may be permitted on the sidewalk or outside of the front or side of the principal building of a retail establishment, whereas, goods are offered for retail sale to the public, typically at discounted price, provided that all such sales shall not exceed 180 cumulative days during the course of a calendar year. 

(9) 	
Yard sales or garage sales conducted on a residential lot or within a residential unit may be permitted up to a maximum of thirty (30) days in any give calendar year. 



(B) 	
The landowner or authorized proprietor of the commercial outdoor sales operation shall apply and obtain all necessary permits prior to the commencement of any sales. 


Section 815: Commercial Water Resource Use 
(A) 	
Commercial water resource uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be limited to: groundwater extraction and exportation operations; surface water extraction and exportation operations; bottling and distribution facilities; and other similar uses, as determined by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within commercial water resource uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the operational facilities within a commercial water resource use. 

(2) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Commercial water resource uses shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving commercial water resource use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
The commercial water resource use shall be approved and permitted by the appropriate local, state and federal regulatory agencies. 

(6) 	
The principal and accessory building located on the site of the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  

(7) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, all facility operations, uses, intake devices, wells, pumps, storage tanks and principal buildings associated with the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two Hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 

(8) 	
All facility operations, uses, intake devices, wells, pumps, storage tanks and principal buildings associated with the commercial water resource use shall be located at least two thousand (2,000) feet from all existing production wells or intake devices utilized for public water supply. 

(9) 	
The perimeter of the property shall be completely enclosed by a security fence, which shall be eight (8) feet in height. 

(10) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(11) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for truck traffic shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets, limitations associated with turning movements and adjacent residential uses. 

(12) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
All proposed signs for the commercial water resource use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A complete hydrological report, analysis and impact plan of the surface water and groundwater conditions shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, which meets the following objectives and requirements: 

(a) 	
The professional hydrogeologist preparing the report shall certify that the commercial water resource use shall be supplied by a continuous safe daily yield, which will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater table within two thousand (2,000) feet of the source of extraction. 

(b) 	
If appropriate, a dynamic recovery rate and draw-down tests shall be conducted by the professional hydrogeologist preparing the report to determine the maximum safe daily yield of the commercial water resource operations. 

(c) 	
All such applications for the commercial water resource use shall demonstrate that the adjacent public and private water supply sources will not adversely be affected by discontinued use, contamination, loss of supply, or the ability to properly recharge over time. 

(d) 	
The professional hydrogeologist preparing the report shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer prior to commencement of the background studies to determine if other conditions should be analyzed as part of the report. 

(e) 	
The hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be subject to the review of the Cumru Township Engineer, Zoning Officer, or other professional consultant(s) qualified to render an opinion of the information submitted on behalf of the applicant. 



(2) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site. 

(3) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(4) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(5) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(6) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the special exception application. 



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 816: Conference Center or Convention Center 
(A) 	
Conference centers or convention centers, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the HC and OC Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within conference centers or convention centers: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a conference or convention center. 

(2) 	
All uses associated with conference or convention centers shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the conference or convention center is located. 

(3) 	
Conference or convention centers shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Conference or convention centers shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving conference or convention centers shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, the utility services and connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
The permitted uses within conference or convention centers shall be limited to: hotels; meeting rooms; professional offices; restaurants, cafeterias and banquet facilities; bars, taprooms and social halls; entertainment facilities; banks or financial institutions; governmental offices; municipal uses; and/or other similar uses, as determined appropriate by Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. 

(7) 	
Subordinate uses within conference or convention centers shall be limited to: retail sales establishments; personal care or service establishments; day care facilities; recreational uses; educational uses; medical, dental, vision, counseling and health care service providers; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by Cumru Township.  The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the convention or conference center.  The accessory uses shall be considered subordinate uses that directly benefit the principal uses within the convention or conference center. 

(8) 	
Office or non-residential condominiums may be permitted as part of a conference or convention center, provided that each use is a permitted use as described in this Zoning Ordinance.  The following provisions shall apply to office or non-residential condominiums: 

(a) 	
The ownership of office condominiums shall be under single ownership, partnership, corporation, or under a guaranteed unified management control.  The office condominiums must have at least one (1) on-site manager or a designated individual whose office is located within one hundred (100) miles of Cumru Township.  The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of on-site managers or designated individuals on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name, mailing address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each designated individual responsible for the daily operation of all uses within the office or non­residential condominiums. 

(b) 	
The owner or manager shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of tenants located within office or non-residential condominium on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name of the tenant, business name, mailing address, telephone number, land use activity and scheduled hours of operation. 



(9) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.. 

(10) 
All proposed signs for the conference or convention center shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to these signs, no more than one (1) common on-

premises free standing sign shall be permitted along each street in which the office and business park has frontage and shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet per side.  No portion of the common on-premises free standing sign shall be less than seven (7) feet or greater than twenty-five (25) feet, as measured from the mean ground elevation. 

(11) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
The primary points of ingress and egress to the conference or convention center shall be along a collector or arterial street.  The applicant shall mitigate all potential traffic impacts. 

(13) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(14) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(C) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, the applicant shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site. 

(2) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(4) 	
Architectural renderings of the proposed building elevations and plan views. 

(5) 	
A preliminary lighting plan showing the location and intensity of the proposed lighting within the property to a point fifty (50) feet beyond the perimeter of the property line.  The proposed lighting for buildings, signs, accessways and parking areas shall be arranged so they do not reflect towards any public street or residential zoning districts. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the special exception application. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 817: Construction Services 
(A) 	
Construction services, as define under Article 2  may be permitted by right within the HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Construction services shall be conducted on an improved industrial lot exceeding 2 acres of net area, which shall comply with the minimum setback requirements specified by the GI Zoning District. 

(2) 	
Construction services shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Construction services shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the construction services use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for construction materials and equipment shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such areas shall be permanently secured by a fence, which shall be properly buffered or screened by landscaping materials.  

(7) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. All such areas shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 



(B) 	
Where required to comply with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the prevailing standards of Cumru Township. 



Section 818: Convenience Stores and Mini-Markets 
(A) 	
Convenience stores or mini-markets, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, are a permitted by right in the LC and HC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All convenience stores or mini-markets shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements established for the zoning district to which it is located. 

(C) 	
All convenience stores or mini-markets shall be designed in accordance with the following design requirements: 

(1) 	
The gross floor area of the convenience store or mini-market shall not exceed 10,000 square feet, exclusive of any area of such lot being used for gasoline pump dispensers and the canopy over such dispensers. 

(2) 	
The convenience store or mini-market shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The convenience store or mini-market shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the convenience store or mini-market shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service 

(5) 	
The maximum number of fueling pumps (one pump shall serve a maximum of two fueling positions only) shall be permitted based upon the size of the building housing the convenience store, which shall be specified as follows: 

(6) 	
As part of the land development plan application, Cumru Township may require a reduction of the total number of fuel pumps if, in its evaluation of the applicant's traffic study, it determines that safe and convenient vehicular circulation cannot be accommodated on the site. 

(7) 	
The canopy covering the fuel pumps shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from ground level at its highest point and shall be of a peak-roof design.  Cumru Township may permit a greater canopy height up to thirty (30) feet if the design of the canopy is considered as architectural enhancement. 

(8) 	
The canopy shall not exceed in area (as measured in square feet) the gross floor area of the convenience store or mini-market building.  However, the canopy shall not exceed in total area of 7,000 square feet. 

(9) 	
The convenience store or mini-market shall be constructed with brick, stone and stucco, or such combination thereof as is approved by Cumru Township, facing on all four sides of the building from the ground level to the roof. 

(10) 	
The following provisions for exterior lighting shall apply to all proposed convenience stores or mini-markets: 

(a) 	
All gasoline pump dispensers shall be covered by a canopy and shall be illuminated by overhead lighting during non-daylight hours.  Canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface (ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush lens fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Drop lens fixtures are prohibited.  Up-lens lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy structure 

above the level of gas pumps are permitted if they have the effect of reducing glare from the lighting fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Outdoor canopies include, but are not limited to, fuel island canopies associated with service stations and convenience stores and exterior canopies above storefronts.  In no event shall any other lighting fixtures be located on or otherwise attached to or used to light a canopy or any area of the property adjacent to the canopy. Canopy lighting over fuel dispensing positions shall not exceed an average of 20.0 maintained footcandles. 

(b) 	
Lighting for parking areas shall provide an illumination level utilizing currently recommended standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, unless a more stringent standard is imposed as a condition of approval granted by the Board of Commissioners under the circumstances of each application.  Exterior lighting of the building is precluded, except as determined necessary for security or for code compliance. 

(c) 	
In no case shall illumination exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is ordered by the Board under the circumstances of each application.  



(11) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress to and from the lot shall be designed to promote safe and convenient access, as finally approved by the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer. 

(12) 	
The internal vehicular circulation pattern of any lot upon which a convenience store with gasoline sales is proposed shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles waiting for such gasoline service from stacking onto public streets. In addition to the required minimum parking spaces, there shall be a minimum of one (1) vehicular stacking space for each fueling position. 

(13) 	
Hand equipment intended to be utilized for the washing of windows of motor vehicles, as well as places for the storage of such equipment, may be permitted as an accessory feature. 

(14) 	
The applicant shall submit a traffic study with the land development plan application demonstrating the adequacy of existing or proposed streets to accommodate any increase in traffic from the proposed use and the adequacy of the proposed vehicular interior circulation on the lot. 




Convenience Store/Mini-Market Gross Floor Area  Maximum Number of Fuel Pumps  Maximum Number of Fueling Positions  
Less than 4,000 square feet  4  8  
4,000 square feet to 5,000 square feet  5  10  
5,000 square feet to 6,000 square feet  6  12  
6,000 square feet to 8,000 square feet  7  14  
8,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet  8  16  

(D) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented.  The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted to Cumru Township as part of the land development plan application. 

(E) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township as part of the land development plan application. 

(F) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(G) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(H) 	
As part of the land development plan application, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 


Section 819: Day Care Facilities and Uses 
(A)  The term “day care facilities” shall include “home day care” and “commercial day care centers” are further defined  
under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(B)  The provisions for home day care uses are further specified under Section 819.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(C)  The provisions for commercial day care centers are further specified under Section 819.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Section 819.1: Home Day Care 


(A) 	
Home day care facilities conducted as a home use or occupation are a permitted use by special exception within the AG, RC, LR and MR Zoning Districts.  For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “home day care” shall be synonymous with “family day care”. 

(B) 	
Home day care services shall be permitted within a single family dwelling unit meeting the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements established for the zoning district to which it is located. 

(C) 	
The maximum number of children to be cared for within a home day care shall be limited to six (6) children, who are unrelated to the resident caregiver. 

(D) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within the single family dwelling, except for a designated outdoor play area meeting the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public sanitary sewage facilities or with an on-lot sewage disposal system with sufficient capacities. 

(2) 	
The single family dwelling shall be either serviced by public water supply facilities or with an on-lot well with sufficient capacities. 

(3) 	
The internal facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the children receiving care plus the occupants of the single family dwelling. 

(4) 	
Common areas and facilities should be designated within the single family dwelling. 

(5) 	
The outdoor recreation area shall be located within the rear yard of the property and have sufficient size to accommodate six (6) children at once.  The designated outdoor play area shall be planted and maintained in grass, lawn or other pervious material, which shall be enclosed with a continuous fence with a height four (4) feet and self-latching gate. 

(6) 	
All designated internal and external areas for the home day care shall be physically separated by a distance of fifty (50) feet from any natural or man-made hazard, including swimming pools, stormwater detention facilities, surface waters, machinery, electric generating and transmitting equipment, streets, and other areas that may be considered hazardous to children.  



(E) 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be designated for the single-family detached residential use.  In addition to these spaces, an off-street pick-up and drop-off area shall be designated and maintained for the discharge and collection of children. 

(F) 	
The home day care and use shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by Cumru Township, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or other agencies having jurisdiction. 

(G) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide the necessary credentials that are required to conduct the home day care use in accordance with local state and federal laws. 

(H) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 


Section 819.2: Commercial Day Care Centers 
(A) 	
Commercial day care centers are a permitted use by right within the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, “commercial day care” shall be synonymous with “day care center”. 

(B) 	
Commercial day care centers shall be permitted as an independent use on an approved commercial lot or within an approved commercial facility, educational facility, church or religious facility, hospital or medical facility, municipal facility, health care facility, or other institutional use, which shall meet the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements established for the zoning district to which it is located. 

(C) 	
Commercial day care centers shall be capable of providing supplemental parental care and supervision and/or instruction to seven (7) or more children or adults simultaneously, who are not related to the caregiver or operator on a daily basis. 

(D) 	
All facilities shall be licensed and approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(E) 	
The use shall be located and conducted within approved facility, except for a designated outdoor play area meeting the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facility and use shall be shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the construction services use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(4) 	
The internal facilities should be of adequate size to accommodate all of the children and adults receiving day care services plus the occupants of the principal or secondary use.  Common areas and facilities should be designated within the approved facility. 

(5) 	
The outdoor recreation area shall be located within the rear yard of the property and have sufficient size to accommodate all of the children or adults receiving care.  The designated outdoor play area shall be planted and maintained in grass, lawn or other pervious materials, which shall be enclosed with a continuous fence with a height four (4) feet and self-latching gate. 

(6) 	
All designated internal and external areas for the facility shall be physically separated by a distance of fifty (50) feet from any natural or man-made hazard, including swimming pools, stormwater detention facilities, surface waters, machinery, electric generating and transmitting equipment, streets, and other areas that may be considered hazardous to children.  



(F) 	
In addition to the number of off-street parking spaces required for the principal and secondary use of the facility, an off-street pick-up and drop-off area measuring ten (10) feet in width and sixty (60) feet in length shall be designated and maintained for the discharge and collection of children or adults.  The designated pick-up and drop-off area shall be marked by signs and physically removed from any required parking area, loading area, fire lane, and all points for vehicular access providing ingress and egress to the facility.  The off-street parking area shall comply with the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(G) 
The commercial day care facility shall comply with all specifications, standards and licenses, which are required by Cumru Township, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or other agencies having jurisdiction. 

(H) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide the necessary credentials that are required to conduct the commercial day care use in accordance with local state and federal laws. 

(I) 	
The principal care givers at the commercial day care facility shall be identified and their credentials shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(J) 	
As part of the land development plan, the Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions. 



Section 820 Educational Uses 
(A) 	
Educational uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the educational use. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the educational use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for educational uses: 

(1) 	
The educational facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.. 

(2) 	
The educational facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the educational use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(5) 	
Subordinate uses within the educational use shall be limited to: cafeterias; administrative and professional offices; recreational uses; day care facilities; religious uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the educational facility.  The accessory uses shall be considered subordinate uses that directly benefit the educational use.  All designated subordinate uses and buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(6) 	
All property lines adjacent to existing residential land uses shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the residential neighborhood from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress.   All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of school buses, emergency response vehicles and/or other commercial vehicles shall be arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities.  

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the educational use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
Educational uses and facilities may lease or purchase space within a shopping center or mini-mall by right, provided that the educational use is considered a secondary or subordinate use to the shopping center or mini-mall. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the educational use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(F) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(G) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 821: Emergency Services Operation 
(A) 	
Emergency services operations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of 30,000 square feet of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the emergency service operations.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the emergency services operations use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for emergency services operations: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the emergency services operation shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(5) 	
Clubs, lodges or social quarters shall only be permitted by special exception. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 822: Fabrication and Finishing Uses 
(A) 	
Fabrication and finishing uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District and by special exception within the HC Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following lot area and dimensional requirements shall apply to a fabrication and finishing use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required within the GI Zoning District. 

(2) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous net land area shall be required within the HC Zoning District. 

(3) 	
The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the fabrication and finishing use is located shall apply. 



(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for fabrication and finishing uses: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, 

which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the fabrication and finishing use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 823: Food Processing Facility 
(A) 	
Food processing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the food processing facility. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the food processing facility is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for food processing facilities: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the food processing facility shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
The transporting, holding and/or slaughtering of live animals at the food processing facility shall be prohibited. All meats that are transported to and from the food processing facility shall be packaged and contained in a manner that complies with local, state and federal requirements. 

(7) 	
The processing, rendering and packaging of all food products shall be conducted within an enclosed building that complies with local, state and federal requirements. 

(8) 	
All unused or discarded food products and/or animal products shall be stored within leak-proof and vermin-proof containers within an enclosed building that complies with local, state and federal requirements.  All such waste shall be transported from the facility by a licensed hauler under contract with the owner of the food processing facility. 

(9) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(10) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior 

to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 824: Funeral Home 
(A) 	
Funeral homes, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LC Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of 30,000 square feet of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the funeral home. In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the funeral home is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for funeral homes: 

(1) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facility and use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the funeral home shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 
On-site cremation facilities may be permitted as a subordinate activity to the principal use provided that such facilities comply with state and federal laws. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application and/or land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(F) 	
As part of the special exception application and/or land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 825: Game Preserve and Regulated Hunting Grounds 
(A) 	
Game preserve and regulated hunting grounds, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance may be permitted by special exception in the AG and RC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
A game preserve or regulated hunting grounds may be permitted as either a principal use or a subordinate use. A minimum of fifty (50) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to exclusively support the game preserve or regulated hinting grounds. 

(2) 	
Provisions for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply and other utilities shall be considered as part of the special exception application. 

(3) 	
No activities associated with the game preserve or hunting grounds shall be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(4) 	
Shooting ranges and target practice areas shall be prohibited. 

(5) 	
Provisions for off-street parking and access drives shall be considered based upon the use, activities and events that may occur at the site.  All proposed off-street parking areas and access drives shall be maintained as mud-free conditions. 

(6) 	
Signs identifying the use and activities shall be posted around the perimeter of the property.  All such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet and shall be posted at intervals one hundred (100) feet apart. 



(B) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners may waive this requirement pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 826: Golf Courses 
(A) 	
Golf courses, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the AG and RC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of one hundred (100) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the golf course and accessory facilities. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for golf courses: 

(1) 	
The golf course shall be serviced by on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The golf course shall be serviced by on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the golf course shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(4) 	
All principal and accessory buildings associated with the golf course shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(5) 	
A club house may be permitted as a principal building, which may include the following related or subordinate uses:  professional offices; retail sales; restaurants and banquet facilities; bars and taprooms; entertainment facilities; locker rooms; health care services; educational or instructional facilities; and/or other similar uses, as determined appropriate by Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. 

(6) 	
A practice range or driving range may be permitted as an accessory use provided that the area is clearly defined and located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(7) 	
Paths designed and developed to accommodate motorized golf carts and maintenance vehicles shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(8) 	
Commercial recreation uses including miniature golf courses, executive golf courses, chip and put golf courses, or other commercial recreation uses shall be prohibited in the AG and RC Zoning Districts.  All such commercial recreation uses are permitted by right within the LC and HC Zoning Districts. 

(9) 	
Clubs, lodges or social quarters that are unrelated to the golf course shall only be permitted by special exception. 

(10) 	
Protective measures including security netting and fencing should be considered in areas to be potentially hazardous as a result of arrant golf shots. 

(11) 	
Exterior lighting shall only be designed and utilized to illuminate the principal buildings, off-street parking areas and access drive.  No exterior lighting facilities shall be permitted to illuminate any portions of the golf course, practice range or driving range. 

(12) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(13) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(14) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application and/or land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application and/or land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 827: Home Centers 
(A) 	
Home centers, as define under Article 2  may be permitted by right in the HC and GI Zoning District, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Home centers shall be conducted on an improved lot exceeding two (2) acres of net area, which shall comply with the minimum setback requirements specified by the GI Zoning District. 

(2) 	
Home centers shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Home centers shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the home center shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Exterior storage areas for materials and equipment shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines.  All such areas shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 

(7) 	
All exterior storage areas shall be permanently secured by a fence having a maximum height of six (6) feet. Landscaping materials should be utilized to buffer the appearance of the fencing. 



(B) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(C) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit 


Section 828: Horseback Riding School and Stables 
(A) 	
Horseback riding schools and stables, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance may be permitted by right in the AG and RC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Horseback riding school and stables may be permitted as either a principal use or a subordinate use.  A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to exclusively support the horseback riding school and stable. 

(2) 	
The maximum number of students shall be limited to six (6) equestrian students at any given time. 

(3) 	
Provisions for sanitary sewage disposal, water supply and other utilities shall be considered as part of a land development plan. 

(4) 	
The barn or other accessory structures utilized to house the horses shall be located one hundred (100) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(5) 	
No activities associated with the horseback riding school and stable shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(6) 	
Areas designated for training, show, boarding and grazing shall be enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet and maximum height of six (6) feet. 

(7) 	
The raising and keeping of horses shall be limited based upon owned contiguous acres relating to animal units.  The total number of horses raised or kept at the designated area for the horse riding school or stable shall not exceed 2.00 animal units per acre. 

(8) 	
Horse rides may be offered to the general public.  A professional guide shall be responsible to supervise no more than ten (10) riders or customers at any given time.  

(9) 	
Provisions for off-street parking and access drives shall be considered based upon the use, activities and events that may occur at the site.  All proposed off-street parking areas and access drives shall be maintained as mud-free conditions. 

(10) 	
Horse riding schools shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning nutrient management, sewage disposal, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, air quality management, and vehicular accessibility.  Where appropriate, the applicant shall submit plans or other forms of documentation to demonstrate compliance with local, state and federal laws. 



(B) 	
A land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all provisions specified by Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners may waive this requirement pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 829: Hotel and Motel Uses 
(A) 	
Hotel or motel uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the HC Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to hotel and motel uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with the hotel or motel. 

(2) 
All uses associated with hotel or motel shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the hotel or motel use is located.  

(3) 	
Hotels or motels shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Hotels or motels shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving hotels or motels shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, the utility services and connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
Subordinate uses within hotels or motels shall be limited to: meeting rooms; professional offices; restaurants and banquet facilities; bars and taprooms; entertainment facilities; retail sales establishments; personal care or service establishments; recreational uses; educational uses;; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by Cumru Township.  The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the hotel or motel.  The accessory uses shall be considered subordinate uses that directly benefit the principal uses within the hotel or motel. 

(7) 	
The length of stay for any guest at a hotel or motel establishment shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the hotel or motel shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(11) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(13) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(C) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 830: Industrial Parks 
(A) 	
Industrial parks, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses within an industrial park. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to the uses contained within industrial parks: 

(1) 	
Each use within the industrial park shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Each use within the industrial park shall be shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the industrial park shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, the utility services and connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The permitted uses within an industrial park shall be limited to: manufacturing facilities; warehousing facilities; wholesale and distribution facilities; fabrication and finishing facilities; food processing facilities; research facilities; professional offices; banks or financial institutions; governmental offices; municipal uses; and other similar office uses, as determined by the Cumru Township as part of the subdivision and land development plan application. 

(5) 	
Subordinate uses within the industrial park shall be limited to: restaurants or cafeterias; retail sales establishments; personal care or service establishments; meeting rooms; recreational uses; educational uses; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by Cumru Township as part of the subdivision and land development plan application. 

(6) 	
All principal uses shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street right-of-way line and fifty (50) feet from all other external property lines, which are not owned by the applicant in pre-development conditions. 

(7) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to each principal use within the industrial park: 

(a) 	
The minimum net lot area shall be two (2) acres per lot, whether it is for one individual use on a lot or for multiple permitted uses within a building on a lot. 

(b) 	
The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet per lot. 

(c) 	
The front yard setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet, as measured from the right-of-way line. 

(d) 	
The side yard setback shall be at least forty (40) feet for each side. 

(e) 	
The rear yard setback shall be at least forty (40) feet. 

(f) 	
The maximum height of the buildings shall be no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(g) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be no more than forty (40) percent of the approved lot. 

(h) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be no more than sixty (60) percent of the approved lot 



(8) 	
Office or non-residential condominiums may be permitted on an individual lot within the industrial park, provided that each use is a permitted use as described in this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  The permitted uses shall be designed as self-contained structures without common facilities, which comply with all pertinent requirements of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to these requirements, the following provisions shall apply to office condominiums: 

(a) 	
The ownership of office condominiums shall be under single ownership, partnership, corporation, or under a guaranteed unified management control.  The office condominiums must have at least one (1) on-site manager or a designated individual whose office is located within a reasonable distance of Cumru Township, as determined appropriate by the Board of Commissioners.  The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of on-site managers or designated individuals on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name, mailing address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each designated individual responsible for the daily operation of all uses within the office or non-residential condominiums. 

(b) 	
The owner or manager shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of tenants located within office or non-residential condominium on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name of the tenant, business name, mailing address, telephone number, land use and scheduled hours of operation. 



(9) 	
The architectural features or building facade for the uses within the industrial park shall be harmoniously planned as a non-residential community.  As part of the subdivision and land development plan, the applicant or developer shall identify the non-residential uses and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned considering their architectural appearance. 

(10) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the industrial park shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to these signs, no more than one (1) common on-premises free standing sign shall be permitted along each street in which the office and business park has frontage and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per side.  No portion of the common on-premises free standing sign shall be less than seven (7) feet or greater than twenty-five (25) feet, as measured from the mean ground elevation. 

(12) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the development shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  The design of the buffer yard and the selected landscape materials shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(13) 	
All principal means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(14) 	
Where permitted or required, security gates or security check points shall be located along an internal road within the development at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the right-of-way of an external public road. 

(15) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(16) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for truck traffic shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets, limitations associated with turning movements and all adjacent residential uses. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the subdivision and land development plan, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site. 

(2) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all municipal site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(4) 	
Architectural renderings of the proposed building elevations and plan views. 

(5) 	
A preliminary lighting plan showing the location and intensity of the proposed lighting within the property to a point fifty (50) feet beyond the perimeter of the property line.  The proposed lighting for buildings, signs, accessways and parking areas shall be arranged so they do not reflect towards any public street or residential zoning districts. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the land development plan application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the land development plan application. 



(E) 	
A complete master plan shall be developed for all contiguous land owned by the applicant. 

(F) 	
Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan.. 



Section 831: Junk Yards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facilities 
(A) 	
Junk yards, salvage yards and/or impoundment facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(7) 	
All containment and operation area for the junk yards, salvage yards and/or impoundment facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(8) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
Access to the site of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations. 

(10) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet shall be erected along all boundary lines of the containment and operation area for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all entrances, gates, which are locked except during operating hours.  Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(11) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(12) 
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(13) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(14) 	
An equipment cleaning and tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site. All equipment used to dispose, dump, move, transport, grade, and compact solid waste shall be cleaned daily.  Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(15) 	
All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned.  Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, county, state or federal standards. 

(16) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(17) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility. 

(18) 	
The applicant shall comply with all locals, state and federal requirements pertaining to junk yards, salvage yards and /or impoundment facilities.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to Cumru Township. 

(19) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radio-active materials, shall not be disposed of within the junk yard, salvage yard and/or impoundment facility. 

(20) 	
The operator shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(21) 	
All vehicles, junk and salvage materials shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment and to prevent accumulation of stagnant water. 

(22) 	
No materials of any nature shall be piled to a height of three (3) cars in crushed condition or more than eight (8) feet from ground elevation, whichever is less. 

(23) 	
All liquids and/or fluids shall be drained from any junk or scrapped automobiles. 

(24) 	
All sales, service, maintenance and repair facilities shall be permitted provided that they are conducted within an enclosed building, which complies the appropriate building code requirements for a commercial establishment within Cumru Township and that they are considered as accessory uses to the automobile sales establishment. 

(25) 	
All motor vehicles that have been transported to the facility for impoundment by the authorities having jurisdiction may remain within the impoundment yard for a maximum of 120 consecutive days.  Upon the expiration of the 120 day impoundment period, the owner of the impoundment facility shall take the appropriate measures to have the vehicle removed or transferred. 



(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A complete hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, which shall demonstrate the proposed facility will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater table within one thousand (1,000) feet of the source of operations. 

(2) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(3) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, erosion and sedimentation control facilities, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(4) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(5) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the special exception application. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 832 Kennels 
(A) 	
Kennels shall include the terms “private kennel” and “commercial kennel”, which are further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for private kennels are further specified under Section 832.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for commercial kennels are further specified under Section 832.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 832.1 Private Kennels 
(A) 	
Private kennels shall be permitted by special exception within the AG and RC Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to private kennels. 

(1) 	
A minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres of land shall be required to operate a private kennel. 

(2) 	
A private kennel shall be an accessory use to a permitted agricultural use or residential use. 

(3) 	
No more than ten (10) dogs or domesticated pets over the age of twelve (12) weeks shall be kept or maintained as part of a private kennel operation. 

(4) 	
Outdoor runs or common exterior areas may be permitted for the animals being cared for at the private kennel, provided that such outdoor runs are conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and are within a confined area at least one hundred feet from any property lines and street right-of-way lines. 



(C) 	
Kennel operations exceeding the design standards and specifications contained under Section 832.1(B) of this Zoning Ordinance shall be considered as a commercial kennel. 

(D) 	
All private kennels shall be recognized and permitted by the appropriate local and state agencies with jurisdiction. 


Section 832.2: Commercial Kennels 
(A) 
Commercial kennels shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A commercial kennel may include accessory uses including: pet grooming services; veterinary or clinical care facilities; retail sales of pet supplies; and other similar uses. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to commercial kennels: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a commercial kennel. 

(2) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the lot occupying the commercial kennel use shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(3) 	
All principal and accessory uses associated with the commercial kennel use shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line and all property lines. 

(4) 	
The commercial kennel shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The commercial kennel shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
All other utility provisions serving the commercial kennel use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(8) 	
Outdoor runs or common exterior areas may be permitted for the animals being cared for at the commercial kennel, subject to the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 

(b) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted within a defined external area, which is completely enclosed by an eight (8) foot high fence.  The perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a 20 foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(c) 	
The location of the outdoor runs shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 



(9) 	
If an incineration (retort) device is proposed to be installed on the property, the applicant shall prove during the special exception application that he has secured the required approvals, permits and licenses from the agencies having jurisdiction. 

(10) 	
The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of by discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility for biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or biological waste shall be within a building, within enclosed containers, pending removal to or disposal at an approved facility. A plan for management of such wastes shall be submitted for municipal review as part of the special exception application. 

(11) 	
Personal service facilities and/or retail sales of items commonly found in connection with such uses, if any, shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet. 

(12) 	
Shows and/or competitions, which are proposed to occur on the property shall be limited to two (2) events per calendar year.  All events shall be specifically designated by the applicant and a permit will be required to facilitate each event. 

(13) 	
The landowner operator of the commercial kennel shall comply with all pertinent provisions relating to noise, disturbance, odors, or other nuisances, as further defined and regulated by Cumru Township. 

(14) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(15) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
All proposed signs for the kennel shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(18) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 833: Laundromats and Dry Cleaners 
(A) 	
Laundromats and dry cleaners, as defined under Article 2 if this Zoning Ordinance,  may be permitted by right in the LC and HC Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Laundromats and dry cleaners shall be located on an improved commercial lot, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient 

capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the laundromats and dry cleaners shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. 

(5) 	
Ventilation exhausts shall meet all applicable state and federal air quality standards.  All ventilation outlets shall be located at least forty (40) feet from all property lines and shall be directed skyward. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-way lines. All such areas shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste. 



(B) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(C) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit 


Section 834: Manufacturing Uses 
(A) 	
Manufacturing uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the manufacturing use.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the manufacturing use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for manufacturing uses: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the manufacturing use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 835: Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services 
(A) 	
Medical, dental, vision, counseling and similar heath care providers, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The use shall be located on an improved commercial lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to medical, dental, vision, counseling and similar heath care the uses: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the facilities and uses shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
All proposed uses providing health care or treatment to patients shall be conducted on an out-patient basis. 

(5) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the medical research park shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks, emergency vehicles and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(10) 	
All medical waste, bio-hazardous materials, equipment, red bag waste, and other similar items, which because of its potential health risks, shall be discarded in a manner specified by state and federal laws. 

(11) 	
Evidence shall be provided indicating that the disposal of all materials and wastes will be accomplished in a manner that complies with state and federal regulations. Such evidence shall, at a minimum, include copies of contracts with waste haulers licensed to operate within Berks County, which have been contracted to dispose of the materials and wastes used or generated on-site or some other legal means of disposal.  The zoning permit for this use shall remain valid only so long as such contracts remain in effect and all materials and wastes are properly disposed of on a regular basis.  Should the nature of the use change in the future, such that the materials used or wastes generated changes significantly either in type or amount, the owner shall so inform the Zoning Officer, and shall provide additional evidence demonstrating continued compliance with the requirements of this section. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 836: Mini-Malls 
(A) 	
Mini-malls containing less than 30,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor area and as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for a mini-mall.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the mini-mall is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to mini-malls: 

(1) 	
The cumulative gross floor area for a mini-mall shall not exceed 30,000 square feet.  For commercial applications exceeding this size, the provisions for a shopping center or shopping mall may apply, subject to the provisions of Section 848 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The permitted uses within a mini-mall shall be limited to: retail business establishments; personal business or service establishments; professional offices; banks or financial institutions; medical, dental, vision, counseling and health care uses; religious uses; educational uses; municipal or governmental uses; restaurants; taverns; and other similar uses.  

(3) 	
The maximum number of uses within a mini-mall shall be limited to twenty (20) independent uses.  All proposed uses shall be designed as self-contained structures without common facilities, which comply with all requirements of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
All uses within a mini-mall shall be harmoniously planned as attached units within a single building.  As part of the land development plan application, the applicant shall identify the planned uses within the mini-mall and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned during all hours of operation. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, planned out parcels, pad sites or detached buildings shall not be considered as part of the design. 

(6) 	
The mini-mall shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(7) 	
The mini-mall shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(8) 	
All other utility provisions serving the mini-mall shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(9) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(10) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(11) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
All proposed signs for the mini-mall shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the property shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(14) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
The ownership of any mini-malls shall be under single ownership, partnership, corporation, or under a guaranteed unified management control.  The shopping center must have at least one (1) on-site manager or a designated individual whose office is located within one hundred (100) miles of Cumru Township.  The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of on-site managers or designated individuals on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name, mailing address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each designated individual responsible for the daily operation of the mini-mall. 

(E) 	
The owner or manager shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of tenants located within the mini-mall on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name of the tenant, business name, mailing address, telephone number, land use activity and scheduled hours of operation. 

(F) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(G) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 837: Mini-Warehouse and Self-Storage Facilities 
(A) 	
Mini-warehouse or self-storage units, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for mini-warehouse and self-storage uses.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the mini-warehouse or self-storage units are located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a mini-warehouse or self-storage facility: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the property shall be adequately screened with a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(5) 	
The mini-warehouse or self-storage units must be enclosed and contained by an eight (8) foot security fence, with a twenty-four (24) hour automated access gate.  The type, location, height and arrangement of the security fence and automated access gate shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township.  Where required by Cumru Township, additional landscaping materials shall be provided in order to screen the security fence from all public roads and all adjacent properties. 

(6) 	
The entrance and all vehicular access aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width and shall be unobstructed by vehicles and/or equipment.  The entrance or main entrance shall be paved and landscaped from the cartway of the public road to a point fifty (50) feet within the automated access gate. 

(7) 	
The outdoor storage and/or parking of recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers or similar vehicles, shall only be permitted behind the proposed buildings and within the rear yard of the lot.  The required buffer yard should conceal the view of all such vehicles.  The design and location of the outdoor storage area and/or parking area shall be schematically arranged in accordance with the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The storage of partially dismantled, wrecked and/or inoperative vehicles shall not be permitted within any exterior area of the mini-warehouse or self-storage operation. 

(9) 	
The storage of flammable, high combustible, explosive or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Based upon the risk or danger of fire or explosion caused by the accumulation of vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover, and other flammable materials, the repair, construction or reconstruction of any boat, engine, motor vehicle or furniture is prohibited within a mini-warehouse or self-storage unit. 

(11) 	
Exterior lighting shall be limited to security lighting, which shall be designed not to exceed 0.25 footcandle along the perimeter of the property lines so as to preclude trespass glare onto adjacent properties.  As part of the land development plan, a lighting plan shall be submitted for review and consideration. 

(12) 	
Mini-warehouses or self-storage units shall be used solely for the storage of personal property.  The following are examples of uses specifically prohibited on the site: auctions (except storage lien auctions), commercial wholesale or retail sales (except ancillary supplies normally sold at self storage centers), or garage sales; the servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, motor cycles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or similar equipment; the operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment; the establishment of a transfer or storage business except the owner/operator of the self storage; any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or vibrations; retail sales and services; residential uses; and other uses determined inappropriate by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(13) 	
A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required per 10,000 square feet of cumulative building space within the mini-warehouse or self-storage facility. The off-street parking spaces shall be in addition to the spaces designated for vehicular storage. 

(14) 	
One (1) office area or building may be included within the site of the mini-warehouse or self storage operation.  The office use shall not exceed 3,000 square feet and shall be subordinate and/or accessory to the mini-warehouse or self-storage operation. 

(15) 	
Each building shall be a fully enclosed building, built of durable materials on a permanent foundation. 

(16) 	
Truck trailers, box cars or similar structures shall not be used as self-storage units. 

(17) 	
All uses shall be in conformity with all provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance.  No use of the mini-warehouse or self-storage units shall violate any local, county, state and federal laws. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the 

submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 838: Municipal and Governmental Uses 
(A) 	
The provisions for “municipal uses” are further specified under Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for “governmental uses” are further specified under Section 838.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 838.1: Municipal Uses 
(A) 	
Municipal uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to Cumru Township or to the Cumru Township Municipal Authority. 

(C) 	
Cumru Township shall comply with the provisions relating to the Conservation Overlay Districts, as further specified under Article 5 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Cumru Township shall comply with the provisions of the Historical Overlay District, as further specified under Section 603 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 838.2: Governmental Uses 
(A) 	
Governmental uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The use shall be located on an improved lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to governmental uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the governmental use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the governmental use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 839: Nurseries and Landscaping Centers 
(A) 	
Nurseries and landscaping centers, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the LC and HC Zoning Districts 

(B) 	
The nursery or landscaping center shall be located on an improved lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a nursery or landscaping center: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The storage of merchandise that is available for retail sales may be permitted outside of the principal building or structure provided that such storage complies with the minimum setback provisions for the zoning district to which the nursery or landscaping center is located. 

(5) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by Cumru Township 

(6) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
All proposed signs for each use within the nursery or landscaping center shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 840: Personal Service Establishment 
(A) 	
Personal service establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right in the LC, HC and OC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Personal service establishments shall be located on an improved lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to personal service establishments: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All proposed signs for the personal service establishment shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity 




to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 841: Places of Worship and Religious Uses 
(A) 	
Places of worship and religious uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the MR, HR, LC and HC Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for places of worship and religious uses.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the place of worship and religious use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to places of worship and religious uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Subordinate uses within the religious use shall be limited to: cafeterias; administrative and professional offices; educational uses; recreational uses; day care centers; and other similar uses that are determined appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board as part of the special exception application. The cumulative gross floor area for all such accessory uses shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of all uses within the religious use. 

(5) 	
All designated subordinate uses and buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(6) 	
All designated areas utilized as a cemetery or burial grounds shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and street rights-of-way. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress.   All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of emergency response vehicles, buses and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs for the use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any all property lines and street right-of-way lines. 



(D) 	
Places of worship or religious uses may lease or purchase space within a shopping center or mini-mall by right, provided that the place of worship or religious use is considered a secondary or subordinate use to the shopping center or mini-mall. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the place of worship or religious use shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application.  

(F) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(G) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by the Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 842: Printing or Publishing Facilities 
(A) 	
Printing and publishing facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Printing and publishing facilities shall be located on an improved lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to printing and publishing establishments: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the printing and publishing use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 843: Quarrying and Mining Operations 
(A) 
Quarrying and mining operations, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a quarrying and mining operation: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate the uses and facilities for a quarry or mining operation. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the quarrying and mining operation shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(6) 	
Quarrying and/or mining activities shall not be conducted within two hundred (200) feet of any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(7) 	
Access to the site of the quarrying and mining operation shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations.  Such barricade, fence or gate shall be at least eight (8) feet in height and shall be kept in good repair. 

(8) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the quarrying or mining facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(11) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(12) 	
A tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site.  All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or Township standards. 

(13) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of eight (8) feet shall be erected along all boundary lines of the area, which is approved for operational use as a quarry or mine. The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all entrances, gates, which are locked except during operating hours.  Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(14) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for operational use as a quarry or mine.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers.  No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(15) 	
All blasting operations shall conform to the regulations enforced by the appropriate agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal government.  Notice of all blasting operations shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting to Cumru Township and to the occupants of all properties within a radius of 1,000 feet of the location of blasting. In addition, notice shall be given to all sensitive business ventures requesting such notice. 

(16) 	
The storage of explosives shall be in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(17) 	
Crushing and processing operations of the minerals, rock and other products of the earth mined on the premises shall be permitted so long as the physical or chemical properties of the same are not changed and so long as such crushing or processing operations do not involve the manufacture of cement or concrete, asphalt materials and products or any other form of manufacturing or fabrication. 

(18) 	
Quarry support activities and uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, may be permitted as an accessory or subordinate use to the quarrying and mining activities provided that the quarry support activities and use have been approved by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners as part of a special exception application. 

(19) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the quarrying or mining operation. 

(20) 	
The applicant shall comply with all locals, state and federal requirements pertaining to the operation of quarrying and mining facility.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to Cumru Township. 



(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A complete hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, geologist or engineer, which shall demonstrate the proposed quarrying or mining operation will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater table within one thousand (1,000) feet of the source of operations. 

(2) 	
A geological and geotechnical site investigation shall be prepared by a professional geologist, which shall demonstrate that the surrounding area is not prone to sinkhole development.  

(3) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site or relocated to accommodate the quarrying and mining operation. 

(4) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(5) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the special exception application. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(E) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 844: Recreational Uses 
(A)  The provisions for “non-commercial recreation uses” are further specified under Section 844.1 of this Zoning  
Ordinance.  
(B)  The provisions for “commercial recreation uses” are further specified under Section 844.2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
(C)  The provisions for “municipal uses” are further specified under Section 838.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  
Section 844.1: Non-Commercial Recreational Uses 


(A) 	
Non-commercial recreational uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the AG, RC, LC, MR, HR, LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a noncommercial recreation use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of three (3) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate non-commercial recreational uses within the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts.  The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 

(2) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate non-commercial recreational uses within the MR, HR, LC or HC Zoning Districts.  The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet. 

(3) 	
Non-commercial recreational uses shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(4) 	
All buildings associated with the non-commercial recreation use shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(7) 	
All other utility provisions serving the non-commercial recreation use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(8) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(10) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All proposed signs for the passive recreational use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(C) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 844.2: Commercial Recreational Uses 
(A) 
Commercial recreational uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a noncommercial recreation use: 

(1) 	
A minimum of one (1) acre of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate commercial recreational uses within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(2) 	
All active or passive recreational areas shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(3) 	
All buildings associated with the commercial recreation use shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all external property lines and street right-of-ways. 

(4) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(6) 	
All other utility provisions serving the governmental use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(7) 	
A landscaped buffer yard or fence shall be considered between the commercial recreational use and adjacent residential uses. 

(8) 	
The side and rear property lines shall be adequately screened and buffered so as to protect the privacy of the adjacent uses from inappropriate noise, light and other disturbances. 

(9) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(10) 	
Sufficient vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be designed, located and constructed in a manner considering the size and weight of all delivery vehicles and customer vehicles entering and exiting the property.  All such vehicular access roads and off-street parking areas shall be mud free shall not create a traffic hazard. 

(11) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
All proposed signs for the passive recreational use shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(14) 	
The landowner or operator of a commercial recreation use shall report all planned activities and hours of operation to Cumru Township on an annual basis. 



(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(F) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 845: Research Facilities 
(A) 	
Research facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the LC, HC OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Research Facilities shall be located on an improved lot or development, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements that are specified by the zoning district to which it is located and subject to the land development provisions of Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply to research facilities: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the research facilities shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property lines or street right-of-way lines.  



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report. Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 846: Restaurants 
(A) 	
Restaurants, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All restaurants shall be located on an approved lot and development, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the restaurant is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for restaurants: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the restaurant shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall be permitted by special exception under the provisions of Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Restaurant may contain an accessory area or use devoted to outdoor eating, retail sales, social quarters, meeting rooms, bars, taverns, taprooms, and similar uses, provided the cumulative total area of the accessory use does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the cumulative gross floor area of the restaurant. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 847: Retail Business Uses 
(A) 	
Retail uses, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
Retail uses shall be located on an approved lot and development, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the retail use is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The following standards and specifications shall be required for retail uses: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the retail use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Retail uses with drive-through facilities shall be permitted by special exception under the provisions of Section 812 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
The provisions for landscaping, lighting and other supplemental requirements shall be considered and designed to comply with the applicable provisions of Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(7) 	
The off-street parking, loading spaces and interior access lanes shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 848: Shopping Centers or Shopping Malls 
(A) 	
Shopping Centers or Shopping Malls, as further define under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by right within the HC Zoning District. 

(B) 	
Shopping Centers or Shopping Malls shall have a minimum of ten (10) acres of contiguous land area, which shall comply with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Shopping Centers or Shopping Malls shall be subject to the following design standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The cumulative gross floor area of the shopping center or shopping mall may exceed 30,000 square feet. 

(2) 	
The permitted uses within the shopping center or shopping mall shall be limited to: retail business establishments; personal business or service establishments; professional offices; banks or financial institutions; medical or dental offices; family entertainment complex; movie theaters; recreational uses; municipal or governmental uses; religious uses; educational uses; restaurants; taverns; night clubs; and other similar uses.  

(3) 	
The maximum number of uses within the shopping center or shopping mall shall be unlimited, provided that each use is designed as part of a common facility or as self-contained structures, which comply with all requirements of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The following minimum and maximum dimensional requirements shall apply to the shopping center or shopping mall: 

(a) 	
The minimum lot width shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(b) 	
All principal and accessory buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(c) 	
The minimum separation distance of buildings shall be fifty (50) feet 

(d) 	
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(e) 	
Off-street parking areas shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines or street right-of-way lines. 

(f) 	
The maximum building coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot area. 

(g) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of the lot areas.  



(5) 	
All uses within the shopping center or shopping mall shall be harmoniously planned within a single building or within groups of buildings.  As part of the land development plan application, the applicant or developer shall identify the planned uses within the shopping center or shopping mall and demonstrate how these uses can be amicably planned during all hours of operation. 

(6) 	
Planned out parcels, pad sites or detached buildings may be permitted, provided the use is located within a separate lot meeting the appropriate minimum and maximum dimensional requirements of the HC Zoning District for that specific use. 

(7) 	
Gasoline sales shall be prohibited as part of the shopping center or shopping mall. 

(8) 	
The uses contained within the shopping center or shopping mall shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage disposal facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(9) 	
The uses contained within the shopping center or shopping mall shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(10) 	
All other utility provisions serving the shopping center or shopping mall shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service. Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(11) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
A minimum of two (2) separate points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be established for shopping centers or shopping malls.  The points of ingress and egress shall be separated by at least five hundred 

(500) linear feet of road frontage.  At least one (1) point of ingress and egress shall be designed to provide direct access onto a collector or arterial road. 

(13) 	
Interior accessways shall be designed so as to prevent traffic congestion at points of ingress and egress. All proposed areas designated for the loading or unloading of trucks and/or other commercial vehicles shall be planned and arranged so they may be utilized without interfering with the interior traffic circulation and parking facilities. 

(14) 	
The off-street parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
All proposed signs for the shopping center or shopping mall shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
The side and rear lot lines of the property shall be adequately screened with a thirty (30) foot wide landscaped buffer yard. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
The ownership of any shopping centers or shopping malls shall be under single ownership, partnership, corporation, or under a guaranteed unified management control.  The shopping center must have at least one (1) on-site manager or a designated individual whose office is located within one hundred (100) miles of Cumru Township.  The owner shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of on-site managers or designated individuals on an annual basis. The list shall include the name, mailing address and telephone number of each on-site manager or each designated individual responsible for the daily operation of the mini-mall, shopping center or shopping mall. 

(E) 	
The owner or manager shall provide Cumru Township with a complete list of tenants located within the shopping center or shopping mall on an annual basis.  The list shall include the name of the tenant, business name, mailing address, telephone number, land use activity and scheduled hours of operation. 

(F) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(G) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 849: Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction Facilities 
(A) 	
Solid waste disposal and reduction facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
All solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities shall comply with all local, county, state and federal laws governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of such facilities, which shall have the appropriate permits to operate the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities in accordance. 

(C) 	
Solid waste disposal and reduction facilities shall be subject to the following design standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
A minimum of fifty (50) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(5) 	
The minimum lot width requirement for the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall be five hundred (500) feet. 

(6) 	
All solid waste disposal and/or reduction facilities shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(7) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
Access to the site of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall be limited to those posted times when an attendant is on duty.  In order to protect against indiscriminate and unauthorized activities, the site shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other positive means designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or locations.  Such barricade, fence or gate shall be at least twelve 

(12) feet in height and shall be kept in good repair. 

(9) 	
No vehicles shall be staged or parked at any entrance and/or access road of the site prior to one (1) hour of the standard operation hours of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  Overnight parking shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(11) 
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(12) 	
An equipment cleaning and tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site. All equipment used to dispose, dump, move, transport, grade, and compact solid waste shall be cleaned daily.  Runoff from the equipment cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(13) 	
All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned.  Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent local, county, state or federal standards. 

(14) 	
A security fence with a minimum height of twelve (12) feet shall be erected along all boundary lines of the area, which is approved for a solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  The fence shall not contain openings greater than four (4) square inches and shall contain, at all entrances, gates, which are locked except during operating hours.  Warning signs shall be placed on the fence at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet. 

(15) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  The buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances.  The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(16) 	
No substances, which can harm persons, animals, vegetation or other form of property shall be dispersed beyond the property lines of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(17) 	
The applicant shall comply with all locals, state and federal requirements pertaining to the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility.  A copy of all permits and licenses issued to the applicant shall be submitted to Cumru Township. 

(18) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radio-active materials, shall not be disposed of in the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(19) 	
The operator shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(20) 	
Routine inspections of the entire site shall be permitted to take place by any local, county, state or federal official who has proper authorization to conduct such inspections.  Any necessary corrective work or action shall be performed by the applicant in the time frame specified by the authorized inspector. 

(21) 	
All components of the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall be conducted within an approved facility, building, cell site, area, transfer site, or other area permitted by the appropriate local, state and federal agencies. 

(22) 	
All solid waste materials awaiting disposal and/or reduction shall be stored or staged in a manner or period of time, which does not exceed the requirements specified on the permit. 

(23) 	
The solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility shall contain an on-site scale, which shall be accurately calibrated to weigh and record all solid waste that is disposed or reduced in a manner permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  All records concerning the daily tonnage, which is delivered, transported, disposed and/or reduced shall be submitted to Cumru Township on a monthly basis. 



(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant or developer shall submit the following information for review and consideration: 

(1) 	
A complete hydrological report, analysis and impact plan shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, who shall demonstrate the proposed solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of the surface water and groundwater table within two thousand (2,000) feet of the source of operations. 

(2) 	
A geological and geotechnical site investigation shall be prepared by a professional geologist, which shall demonstrate that the surrounding area is not prone to sinkhole development from the preparation stages through the post-closure stages. 

(3) 	
A preliminary utility plan showing how sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable and other utilities will service the site or relocated to accommodate the solid waste disposal and/or reduction facility. 

(4) 	
A preliminary landscaping plan showing how the buffer yards and other landscaping enhancements will be incorporated within the site. 

(5) 	
A preliminary grading plan shall be developed identify the limits of disturbance for all site improvements, the proposed ground elevations, erosion and sedimentation control facilities, stormwater management facilities, and other natural or man-made features of the site. 

(6) 	
A Traffic Impact Study shall be conducted in order to assess transportation conditions and needs.  The Traffic Impact Study should identify how the potential adverse impacts associated with traffic volumes and vehicle weight will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted with the special exception application. 

(7) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be conducted in order to assess existing and proposed site conditions.  The Environmental Impact Assessment Report should identify how potential environmental or ecological impacts will be mitigated and/or prevented. The Environmental Impact Assessment Report shall be submitted to Cumru Township with the special exception application. 

(8) 	
A contingency plan for the disposal and/or reduction of solid waste during any discontinuation of the normal operations. 



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 850: Telecommunication and Wireless Communication Facilities 
(A) 	
The purpose of this section and the standards established herein is to govern the use, construction and location of telecommunication and wireless communications facilities in recognition of the nature of commercial communication systems and the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.  These regulations are intended to: 

(1) 	
Accommodate the need for telecommunication and wireless communications facilities while regulating their location and number so as to insure the provision for necessary services;  

(2) 	
Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities through proper design, locating, screening, material, color and finish and by requiring that competing providers of wireless communications services collocate their commercial communications antennas and related facilities; 

(3) 	
Ensure the structural integrity of commercial communications antenna support structures through compliance with applicable industry standards and regulations; and 

(4) 	
Promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners within Cumru Township.  



(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance, telecommunication or wireless communication facilities, as further defined under Article 2, shall be permitted by within as follows: 

(1) 	
By right on all land areas owned and maintained by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
By right on existing telecommunication or wireless communication facilities, which have the capacities to accommodate additional facilities. 

(3) 	
By right on existing buildings and/or structures within the HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts, which have sufficient height to facilitate the immediate service area of the telecommunication or wireless communication provider. 

(4) 	
By special exception on a proposed telecommunication facility and structures within the AG, RC, LR, HC, OC and GI Districts, provided that: such facilities are necessary to satisfy coverage requirements; that they are designed to permit co-location with a minimum of four (4) telecommunication providers; and that the all telecommunication facility structures are located at least two hundred (200) feet from a street right-of-way line and property lines. 

(5) 	
As permitted by the procedural requirements and criteria specified within this Zoning Ordinance.  



(C) 	
All applicants seeking to construct, erect, relocate or alter telecommunication or wireless communications facilities shall secure approval from the Board of Commissioners, which shall be conditioned upon their demonstrated compliance with the regulations specified under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  As part of this requirement, a site plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(D) 	
The following specifications concerning location and height shall apply to telecommunication or wireless communication facilities: 

(1) 	
Telecommunication or wireless communications facilities must be located on a sites identified or permitted by this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  A site plan shall be submitted to demonstrate that the requirements for location, height, design, infrastructure and improvements have been properly addressed considering the telecommunication or wireless communication network. 

(2) 	
No applicant shall have the right under the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance to erect any commercial communications antenna support structure, also referred to as a "tower" in these regulations, to the maximum height specified within this section of the Zoning Ordinance, unless it proves the necessity for such height.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the commercial communications antenna support structure and the commercial communications antennas intended to be attached thereto is the minimum height required to provide satisfactory service for the communications. 

(3) 	
Prior to the Board of Commissioners approval of a site plan authorizing the construction and installation of a commercial communications antenna support structure in a permitted location or zoning district, the applicant shall demonstrate that the facility/or structure is necessary to extend or infill its communications system by the use of equipment such as radomes, repeaters, antennas and other similar equipment installed on existing structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances, and other available tall structures described in this section of the Zoning Ordinance, actually constructed and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, hereinafter referred as an "existing structure". 

(4) 	
The site plan, whether for a tower or antennas on existing structures, shall be accompanied by a propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed tower or other communications facilities and equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of the proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency range (megahertz band) assigned to the applicant, the power in watts at which the applicant transmits, the design gain of applicant's antennas, the subscriber equipment sensitivity expressed in dBm, the design dBm of the transmission and receiving equipment and the results of the drive test and other studies conducted by the applicant in determining the need for the proposed site and installation. 

(5) 	
No commercial communications antenna support structure shall be taller than 120 feet, as measured from undisturbed ground level, unless the applicant proves that another provider of wireless communications services has agreed to collocate commercial communications antennas on the applicant's tower or that the 

tower will be available for such collocation.  It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to prove that a greater tower height is necessary to provide satisfactory service for wireless communications than is required by the applicant.  In such cases, the commercial communications antenna support structure shall not exceed one-hundred and fifty (150) feet unless the applicant secures approval from the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners and the agencies having jurisdiction, by demonstrating such proof as would be required for the granting of a variance under the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  In no event shall mounted commercial communications antennas' height on any tower extend more than ten (10) feet above the installed height of the tower. 

(6) 	
In those areas where commercial communications antennas and commercial communications antenna support structures are permitted, either a one single-story wireless communications equipment building not exceeding 1,500 square feet in area or up to five (5) metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding fifty (50) feet by eighty (80) feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting equipment may be located on the permitted site selected for installation and location of the tower for each unrelated company sharing commercial communications antenna space on the tower. 

(7) 	
With the exception of the transmitting and wireless communications equipment necessary to facilitate the tower and commercial communications antennas, all other uses ancillary to commercial communications antennas and commercial communications antenna support structures, including but not limited to a business office, mobile telephone switching office, maintenance depot and vehicular storage area, shall not be located on any site, unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The attachment of telecommunication or wireless communication facilities to existing structures shall be permitted by right, provided the following condition apply: 

(a) 	
The proposed use or structure complies with all other provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance, whereas the applicant may locate commercial communications antennas and their support members, but not a commercial communications antenna support structure, on a smokestack, utility pole, water tower, commercial or industrial building or any similar tall structure, actually constructed and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance. 

(b) 	
The height of the commercial communications antennas and apparatus attaching the commercial communications antennas thereto shall not exceed by more than ten (10) feet the height of such existing structure, unless the applicant proves that a greater antenna height is required to make it an adequately functional component of the applicant's system, but in no case shall such height exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 

(c) 	
The applicant proves that such location is necessary to satisfy the antenna's function within the communications system and will obviate the need for the erection of a commercial communications antenna support structure in another location where the same is permitted. 

(d) 	
The applicant employs concealment or other reasonably appropriate stealth measures, as determined appropriate by the Board of Commissioners, to camouflage or conceal the antennas, such as the use of neutral materials that hide antennas, the location of antennas within existing structures, such as steeples, silos, and advertising signs, the replication of steeples and other structures for such purpose, the simulation of elements of rural landscapes, such as trees, and such other measures as are available for use for such purpose. 

(e) 	
Commercial communications antennas may be located entirely within a steeple, but no portion of the antenna shall be visible from the outside. 

(f) 	
If the Board of Commissioners finds that location of antennas on a structure, which was constructed prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, obviates the need for the construction and erection of a tower in a permitted zoning district in which a tower is a permitted by right, the Board of Commissioners may authorize as part of the site plan approval process, the location of up to five (5) metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding 25 feet by 30 feet in area housing the receiving and transmitting equipment necessary to the operation of the antennas provided that: the pad is located within the side yard or rear yard; that the pad and boxes are set back from the property line by a minimum of 30 feet; the combined height of the 






pad and boxes does not exceed eight feet; and an evergreen landscape buffer screen is planted and maintained as required by the Board of Commissioners.   
(9) 	
The minimum distances between the base of a commercial communications antenna support structure and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall equal fifty (50) percent of the proposed commercial communications antenna support structure height. Where the site on which a tower is proposed to be located is contiguous to an educational use, child day-care facility or residential use, the minimum distance between the base of a commercial communications antenna support structure and any such adjoining uses shall equal one hundred and ten (110) percent of the proposed commercial communications antenna support structure height, unless it is demonstrated to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board of Commissioners that in the event of tower failure, the tower is designed to collapse upon itself within a setback area less than the required minimum setback without endangering such adjoining uses and their occupants. 

(10) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance or as permitted by the Board of Commissioners, a proposed telecommunication or wireless communications facility must be located or separated by a horizontal distance of 3,000 feet from any another telecommunication or wireless communications facility. 


(E) 	
The following standards and specifications shall apply structural stability, support and design of all telecommunication or wireless communication facilities: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed commercial communications antennas and commercial communications antenna support structures are designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable national building standards for such facilities and structures, including, but not limited to, the standards developed by the Electronics Industry Association, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer, Telecommunications Industry Association, American National Standards Institute and Electrical Industry Association, and other established standards identified by the Cumru Township Engineer.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed wireless communications facility is designed in such a manner so that no part of the facility will attract/deflect lightning onto adjacent properties. 

(2) 	
When one or more commercial communications antennas are to be located on an existing structure and the general public has access to the structure on which the commercial communications antenna is to be located, the applicant shall provide engineering details showing what steps have been taken to prevent microwave binding to wiring, pipes or other metals. For purposes of this subsection, the term "microwave binding" shall refer to the coupling or joining of microwave energy to electrical circuits, including but not limited to power lines and telephone wires, during which process the transference of energy from one to another occurs. 

(3) 	
In order to reduce the number of commercial communications antenna support structures within Cumru Township in the future, the proposed commercial communications antenna support structure shall be designed to accommodate other potential communications users, including but not limited to, commercial wireless communications companies, local police and fire and ambulance companies. 

(4) 	
If the wireless communications facility is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for all maintenance workers, with a minimum of two spaces provided. If the wireless communications facility is not fully automated, the number of required parking spaces shall equal the number of employees present at the wireless communications facility during the largest shift. 

(5) 	
Commercial communications antenna support structures shall be painted silver or another color approved by the Board of Commissioners, or shall have a galvanized finish.  All wireless communications equipment buildings and other accessory facilities shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. In furtherance of this provision, the Board of Commissioners may require that: 

(a) 	
Commercial communications antenna support structures be painted green up to the height of nearby trees; and/or 

(b) 	
Wireless communications equipment buildings, which house electrical transmitter equipment be placed underground, unless determined to be detrimental to the functioning and physical integrity of such equipment.   



(6) 	
In making these determinations concerning aesthetics and architectural compatibility, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the following: 

(a) 	
If it will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district involved; 

(b) 	
If it is compatible with the character and type of development existing within the area; 

(c) 	
If the benefits exceed any negative impacts on the aesthetic character of the community; 

(d) 	
If it preserves woodland areas and trees existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and 

(e) 	
If it encourages sound engineering practices and land development design. 





(F) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Commissioners as part of the site plan, the following general site improvements, compliance provisions and procedural obligations shall be required for all telecommunication or wireless communication facilities: 

(1) 	
No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the wireless communications facility, except as may be required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other governmental agency. 

(2) 	
Where appropriate, the commercial communications antenna support structures shall meet all FAA regulations.  No commercial communications antenna support structure may be artificially lighted except when required by the FAA or other governmental authority.  When lighting is required by the FAA or other governmental authority, it shall be limited to the minimum lumens and number of lights so required and it shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto surrounding properties. The applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities as well as Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall describe the anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency of service, personnel needs and equipment needs, and the traffic safety and noise impacts of such maintenance. 

(4) 	
In the event that a commercial communications antenna is attached to an existing structure, vehicular access to the wireless communications facility shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the existing principal use. 

(5) 	
If the applicant proposes to build a commercial communications antenna support structure (as opposed to mounting the commercial communications antenna on an existing structure), the applicant shall prove to the Board of Commissioners that it has contacted the owners of structures of suitable location and height, either other towers or existing tall structures within 3,000 foot radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the commercial communications antennas on those structures and has been denied. The Board of Commissioners may deny an application to construct a new commercial communications antenna support structure if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the commercial communications antenna on an existing structure. 

(6) 	
If use of the wireless communications facility is abandoned or if the wireless communications facility is not in use for a period of six (6) months or longer, the owner shall demolish and/or remove the wireless communications facility from the site within six (6) months of such abandonment and/or nonuse. All costs of demolition and/or removal shall be borne by the owner of the wireless communications facility. In the event that the demolition and/or removal referred to above are not performed in a timely manner, the landowner shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of this Zoning Ordinance.   

(7) 	
As part of the site plan, the applicant seeking to construct, erect, relocate or alter a wireless communications facility shall file a written certification that all property owners within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the property on which the commercial communications antenna support structure is 

proposed to be located have been given written notice by the applicant of the applicant's intent to construct, erect, relocate or alter a wireless communications facility.  The certification shall contain the name, address and tax parcel number of the property owners so notified. 

(8) 	
In the event that the wireless communications facilities cause interference with the radio or television reception of any residential or non-residential use within Cumru Township for a period of three (3) continuous days, the resident shall notify the applicant of such interference, and the applicant, at the applicant's sole expense, shall thereafter ensure that any interference problems are promptly corrected. In the event that the interference is not corrected in a timely manner, the applicant shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
A security fence shall be required around the antenna support structure and other equipment, unless the commercial communications antenna is mounted on an existing structure. 

(10) 	
Landscaping shall be required to screen and buffer as much of a newly constructed commercial communications antenna support structure as possible. The Board of Commissioners may permit a combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features in lieu of landscaping. 



(G) 	
The following background information and documentation shall be submitted as part of the site plan: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall demonstrate that it is a commercial wireless communications company, licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or, in the case of those companies that own and erect towers for lease to such companies, that it has an existing contract with one or more such companies to locate on the proposed tower (in those zoning districts or areas where such towers are permitted) and provide the Township Secretary with copies of all FCC applications, permits, approvals, licenses and site inspection records. All such information shall be accompanied by a certification signed by two officers of the applicant that the information being supplied is true and correct to the best of their knowledge, information and belief. The applicant shall also provide Cumru Township with copies of all applicable federal regulations with which it is required to comply and a schedule of estimated FCC inspections. 

(2) 	
A soil report complying with the standards of geotechnical investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended, or other pertinent codes and specifications, shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Engineer to document and verify the design specifications of the foundation for the commercial communications antenna support structure, and anchors for the guy wires, if used. 

(3) 	
Prior to the issuance of a permit authorizing construction and erection of a commercial communications antenna support structure, a structural engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall issue a written certification to Cumru Township of its ability to meet the structural standards required by either the Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation and the erection of the commercial communications antenna support structure.  Where antennas are proposed to be attached to an existing structure, the structural engineer shall certify that both the structure and the antennas and their appurtenances meet minimum industry standards for structural integrity. 

(4) 	
The site plan shall show all wireless communications facilities, showing all existing and proposed structures and improvements, including but not limited to the commercial communications antennas, commercial communications antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering and ingress and egress. The land development plan shall comply with the requirements of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
In January of each year, the owner of any wireless communications facilities shall pay any required registration fees and shall provide Cumru Township with the following information: 

(a) 	
The names and addresses of the owner of the wireless communications facilities and any organizations utilizing the wireless communications facility and telephone numbers of the appropriate contact person in case of emergency. 

(b) 	
The name and address of the property owner on which the communications facility is located. 

(c) 	
The location of the wireless communications facility by geographic coordinates, indicating the latitude and longitude. 

(d) 	
Output frequency of the transmitter. 

(e) 	
The type of modulation, digital format and class of service. 

(f) 	
Commercial communications antenna(s) gain. 

(g) 	
The effective radiated power of the commercial communications antenna(s).  

(h) 	
The number of transmitters, channels and commercial communications antenna(s).  

(i) 	
A copy of the owner or operator's FCC authorization. 

(j) 	
Commercial communications antenna(s) height. 

(k) 	
Power input to the commercial communications antenna(s). 

(l) 	
Distance to nearest base station. 

(m) 	
A certification signed by two officers of the applicant that the wireless communications facility is continuing to comply with this chapter and all applicable governmental regulations, including but not limited to output and emission limits established by the FCC. 

(n) 	
Cumru Township may assess an annual permit fee to each provider.  All such permit fees shall be established by resolution. 



(6) 	
A certificate of insurance issued to the owner/operators evidencing that there is adequate current liability insurance in effect insuring against liability for personal injuries and death and property damage caused by the site and the wireless communications facilities. 



(H) 	
At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance may be adjusted or modified to facilitate the evolving technology of the telecommunication and wireless communication industry.  In all such cases, the applicant shall provide technical evidence to Cumru Township that the adjustment or modification will meet the purpose and objectives of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 851: Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments 
(A) 	
Truck service and maintenance establishments, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the truck service and maintenance establishment.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a truck service and maintenance establishments: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The quantity and quality of the wastewater generated, stored, transported and/or discharged shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
Where overnight parking is permitted, the trucks or commercial vehicles utilizing the facilities shall not be kept running or idling for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) consecutive minutes or ninety (90) cumulative minutes within any twenty-four (24) hour time period. 

(8) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(9) 	
A tire cleaning area shall be provided on-site.  All tires of all trucks leaving the site shall be cleaned. Runoff from the tire cleaning area shall be controlled and disposed of in accordance with all pertinent federal, state and/or Township standards. 

(10) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials, shall not be stored at the site. 

(11) 	
All vehicle service, maintenance and repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building, which has been approved and permitted by Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
All vehicles that have been brought in for service, maintenance or repair shall be in a state of active repair and in no case shall be stored on the premises for thirty (30) consecutive days. 

(13) 	
The outdoor storage of unlicensed or non-inspected vehicles or trailers shall be prohibited.  

(14) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(15) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru 

Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 



Section 852: Utilities 
(A) 	
The provisions for “community utilities” are further specified under Section 852.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The provisions for “private utilities” are further specified under Section 852.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for “public utilities” are further specified under Section 852.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 852.1: Community Utilities 
(A) 	
Community utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right as an accessory use to support principal uses permitted within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR, LC, HC, OC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Community utilities shall be designed to provide service in an isolated service area, community or neighborhood. 

(2) 	
The community facilities shall be located on a self contained lot, which meets the minimum and maximum dimensional lot requirements of the underlying zoning district. 



(B) 	
A complete subdivision and land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The subdivision and land development plan shall comply with all provisions specified by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 852.2: Private Utilities 
(A) 	
Private utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning Districts, subject to the following requirements: 

(1) 	
A minimum of twenty-five (25) acres of contiguous land area shall be required to accommodate all of the uses associated with a private utility provider. 

(2) 	
The offices, terminals, storage and maintenance buildings for the private utility provider shall be serviced by public sanitary sewage facilities and public water supply facilities. 

(3) 	
The minimum lot width for the private utility use shall be three hundred (300) feet. 

(4) 	
All facilities and uses associated with the private utility use shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(5) 	
The maximum height of the buildings and all accessory equipment shall be fifty (50) feet. 

(6) 	
The maximum building coverage shall be thirty (30) percent of the total lot area. 

(7) 	
The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50) percent of the total lot area. 

(8) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
Measures shall be provided to control dust and debris.  The entire area shall be kept clean and orderly. The perimeter of the site shall be inspected for debris on a daily basis. 

(10) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the owner or manager.  All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(11) 	
A fifty (50) foot wide buffer yard shall completely surround all areas approved for the private utility use. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the buffer yard shall consist of a dense evergreen screen, and is to be located and maintained along all boundary lines of the site, except at the entrances. The selected evergreens shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be staggered on twelve (12) foot centers. No materials of any nature shall be stored within this buffer yard. 

(12) 	
Hazardous, contaminated and/or toxic materials, including but not limited to highly flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and radioactive materials, shall not be stored at the site of private utility use. 

(13) 	
All local, state and federal regulations concerning air pollution or air quality shall be considered as minimum standards for the control of smoke, dust, fumes and emissions. 

(14) 	
The owner or manager shall comply with all local, state and federal laws concerning stabilization, stormwater management, and erosion and sedimentation control. 

(15) 	
All trucks and trailers stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access by emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(B) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report. Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(C) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(D) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 



Section 852.3: Public Utilities 
(A) 	
Public utilities, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance may not specifically apply to certain public utilities, which because of their status with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission may exempt them from the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 



Section 853: Veterinary Hospitals and Animal Clinics 
(A) 	
Veterinary hospitals and animal clinics, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by special exception within the AG, RC, LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts, subject to the appropriate provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Veterinary hospital or animal clinics shall be located on an approved lot, which complies with the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as well as the utility provisions, which are further specified by the appropriate zoning district to which the veterinary hospital or animal clinic is located or by the appropriate development requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
A veterinary hospital or animal clinic shall not include a “kennel”, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance.  A kennel operation may be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District, provided that the use, facilities and operations comply with the provisions of Section 832 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to veterinary hospitals or animal clinics: 

(1) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The use shall be serviced by public, private or on-lot water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
All other utility provisions serving the governmental use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(4) 	
Veterinary hospitals or animal clinics shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from all existing residential uses, as measured from the veterinary hospital or animal clinic to the existing residential use. 

(5) 	
Outdoor runs may be permitted for the animals being cared for at the veterinary hospital or animal clinic, subject to the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 

(b) 	
The outdoor runs are conducted within a defined area, which is completely enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence.  The perimeter of the fence shall be adequately screened with a 10 foot wide landscaped buffer yard.  

(c) 	
The location of the outdoor runs shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. 



(6) 	
The veterinary hospital or animal clinic shall be adequately soundproofed so that the sounds generated by the animals being cared for are not audible or detectable from any lot line. 

(7) 	
If an incineration (retort) device is proposed to be installed on the property, the applicant shall prove during the special exception application that he has secured the required approvals, permits and licenses from the agencies having jurisdiction. 

(8) 	
The storage of any animal waste shall be regularly disposed of by discharge to an approved sewage disposal system or facility for biological wastes. Any temporary storage of animal or biological waste shall be within a building, within enclosed containers, pending removal to or disposal at an approved facility. A plan for management of such wastes shall be submitted for municipal review as part of the special exception application. 

(9) 	
Retail sales of items commonly found in connection with such uses, if any, shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 1,000 square feet. 

(10) 	
All designated points of ingress and egress for all vehicles shall be designed to consider traffic volumes on existing streets and adjacent uses. 

(11) 	
The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed to comply with the provisions specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(12) 	
All proposed signs for the veterinary hospital or animal clinic shall comply with the provisions specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(13) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 

(14) 	
The lighting facilities shall be designed in a manner so the illumination does not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle. 



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(F) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(G) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete land development plan shall be submitted for review and consideration.  The land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by Cumru Township 


Section 854: Warehousing and Freight Uses 
(A) 	
Warehouse and freight terminals, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the warehouse and freight terminal.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a warehouse and freight terminals: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground 

(5) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
Where overnight parking is permitted, the trucks or commercial vehicles utilizing the facilities shall not be kept running or idling for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) consecutive minutes or ninety (90) cumulative minutes within any twenty-four (24) hour time period. 

(7) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(8) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
All proposed signs shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 855: Wholesale and Distribution Uses 
(A) 	
Wholesale and distribution facilities, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted by right within the GI Zoning District, subject to the provisions specified within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A minimum of two (2) acres of contiguous net land area shall be required to accommodate the wholesale and distribution facility.  In addition, the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements, as specified by the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply. 

(C) 	
The following design standards and specifications shall apply to a wholesale and distribution facilities: 

(1) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances 

adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
The facilities and uses shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
Where public sanitary sewage disposal facilities and/or public water supply facilities are not planned within a defined service area, the use of on-lot sewer and water facilities may be considered provided that it is consistent with all relevant plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
Retail sales of items commonly distributed as part of the wholesale operation may be permitted provided that the accessory retail use does not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area. 

(6) 	
All means of ingress and/or egress shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any intersecting street and shall be designed to accommodate traffic in a safe and efficient manner.  The applicant or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of any traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration and/or deceleration lanes as may be required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
Where overnight parking is permitted, the trucks or commercial vehicles utilizing the facilities shall not be kept running or idling for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) consecutive minutes or ninety (90) cumulative minutes within any twenty-four (24) hour time period. 

(8) 	
Truck access shall be designed to minimize traffic hazards and inconveniences.  All interior roadways shall be maintained and constructed by the operator. All trucks leaving the site shall not deposit accumulating amounts of mining products, dirt, mud or other such substances on public roads. 

(9) 	
All trucks, trailers and commercial vehicles stored on the property shall be arranged so as to permit access to emergency management equipment.  The off-street parking and loading spaces shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
All signs shall comply with the provisions that are specified under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be properly screened with secured fencing and landscaping materials.  All containers shall be enclosed, vermin proof and have adequate storage capacity to accommodate the projected volumes of solid waste.  No such storage area for trash and rubbish shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 



(D) 	
As part of the land development plan, the applicant shall provide evidence that the use or activities shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the land development plan, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 

(E) 	
As part of the land development plan, Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the land development plan and/or zoning permit. 


Section 856: Undefined or Other Land Uses 
(A) 	
Pursuant to the provisions involving the regional allocation of land uses, as summarized under Section 105 of this Zoning Ordinance, certain uses may not be permitted or recognized by this Zoning Ordinance, but may be permitted and included as part of the municipal zoning ordinance(s) that have been adopted by Brecknock Township, Kenhorst Borough, Mohnton Borough and/or Shillington Borough.  Should a use not be permitted or recognized within any of the zoning ordinances, an application should be made to the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Should other types of land uses evolve or become commonly acceptable as a reasonable use, an application should be made to the Zoning Officer.  It is the purpose of this section to provide for all reasonable and appropriate land uses and to establish a mechanism for the inclusion of such land uses within Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
All undefined or other reasonable land uses that are not recognized by this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted by special exception within the GI Zoning District. 

(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the following design and development requirements shall apply to all undefined or other reasonable land uses: 

(1) 	
A minimum of five (5) acres of net land area shall be required to accommodate the undefined use. Depending upon the complexity or intensity of the proposed undefined land use, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider a reduction of the minimum area requirement, however, in no case shall the minimum lot size be reduced to less than two (2) contiguous net acres of land.  

(2) 	
The undefined use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be planned in accordance with the most recent update to the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted to comply with Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended) as well as any ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(3) 	
The undefined use shall be serviced by public water supply facilities, which shall be consistent with any plans and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  All water supply facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacities, which shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township, the Cumru Township Municipal Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection 

(4) 	
All other utility provisions serving the use shall be planned and installed in accordance with the specifications of the public utility provider supplying service.  Unless otherwise required by the utility company or authority providing service, all utility connections shall be installed underground. 

(5) 	
Depending upon the complexity or intensity of the undefined use, the Zoning Hearing Board shall establish the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements as part of the special exception application.  These provisions shall include the lot width, setback requirements (front, side and rear), height, building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the undefined use.  



(E) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following information and documentation to be submitted to Cumru Township on behalf of the applicant: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a request for inclusion of an undefined or other reasonable land use that is not recognized as part of the Zoning Ordinance, with illustrations and complete documentation that completely describes the land use activity and the manner in which it differs from the permitted uses defined or permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the Zoning Officer shall advise Cumru Township if the application meets the purpose and objective of this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence that the undefined use shall comply with all provisions established within the Zoning Ordinance.  This may include the submission of a grading plan, utility plan, landscaping plan, lighting plan, architectural renderings, traffic impact study and/or environmental impact assessment report.  Prior to the submission of the special exception application, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer to initially discuss the supplemental documentation that may be required as part of the application. 



(F) 	
If the Zoning Hearing Board approves the special exception application, a complete subdivision and/or land development plan shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The subdivision and/or land development plan shall comply with all conditions of approval issued as part of the special exception application as well as all other provisions specified by the Zoning Ordinance. 




Article 9: Supplemental Regulations 
Section 901: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific supplemental regulations for residential and non-residential land uses. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained in Article 9 of this Zoning Ordinance are intended to serve as minimum requirements to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents and property owners of Cumru Township. The regulations shall supplement and not replace the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance and/or where the supplemental regulations contained within Article 9 impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions established under Article 9 shall prevail. 


Section 902: Access to Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses 
(A) 
Every building and structure hereafter erected or moved shall be located on a lot adjacent to a public street or an approved private street.  The buildings and structures shall be so located on the lots in such a manner to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles and off-street parking. 

(B) 	
Unless specifically stated otherwise within this Zoning Ordinance, no more than one (1) principal building, structure or use of land shall be permitted or erected on a single lot. 

(C) 	
Where more than one (1) principal uses is permitted, the property shall either be subdivided to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or be capable of being subdivided to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The Board of Commissioners shall determine the requirements for subdivision. 

(D) 	
Private streets shall not be extended to accommodate additional land uses unless such extension complies with all pertinent codes and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(E) 	
The provisions relating to the accessibility to lots, structures and uses are specified within this Zoning Ordinance. In addition to these provisions, accessibility must be provided and maintained in accordance with all pertinent state and federal requirements for code enforcement, construction, emergency management and property maintenance.  


Section 903: Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Residential lots containing accessory buildings, structures and uses, including any garages, carports, decks, patios, terraces, gazebos, greenhouses, utility sheds, storage sheds, tennis courts, domestic animal shelter, or other similar accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 903.1 of this Zoning Ordinance.  

(B) 	
Non-residential lots containing accessory buildings, structures and uses, including any garages, storage facilities, pole barns, farm building, greenhouses, supplemental uses, recreation facilities, or other similar accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply with the provisions specified under Section 903.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for accessory uses and structure, as specified under Section 903.1 and 903.2 shall be considered as minimum standards for compliance with this Zoning Ordinance.  The landowner shall be responsible to obtain all other permits and/or approvals that may be required for code enforcement, erosion and sedimentation control, stormwater management, utility services, and other provisions required by other local, state or federal agencies.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 245 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 903.1: Residential Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Residential lots containing a permitted residential dwelling unit shall comply with the following general provisions: 

(1) 	
The accessory building, structure or use shall be subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and utilized as an accessory use on the lot occupied by the principal building. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, the accessory building, structure or use shall not be located in the front yard.  The accessory building and structure shall be located within the side yard or rear yard of the property, or behind the front facade of the residential use. 

(3) 	
Setback provisions may apply for certain accessory buildings and structures for a residential use.  Where setback provisions are not specified, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply for residential uses: the front yard setback shall be forty (40) feet; the side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet; and the rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(4) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the building coverage calculations for the lot and zoning district to which it is located.  The cumulative building coverage shall not exceed the maximum building coverage requirements.  

(5) 	
The land area occupied by the residential accessory building or structure shall account towards the impervious surface ratio calculations for the lot and zoning district to which it is located.  The cumulative impervious coverage shall not exceed the maximum impervious coverage requirements. 

(6) 	
The maximum building coverage requirements and/or maximum impervious coverage requirements may be expanded by twenty-five (25) percent over the permitted requirements in order to accommodate accessory building and structures on a residential lot provided that a special exception is granted and that the applicant demonstrates that the additional coverage will not create any adverse problems relating to stormwater management. 

(7) 	
The maximum height of any accessory building or structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 

(8) 	
No permanent residential accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the commencement of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory component. 



(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to attached residential garages, detached residential garages or carports in all zoning districts: 

(1) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports shall be calculated as part of the building coverage for the lot.  The cumulative building coverage shall not exceed the maximum building coverage requirements for the lot and zoning district to which it is located. 

(2) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports shall be calculated as part of the impervious coverage for the lot.  The cumulative impervious coverage shall not exceed the maximum impervious coverage requirements for the lot and zoning district to which it is located. 

(3) 	
Attached residential garages, detached residential garages, and/or carports located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district to which they are located. 

(4) 	
Attached residential garages or detached residential garages on a lot occupied by a single-family attached dwelling, single-family semi-detached dwelling, townhouse, or other dwelling having a common lot line may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project onto the adjacent property and they are located at least ten (10) feet from the rear lot line. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to utility sheds, storage sheds, pole buildings and gazebos: 

(1) 	
Utility sheds, storage sheds, and gazebos located on a residential lot within the MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts shall comply with the following provisions: 

(a) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds may be erected in the rear yard and side yard, provided it is located at least five (5) feet from the property line and provided the utility shed or storage shed does not exceed one hundred-forty (140) square feet in floor area. 

(b) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds exceeding one hundred-forty (140) square feet in floor area shall comply with the minimum side yard and rear yard requirement for the zoning district to which the utility shed or storage shed is located. 

(c) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 

(d) 	
No more than two (2) utility sheds or storage sheds shall be permitted per lot. 

(e) 	
No utility sheds or storage sheds shall be permitted within a multi-family development consisting of townhouses, condominiums or apartment, unless they have been designed as a uniform feature within the development. 

(f) 	
All utility sheds or storage sheds shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the manufacture’s specifications and the building codes of Cumru Township. 

(g) 	
Gazebos may be permitted on a lot occupied by a residential use provided it is located in a manner to comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district to which the gazebo is located. 



(2) 	
Utility sheds, storage sheds, pole buildings and gazebos located on a residential lot within the AG, RC, LR, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts shall comply with the following provisions: 

(a) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds may be erected in the rear yard and side yard, provided it is located at least ten (10) feet from the property line and provided the utility shed or storage shed does not exceed one hundred-forty (140) square feet in floor area. 

(b) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds exceeding one hundred-forty (140) square feet in floor area shall comply with the minimum side yard and rear yard requirement for the zoning district to which the utility shed or storage shed is located. 

(c) 	
Utility shed or storage sheds shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area. 

(d) 	
Utility sheds or storage sheds shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 

(e) 	
No more than three (3) utility sheds or storage sheds shall be permitted per lot. 

(f) 	
No utility sheds or storage sheds shall be permitted within a multi-family development consisting of townhouses, condominiums or apartment, unless they have been designed as a uniform feature within the development. 

(g) 	
All utility sheds or storage sheds shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the manufactures specifications and the building codes of Cumru Township. 

(h) 	
Pole buildings may be located on a lot occupied by a residential use provided that it shall comply with the building setback and coverage requirements of the underlying zoning district and does not exceed a height of twenty five (25) feet. No more than one (1) pole building shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a residential use. 

(i) 	
Gazebos may be permitted on a lot occupied by a residential use provided it is located in a manner to comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district to which the gazebo is located. 

(j) 	
The provisions specified under Section 903.2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply to lots within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts that are occupied by non­residential uses. 





(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to decks, patios and terraces: 

(1) 	
Decks, patios and terraces located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district to which they are located. 

(2) 	
Decks, patios and terraces located on a lot occupied by a single-family semi-detached dwelling or townhouse dwelling may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project onto another property and comply with the remaining setback requirements. 

(3) 	
Decks, patios and/or terraces located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit, single-family semi-detached dwelling or townhouse dwelling may be covered provided that it is in accordance with all building code requirements. 

(4) 	
Decks, patios and terraces located on a lot occupied by a townhouse dwelling may only be located in the rear yard and subject to the following provisions: 

(a) 	
The deck, patio or terrace may be located along the lot line or in the case where a townhouse dwelling is not located on a fee-simple lot, an imaginary line extending from the common wall of any contiguous townhouse dwelling units 

(b) 	
Unless otherwise designed as a uniform feature within the development, no patio, deck, terrace or similar structure shall be enclosed or under roof. 

(c) 	
If a patio, deck or similar structure extends into the side yard setback or rear yard setback otherwise required by this chapter, no other accessory structure shall be located closer to the patio, deck, similar structure or lot line than the permitted setback for an accessory structure. 

(d) 	
No patio, deck or similar structure shall extend into the minimum space required between any townhouse building faces otherwise required by this chapter. 

(e) 	
A patio, deck or similar structure which meets the requirements of this chapter shall be included in the determination of the impervious surface ratio and the building coverage for the lot.  Where designed and planned as a unified development, the cumulative total impervious surface ratio and cumulative total building coverage shall also apply. 





(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to non-commercial greenhouses: 

(1) 	
Non-commercial greenhouses located on a lot occupied by a single-family detached dwelling unit shall comply with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 

(2) 	
All non-commercial greenhouses shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet per acre of land and shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) cumulative square feet in total gross covered floor area occupied by all of the non-commercial green houses located on the property. 



(F) 	
Domestic animal shelters or housing units may be permitted provided that the structure is located at least ten (10) feet from the side or rear property line. 

(G) 	
Permanent non-commercial recreation facilities, structures and uses, including but not limited to, tennis courts, hockey rinks, skateboard facilities, basketball courts, and other similar accessory facilities, structures or uses exceeding a cumulative playing surface area of one thousand (1,000) square feet shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear or side property lines.  The exterior lighting facilities for all such non-commercial recreation facilities, structures or uses shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all property lines, which shall be directed downward to the playing surface area and shielded to prevent light spillage onto adjacent properties. 

(H) 	
Fences, walls and hedges shall comply with the provisions specified by Section 910 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Private non-commercial in-ground or above-ground swimming pools, which are located on a residential lot, shall comply with the provisions of Section 920 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(J) 	
Private non-commercial in-ground or above-ground hot tubs or therapeutically spas, which are located on a residential lot, shall comply with the provisions of Section 920 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(K) 	
Private free standing satellite receiving dishes or telecommunication devices shall be mounted at ground level and shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from any property lines. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 246 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 247 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 248 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 903.2: Non-Residential Accessory Uses and Structures 
(A) 	
Non-residential lots containing a permitted non-residential use shall comply with the following general provisions: 

(1) 	
The accessory building, structure or use shall be subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal building and utilized as an accessory use on the lot occupied by the principal building. 

(2) 	
All accessory buildings, structures or uses shall comply with all building setback and coverage requirements for the underlying zoning district to which it is located. 

(3) 	
Setback provisions shall apply to accessory buildings and structures for a non-residential uses.  Where setback provisions are not specified, the following minimum setback requirements shall apply for residential uses: the front yard setback shall be forty (40) feet; the side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet; and the rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. 

(4) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the building coverage calculations for the lot and zoning district to which it is located. 

(5) 	
The land area occupied by the accessory building or structure shall account towards the impervious surface ratio calculations for the lot and zoning district to which it is located. 

(6) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the maximum height of any non-residential accessory building or structure shall be thirty (30) feet. 

(7) 	
No permanent residential accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the commencement of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory component. 



(B) 	
Storage facilities are permitted provided that such facilities are located in areas, which have direct access to a public street or driveway.  The outdoor storage of materials shall be screened from the view of adjacent properties with a berm, trees, landscaping materials and/or fence. 

(C) 	
Restaurants, cafeterias and/or recreational facilities are permitted provided they are intended for the use of employees only, unless they are permitted as principal uses in the district in which they are constructed. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 249 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 904: Residential Conversions 
(A) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a special exception the conversion of any single-family detached dwelling into a dwelling for not more than two (2) families, provided that the tract or lot is located within the LC Zoning District. 

(B) 	
As part of the special exception application, the applicant shall demonstrate that the residential conversion shall comply with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The minimum lot area per family shall not be reduced to less than the minimum lot area that is required for a single family dwelling in the zoning district in which the residential conversion is located. 

(2) 	
The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the appropriate zoning district shall not be reduced. 

(3) 	
The maximum building coverage and lot coverage requirements for the appropriate zoning district shall not be exceeded. 

(4) 	
The residential uses are serviced by public sewage disposal facilities, whereas, separate utility connections shall be required, which comply with the requirements of the Cumru Township Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The residential uses are serviced by public water supply facilities or on-lot water supply facilities with sufficient capacities, whereas, separate utility connections may be required by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 

(6) 	
The residential conversion shall take place within a building capable of accommodating two (2) families. The applicant shall demonstrate that the building has relatively little economic value or usefulness as a single-family detached dwelling. 

(7) 	
The building can be altered and improved to comply with all building code requirements. The applicant shall provide documentation to the Zoning Hearing Board, Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer and Sewage Enforcement Officer that all plumbing, heating, electrical, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and similar facilities comply with all applicable ordinances, regulations, codes and laws specified by Cumru Township and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(8) 	
Each residential unit shall contain independent washing and bathing facilities as well as a complete kitchen with cooking facilities to accommodate the tenants. 

(9) 	
At least two (2) off-street parking spaces are provided for each unit, which are designed to comply with the provisions of Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
There shall be no external alterations of the building, unless it is required for safety, structural durability, accessibility, architectural enhancement, or as permitted by Cumru Township. 



(C) 	
If the residential conversion is permitted, the Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe such further conditions with respect to the conversion and use of such building as it deems appropriate. 

(D) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the subdivision plan, land development plan and/or zoning permit. 

(E) 	
All residential conversions shall be subject to an annual inspection by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer and Sewage Enforcement Officer.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 250 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 905: Height Exceptions 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance, the building height limitations contained within this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to chimneys, spires, belfries, cupolas, farm buildings, silos, greenhouse ventilators, antennas (not in combination with support towers), water tanks, solar energy collectors, windmills, and other similar appurtenances, which are usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 

(B) 	
The projection of the exempted structures specified within Section 905(A) may be increased to a maximum height of fifty (50) feet provided that the height of the exempted structure is not greater than the distance to any property line, as measured from the exempted structure to any property line. 

(C) 	
The height exceptions specified within this Section of the Zoning Ordinance shall be consistent with the provisions specified by state and federal aviation laws.  Where conflicts should arise, the provisions of the state or federal aviation law shall be upheld. 


Section 906: Front Yard and Lot Width Exceptions 
(A) 	
When an unimproved lot is situated between two (2) improved lots with front yard dimensions less than those required for the zoning district in which the unimproved lot is located, the front yard required for the unimproved lot may be reduced to a depth equal to the average of the two (2) adjoining lots; provided, however, that this provision shall only apply in such cases where the improved lots in question are improved as of the time of the adoption of the Ordinance and the improvements are located within one hundred (100) feet of the unimproved lot.  For the purpose of this section, an unimproved lot shall be the same as a vacant lot and an improved lot shall be one on which a principal building is erected. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, all residential and non-residential lots shall comply with the appropriate minimum lot width requirement for that use in the zoning district to which it is located, as measured at the street line, legal right-of-way line, ultimate right-of-way line (where it exists) and the building setback line.  The following lot width exceptions shall be permitted: 

(1) 	
Where single-family residential lots are created along the bulb of a cul-de-sac street, the minimum lot width may be reduced by fifty (50) percent of the required lot width at the street line, provided the that the minimum lot width requirement is established at the building setback line, as measure from the street right-of-way line to a point equivalent to the front yard setback requirement, which is specified by the appropriate zoning district in which the single family detached dwelling is located. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, no more than four (4) single family lots shall be located along the bulb of a cul-de-sac street. 

(3) 	
Where single-family residential lots are created along a street curve with a horizontal radius exceeding one hundred-fifty (150) feet, as measured along the street centerline, the minimum lot width may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent of the required lot width, provided the that the minimum lot width requirement is established at the building setback line, as measure from the street right-of-way line to a point equivalent to the front yard setback requirement, which is specified by the appropriate zoning district in which the single family detached dwelling is located.  The side lot lines should be established at ninety (90) degree angles to the street line tangents or radial to the street line curves. 



(C) 	
The Zoning Officer shall review and authorize all front yard and lot width exceptions in accordance with the provisions established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance.  All such permitted exemptions shall be noted on the zoning permit, subdivision plan and/or land development plan. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 251 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 907: Flag Lots or Key Hole Lots 
(A) 	
Flag lots or key hole lots are permitted as single family detached lots within the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts, subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Flag lots shall only be permitted within residential developments containing ten (10) or fewer lots, which are designed to accommodate single family detached dwelling units. 

(2) 	
No more that two (2) flag lots shall be permitted as a result of the overall subdivision and/or cumulative phases of the development.  In all cases, the applicant must demonstrate that the following site conditions exist: 

(a) 	
The tract of land cannot be subdivided in a manner to comply with the minimum lot width and area requirements for the zoning district in which the flag lot is located. 

(b) 	
The tract of land represents the total contiguous land area owned by the applicant. 

(c) 	
The tract of land cannot be further subdivided in the future by normal or typical design. 

(d) 	
The tract of land cannot be properly subdivided due to the presence of certain physical or environmental development constraints associated with the site. 

(e) 	
The configuration of the proposed lots will not limit the potential for development on adjacent tracts of land in the future. 





(B) 	
If the applicant demonstrates that the site conditions are amenable to the development of a flag lot, the subdivision shall be designed considering the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The access strip or stem of the flag lot shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(a) 	
The access strip or stem of the flag lot shall be owned fee simple and extended from an existing public street to the rear property line of the flag lot. 

(b) 	
The width of the access strip or stem shall be a minimum of fifty-four (54) feet. Additional width may be required by Cumru Township in order to overcome problems associated with slope, drainage and/or sedimentation. 

(c) 	
A reduction in the width of the access strip or stem, if the applicant can demonstrate that it will not be utilized by more than one (1) principal use or party and that there will be no adverse problems associated with slope, drainage and/or sedimentation. In such cases, the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners may authorize a reduction in width to thirty (30) feet.  

(d) 	
The unimproved portion of the access strip or stem shall be properly graded and stabilized. Where appropriate, an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be developed and implemented by the landowner. 

(e) 	
The fifty-four (54) foot wide access strip or stem shall be utilized as a future right-of-way to permit the construction of a public or private street.  If additional lots are created and/or if additional lots utilize the access strip or stem for ingress and egress purposes, the fifty-four (54) foot wide access strip shall be improved to comply with the design standards and specifications for a public street.   



(2) 	
The net lot area for each flag lot shall meet or exceed the minimum lot area for the zoning district to which the flag lot is located.  The area of the access strip or stem shall not be included as part of the net lot area for the flag lot. 

(3) 	
The building setback line for the flag lot shall meet the minimum required setback dimensions for the zoning district in which the flag lot is located.  The setback lines shall be established at the flag portion of the lot. The front yard depth or setback shall be measured from the access strip or stem (extended through the lot) and from the rear property line.  All other setback requirements shall comply with the rear yard setback provisions. 

(4) 	
The driveway serving the flag lot shall comply with all pertinent standards and specifications for driveways, as specified by Cumru Township and by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, common driveways shall be prohibited as part of a flag lot design.  



(C) 	
If the tract of land contains any residue or undeveloped land area, the applicant shall submit a sketch plan or a preliminary plan depicting how the remaining area will be developed or perpetually preserved as open space. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 252 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 

Section 908: Visibility at Street Intersections 
(A) 	
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections.  Within such triangles, nothing, except permitted street signs, traffic lights or signs, utility poles and mail boxes, which impedes vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow.  Such triangles shall be established as follows: 

(1) 	
For intersections involving a minor street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(2) 	
For intersections involving a collector street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred (100) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(3) 	
For intersections involving an arterial street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 



(B) 	
The functional classifications of all existing streets within Cumru Township are identified within this Zoning Ordinance, the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and /or by transportation plans that have been adopted by Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
No fence, wall and/or hedge shall be erected or planted within or encroaching upon the legal or ultimate street right­of-way. 


Section 909: Corner Lot Restrictions and Requirements 
(A) 	
For all corner lots, as defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, the minimum lot width and front yard setback requirements of the zoning district to which the corner lot is located shall be applied to each street on which the corner lot has frontage. 

(B) 	
In cases in which a pre-existing lot of record is changed or converted into a corner lot, as the result of an adjacent subdivision or land development, the front yard of the pre-existing lot shall be established along the public street to which it originally had frontage as well as along the proposed or new road to which it will have frontage.  All other setback requirements shall conform with the appropriate side and rear yard setback requirements for the zoning district to which the pre-existing lot is located. 

(C) 	
All corner lots shall comply with the provisions established for visibility at street intersections, as provided under Section 908 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 253 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 910: Fences, Walls and Hedges 
(A) 	
Fences, walls and/or hedges may be permitted within and along the periphery of any required yard provided: 

(1) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, no fence, wall and/or hedge shall be erected or planted within or encroaching upon the legal or ultimate street right-of-way, floodway, utility easement or drainage easement. 

(2) 	
No fence, wall and/or hedge shall be erected in any manner that obstructs a clear line of sight or vision from a driveway or street intersection. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, all fences and walls utilized for a residential use shall not exceed a maximum height of three (3) feet within the front yard and eight (8) feet within the side yard or rear yard. 

(4) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, all fences and walls utilized for a non-residential use shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. 

(5) 	
Fences and walls shall be constructed so as to place structural members toward the property being enclosed by the fence, thereby presenting the best appearance towards adjacent property. 

(6) 	
Security fencing for non-residential uses and agricultural uses may be utilized within the AG, RC, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(7) 	
An existing fence or wall replaced in its entirety shall comply with the provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
All permitted fences and walls shall be constructed out of durable building materials and shall be installed and erected in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer.  

(9) 	
Ordinary and normal maintenance and/or repairs of a fence or wall in any zoning district shall not require the issuance of a permit. Otherwise, a permit shall be required for any fence installation or wall construction, as specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(10) 	
Any fence or wall, which in the judgment of the Zoning Officer is unsafe, dangerous, or a threat to the public health, safety and/or welfare shall be removed, repaired or replaced as determined necessary by the Zoning Officer at the expense of the property owner. 

(11) 	
Fences or walls erected on property that is dedicated to private or public open space shall comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance. 



(B) 	
The following wall and/or fences shall be exempt from the provisions established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance: 

(1) 	
Fences and walls used for agricultural and recreational purposes to contain livestock, provided that they do not hinder visibility or pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 

(2) 	
Fences and walls of an historic nature, which are accessory to an officially designated historic structure. 

(3) 	
Buried electronic fences used to control pets, provided that they do not emit radiation, which would pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.   



(C) 	
Prior to the installation of any fence, wall or hedge row, the landowner should verify the limits of the property lines that may be in question.  In situations where the property line is in doubt, the Zoning Officer may require the property owner to have a professional land surveyor determine and mark the property line in question. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 254 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 911: Projections Into Yards 
(A) 	
The following projections shall be permitted into required yards and shall not be considered in the determination of the lot coverage requirements: 

(1) 	
A lawful building erected prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, which encroaches into the required side yard established for that district may be further extended into the rear yard, provided that the building extension is contiguous to the existing building and provided that the building extension maintains at a minimum the rear yard setback established for that zoning district. 

(2) 	
A porch abutting the frontage of a building, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height nor sixteen (16) feet in width may be extended by not more than five (5) feet into the front yard with unenclosed sides except for four (4) columns, which support a roof limited to the dimensions of the porch plus an 18 inch projection on any side for cornices, eaves or gutters. 

(3) 	
A porch abutting the side of a building, not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height nor sixteen (16) feet in width may be extended by not more than five (5) feet into the side yard with unenclosed sides except for four (4) columns, which support a roof limited to the dimensions of the porch plus an eighteen (18) inch projection on any side for cornices, eaves or gutters.  In such cases, the porch shall be located at least five 

(5) feet from the property line. 

(4) 	
Porches, decks, terraces or patios located within the rear yard of a single family semi-detached dwellings, multi-family townhouse units and multi-family apartment units may be located along the common lot line, provided that they do not project into the rear yard setback. 

(5) 	
A porch, deck, terrace or patio, which does not extend above the first floor elevation or contains a roof, may be erected into a required yard for a distance of not more than one-half the distance of the side yard or rear yard setback.  In cases where a common wall or property line are not relevant, the porch, deck, terrace or patio shall be located at least 10 feet from the property line. 

(6) 	
A carport may be erected over an existing driveway provided that the carport is located in a manner to comply with all setback requirements for that zoning district. 

(7) 	
A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project not more than two (2) feet into a required yard setback. 

(8) 	
Open balconies, steps, fire escapes, basement door units, bay windows, eaves, window sills, and other similar architectural features or structures may project into the required yard provided that such features shall project no more than five (5) feet into any required yard.  In all such cases, the projection shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to a property line. 



(B) 	
In situations where the property line is in doubt, the Zoning Officer may require the property owner to have a professional land surveyor determine and mark the precise limits of the property line in question. 


Section 912: Development Along Existing Public Roads 
(A) 
Where determined appropriate by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, accessibility to a public street may be restricted, limited or required by one or more of the following methods: 

(1) 	
Provisions of marginal access street or internal street system to provide proper frontage for the proposed lots, which shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
Provisions of marginal access street or internal street system to provide rear access for the proposed reverse frontage lots, which shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
The restriction of ingress and egress involving specific turning movements onto or off of a collector street or arterial street.  



(B) 	
Private streets shall be prohibited unless they are designed, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of a private street or minor street, as further specified by Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
Where a subdivision or land development application abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width or cartway width, the applicant shall dedicate additional right-of-way and improve the cartway to conform with the provisions of Cumru Township or as directed by the Board of Commissioners. 

(D) 	
Where a subdivision or land development application abuts or existing street of inadequate horizontal and/or vertical alignment, the applicant shall dedicate additional right-of-way and improve the street segment to conform with the provisions of Cumru Township or as directed by the Board of Commissioners. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 255 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 913: Common Open Space 
(A) 
The overall intent of these provisions is to supplement and not replace the provisions identified in those zoning districts where the designation of open space is explicitly applicable and further, to identify related use regulations and performance for land to be held for recreational use and/or for conservation, preservation or enhancement of natural and cultural resources. These provisions are designed to: 

(1) 	
Provide an effective means for identifying, organizing and maintaining open space. 

(2) 	
Provide for necessary active and passive recreation areas to complement existing open space and recreational uses. 

(3) 	
Preserve the natural and environmental resources while maintaining ecological stability by:  encouraging the preservation of floodplains; limiting the development of steep slopes; protecting the quality of existing watercourses, ponds, lakes and other water bodies, including riparian buffers; encouraging the preservation of groundwater resources through the provision of open space areas for groundwater recharge; and avoiding the disruption of woodland and forest areas. 

(4) 	
Encourage the preservation of existing and potential agricultural land through the identification and use of open space lands, which are suited for agricultural production, particularly prime agricultural land. 

(5) 	
Preserve historic and cultural resources by:  promoting the preservation of significant historical and cultural sites and structures as open space; protecting the character of historic and cultural sites and structures by encouraging the designation of surrounding land as open space; and by implementing the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  



(B) 	
All land and water areas designated as common open space within Cumru Township shall comply with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All residential developments requiring common open space shall comply with the appropriate provisions established under Article 7 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
All non-residential developments requiring common open space shall comply with the appropriate provisions established under Article 8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Where residential or non-residential developments do not specifically require common open space, as defined under Articles 7 and 8 of this Zoning Ordinance, the residential or non-residential development 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 256 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
shall be subject to the provisions established under this section of the Zoning Ordinance, as well as those other applicable provisions established by Cumru Township. 
(4) 	
The requirements for common open space, as specified under this Zoning Ordinance, does not relieve any person, applicant or developer from the mandatory requirements for dedication of open space for recreation purposes or recreation impact fees in lieu of land dedication or any combination thereof, as permitted under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and as adopted by Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
All areas designated as common open space shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township.  


(C) 	
The following uses shall be permitted within areas designated as common open space: 

(1) 	
Recreation uses, subject to the provisions of Section 844 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Conservation uses or areas to preserve woodland and forest areas, lakes, ponds, streams, floodplains, wetlands, seasonal pools and other related landscape features.   

(3) 	
Agricultural uses, subject to the provisions of Section 804 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Municipal uses, subject to the provisions of Section 838 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Culturally and/or historically significant uses, as determined appropriate by the Board of Commissioners. 



(D) 	
Unless otherwise required by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, the land and water areas designated as common open space shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The minimum area required or the percentage of the gross area to be set aside as common open space shall meet or exceed the requirement established by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands within areas that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas exceeding twenty (20) percent in slope. 

(3) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities, as further described by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Existing and/or proposed roads may bisect the areas designated as common open space, provided a cross walk at grade is safely designed to link the common open space areas.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of any subdivision or land development application. 

(5) 	
Significant natural features shall be incorporated into the overall schematic of the design as common open space areas whenever possible. 

(6) 	
A system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall be provided by utilizing sidewalks and trails. 

(7) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required common open space. 



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the ownership and maintenance of the areas designated as common open space: 

(1) 	
For all common open spaces, satisfactory written agreements approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, and shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(2) 	
The applicant or developer shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant or developer shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development. 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication. 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation organization, as determined appropriate by the Board of Commissioners. 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities. 



(3) 	
The selected options for the ownership, management and maintenance of the land and water areas, which are designated as common open space, shall be subject to the review by the Cumru Township Solicitor and subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners. 



(F) 	
The provisions specified herein for common open space do not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation, recreation impact fees, and/or other provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 257 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 

Section 914: Landscaping 
(A) 
Where zoning district or development regulations require landscaping, street trees, replacement trees, buffer yards, screening and/or planting strips, the applicant shall prepare and submit a landscaping plan in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The plant materials utilized for a landscaping plan shall be selected from the approved list, as contained within the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  


Section 915: Temporary Structures and Uses 
(A) 	
A temporary permit shall be issued for the authorization of temporary structures or uses necessary during construction, renovations, remediation, moving or other special circumstances of a discontinuing nature. 

(B) 	
The time period of the initial permit shall be one (1) year, which may be renewed for one (1) year time periods up to and not exceeding two (2) years from the time the original temporary permit was issued. 

(C) 	
The temporary structure(s) shall be removed completely within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the permit without cost to Cumru Township. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 258 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 916: Outdoor Storage 
(A) 	
Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage conforms to the normal functions and procedures conducted on the premises.  Outdoor storage of any type that is not a normal function of the property or permitted use shall be prohibited, if such storage is considered as unsightly, malodorous, hazardous to the environment and potentially detrimental to the health and safety of the adjacent property owners.  The provisions specified by the International Property Maintenance Code shall also apply. 

(B) 	
The materials to be stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence and planting screen to conceal the storage facilities from the view of adjacent properties.  The fence and planting screen shall be subject to the review and approval by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
The location of the permitted materials to be stored outside as well as any required fence enclosure shall comply with the minimum setback provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. 

(D) 	
Any lot, land or structure, or parts thereof, used for the collection, storage, dismantling, salvage, sale, exchange and/or recycling of used and discarded materials, including, but not limited to, waste, paper, rags, glass, containers, fabric, debris, and similar material from vehicles, equipment or machinery shall be considered as a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 831 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The provisions specified by the International Property Maintenance Code shall also apply. 

(E) 	
The deposit or storage of two (2) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be deemed to be a "junk yard" or “salvage yard”, which as a result of being classified of such use shall conform with the provisions of Section 831 of this Zoning Ordinance. The provisions specified by the International Property Maintenance Code shall also apply.  

(F) 	
The storage of licensed, functional or operational equipment and vehicles utilized as part of a non-residential use within the AG, RC, HC and GI Zoning Districts shall be permitted, provided that the equipment or vehicles are not exclusively part of a junk yard or salvage yard operation in Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
The storing or parking of automobiles for sale shall not be located within any street right-of-way and shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all other property lines. 

(H) 	
No materials or waste shall be deposited on site in such form or manner by which it can be transported off the site by natural causes or forces. 

(I) 	
No exterior storage of a substance, which has the potential to contaminate groundwater or surface water, shall be permitted unless the owner provides and installs safeguards, which are satisfactory to Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.  All such protective safeguards shall be subject to the review and approval by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(J) 	
Unless otherwise specifically approved or permitted for the non-residential use, commercial outdoor sales of merchandise shall be prohibited.  Commercial outdoor sales may be permitted for those non-residential uses whose merchandise are customarily displayed outdoors, provided the use has been designated on an approved land development plan or occupancy permit. 


Section 917: Prohibited Uses 
(A) 	
No building or structure may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may be used, for any activity which is continuously noxious, injurious or offensive by reason of dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, gas, effluent discharge, illumination or similar substances or conditions. 

(B) 	
No building, structure, land, watercourses, or parts thereof within Cumru Township shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed, assembled, moved, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered unless in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 918: Hazardous Conditions and Areas 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 259 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
(A) 	
Within Cumru Township, certain land and/or water areas may be considered hazardous in terms of their condition or potential use.  These hazardous areas may include: mine holes; quarries; sinkholes; waterways; caves; areas of naturally occurring physical features; areas of naturally occurring minerals or chemicals; areas containing hazardous, contaminated or toxic waste; solid waste disposal facilities; wastewater treatment facilities; and/or other areas considered hazardous by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer or other professional consultants appointed by Cumru Township.  Based upon their presence, these hazardous areas could endanger the public health, safety or welfare by presenting potential hazards to life, health or property. 

(B) 	
Where hazardous areas have been identified by the appropriate local, county, state or federal agency, the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
No occupied building, well or sewage disposal system shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of an identified hazardous area, except as noted within this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
An occupied building, well or sewage disposal system may be located within five hundred (500) feet of an identified hazardous area, provided that a sufficient number of excavations, borings, soil probes and/or groundwater tests have been conducted within the area to determine that the soil, geology and/or groundwater conditions are not considered hazardous to the occupant(s).  The accuracy of all test results and/or conclusions shall be certified by a qualified professional, as determined to have the appropriate qualification and credentials by Cumru Township.  All wells located within five hundred (500) feet of the hazardous area shall be re-tested every two (2) years by a certified laboratory to determine if the water is potable.  All costs incurred for the sampling and laboratory analysis shall be incurred by the landowner. 



(C) 	
The hazardous areas shall continue to be considered as a hazardous area until the Board of Commissioners determine that the hazards have been sufficiently mitigated or adequate safeguards against such hazards have been provided, as recommended, approved or permitted by the appropriate local, county, state or federal agencies. 



Section 919: Exterior Lighting 
(A) 
This section sets forth minimum criteria for the installation, use and maintenance of exterior lighting, the purposes of which are to require lighting in outdoor public places where safety and security are concerns; protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby streets from glare from non-vehicular light sources that shine directly into their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; shield neighboring properties from glare resulting from excessive light sources and from nonexistent or improperly directed or shielded light sources; limit the height of light standards to preclude or lessen light pollution; and promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation. 

(B) 	
Lighting facilities shall be required for all off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas and for all driveways providing ingress and egress thereto and for all subdivisions and/or land developments for business, commercial, retail, personal service, industrial, multi-family, recreational, institutional and public uses, and for all construction or reconstruction or improvement of any such use for which land development approval is not required. In the approval of any subdivision or land development plan, Cumru Township shall have the authority to require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations where in their reasonable discretion such lighting is warranted. In addition, the provisions of this section shall apply to signs, architectural lighting, and landscape lighting. 

(C) 	
Where required by Cumru Township to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, a lighting plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the following criteria:  

(1) 	
A lighting plan shall be submitted for review and approval for all applications and uses, which require exterior lighting. 

(2) 	
The lighting plan shall include a schematic layout of all proposed exterior fixture locations, footcandle data, and a plat demonstrating intensities and uniformities within the limitations established within this Zoning Ordinance, as well as the manufacturer's description of the equipment (catalog cuts), glare control devices, lamps, mounting heights and means, proposed hours of operation of the lighting, and maintenance schedule. Illumination intensities shall be plotted on a ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan and the provision for adequate measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution and disabling glare, both on the use or development site and on adjacent properties.   



(D) 	
The lighting plan shall be prepared to comply with the provisions specified within the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 260 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 920: Swimming Pools and Therapeutic Spas 
(A) 	
Private non-commercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more, that are utilized for the purpose of swimming and bathing shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The pool shall be considered as an impervious surface and applied to the maximum impervious surface ratio permitted on the lot for which it is located. 

(2) 	
The swimming pool, filters, pumps and other mechanical or structural equipment shall only be permitted within the side yard or rear yard of a lot, and shall comply with the following setback requirements: 

(a) 	
Swimming pools shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for properties located within the MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts. 

(b) 	
Swimming pools located within the AG, RC, LR, HC, OC and GI Districts shall comply with the side yard and rear yard setback requirements. 



(3) 	
Any flood lighting or other illumination used in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners. 

(4) 	
The swimming pool shall be enclosed by a secured fence or barrier and shall be equipped with a self-latching gate, which shall comply with the specifications of the appropriate building codes of Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
All swimming pools shall comply with the appropriate provisions for permits, construction, plumbing, sanitation, inspection, operation and maintenance, which are further defined and outlined by Cumru Township 

(6) 	
The pool shall be used or intended to be used in connection with a residential use and available only to the family of the householder and their private guests. 



(B) 	
Public, community or commercial swimming pools, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more, shall be considered an active or commercial recreation use, which shall comply with the provisions of Section 844 (Recreational Uses) of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs, which are designed to contain a water depth of twenty-four (24) inches or more shall comply with the following shall comply with the following standards and specifications: 

(1) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub, including the filters, pumps and other mechanical or structural equipment shall comply with the following setback requirements: 

(a) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs shall be located a minimum of five (5) from the side lot line and rear lot line for properties located within the HR Zoning District. 

(b) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line and rear lot line for properties located within the MR and LC Zoning Districts. 

(c) 	
Therapeutic spas or hot tubs located within the AG, RC, LR, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district to which use and the accessory therapeutic spa and hot tub is located. 



(2) 	
Any flood lighting or other illumination used in conjunction with the pool shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent property owners. 

(3) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a cover in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications of the manufacturer and the codes established by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The therapeutic spa or hot tub shall be used in connection with a permitted residential use and shall be available only to the family of the householder and their private guests. 



(D) 	
In addition to these provisions, the requirements for permits, construction, plumbing, sanitation, inspection, operation and maintenance, which are further regulated under the codes adopted by Cumru Township.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 261 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 921: Renewable Energy Systems 
(A) 	
Renewable energy systems, as further defined under Article 2 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted within all zoning districts by right as accessory structures, subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All developments and/or structures shall be oriented to the fullest extent possible to maximize the use of passive and/or active solar applications, as would be appropriate for the site. 

(2) 	
The renewable energy system may be utilized as a primary or alternative energy supply source, which provides service to a permitted use on the same lot. 

(3) 	
The maximum height of any renewable energy system shall be fifty (50) feet, which shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of the renewable energy system. 

(4) 	
All equipment, devices and structural components for the renewable energy system shall be located a minimum distance in a manner that cannot fall onto an adjoining neighboring.  The minimum separation distance from any property line shall be at least one hundred and ten (110) percent of the maximum height of the renewable energy system. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise specified, the renewable energy system shall be located, installed and maintained in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer.  Further, the renewable energy system shall comply with all pertinent building and energy codes. 

(6) 	
After the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, no one shall block, interfere or disrupt the functional operation of an existing renewable energy resource, including: erecting a building or other structure; planting a tree, shrub or other flora; disrupting the quantity or quality or surface water or groundwater; and blocking solar or wind resources.  



(B) 	
To obtain renewable energy resource protection, the renewable energy system shall file a statement with the Zoning Officer that the landowner of the renewable energy resource system has been installed. At such time, the landowner shall also obtain the appropriate permits from the agencies with jurisdiction in order to locate his renewable energy resource system on his property and to obtain maximum protection from future lawful buildings or structures located on adjoining properties.  In addition, the owner shall document the land and airspace, which must remain open to assure adequate solar access, water and/or wind to his renewable energy system.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 262 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 922: Filling, Excavating and Grading 
(A) 	
All construction and site improvement activities, which require the moving of earth or the filling or excavating of an area exceeding 5,000 square feet shall submit a plan to Cumru Township showing site grading and erosion control measures in accordance with the Cumru Township and the Berks County Conservation District. 

(B) 	
The existing grade of an area shall not be increased so that unstable slopes are created. 

(C) 	
The surface area of any yard adjacent to a building or structure shall be graded so that the surface water will be drained away from such structure as per code requirements. 

(D) 	
Topsoil shall not be stripped from any site within Cumru Township unless it is directly affiliated with the subdivision and/or development of land.  Unless permitted by Cumru Township, topsoil shall not be removed from any site. 

(E) 	
The on-site burial of trees, stumps or construction materials is prohibited in the MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts. Trees and stumps may be chipped or reduced in size to be removed from the site. 


Section 923: Blasting and Detonation Requirements 
(A) 
All general blasting and/or detonation operations shall conform with the regulations enforced by the applicable agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the federal government. 

(B) 	
Blasting and/or detonation operations for any purposes shall comply with all local, state and federal laws. 

(C) 	
The storage of explosives shall be in accordance with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(D) 	
Written notice of all blasting and/or detonation operations shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting and/or detonation to the Cumru Township Zoning Officer and to the occupants of all properties within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the location of the blasting and/or detonation.  In addition, notice shall be given to the local fire department and police department. 

(E) 	
All blasting and/or detonation operations shall be conducted by a qualified licensed contractor.  A copy of the license and certificate of insurance shall be provided to Cumru Township at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of blasting. 


Section 924: Mailboxes 
(A) 
Unless otherwise prohibited by local, state or federal requirements, private or community mailboxes may be permitted within the street right-of-way. 

(B) 	
The landowner shall be responsible for the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of a private mailbox. 

(C) 	
The landowner, homeowners association or other designated entity shall responsible for the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of a community mailbox. 

(D) 	
All private and community mailboxes shall be located, designed, constructed and erected to comply with all postal and federal government requirements.  

(E) 	
Cumru Township shall not be responsible for any damage made to a private or community mailbox as a result of regular maintenance duties and/or road projects. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 263 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 
Section 925: Domestic Pets and Non-Farm Animals 
(A) 	
Domestic pets and non-farm animals may be raised and kept provided they are not prohibited by local, state or federal laws. 

(B) 	
Domestic pets and non-farm animals shall be raised, kept, maintained and bred in accordance with the minimum guidelines specified by the Humane Society of Berks County, the Animal Rescue League of Berks County, or other agency having jurisdiction. 

(C) 	
Domestic pets and non-farm animals shall not be kept or raised to create adverse problems associated with the health, safety and general welfare of residents and landowners within Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
The provisions for private kennels are further specified under Section 832.1 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
The provisions for commercial kennels are further specified under Section 832.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 264 	Article 9:  Supplemental Regulations 


Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 1001: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to off-street loading, parking and access management. 

(B) 	
The provisions contained in Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance are intended to serve as minimum requirements to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents and property owners of Cumru Township. The regulations shall supplement and not replace other land use provisions established within this Zoning Ordinance. Where theses regulations impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions established under Article 10 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be upheld. 


Section 1002:   General Provisions for Off-Street Loading and Off-Street Parking 
(A) 	
Off-street loading and parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, whereas, the number, type, size, orientation and location of the off-street loading and parking spaces shall be satisfactorily designed to accommodate the use. 

(B) 	
The provisions for off-street loading shall apply to non-residential uses when a new non-residential use is established, changed or modified and/or when a building is constructed, enlarged or altered to accommodate the non­residential use.  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the off-street loading spaces shall comply with the design standards specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The provisions for off-street parking shall apply to residential and non-residential uses when a new use is established, changed or modified and/or when a building is constructed, enlarged or altered to accommodate the use. Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the off-street parking spaces shall comply with the design standards specified under Section 1004 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Where the lot area cannot accommodate the required number of off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces for the intended use, either the minimum lot area shall be enlarged or the intensity of the use shall be reduced. 

(E) 	
Where an existing building or use pre-exists the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions for off-street loading and off-street parking, as specified within this Article shall not specifically apply, unless the building or use is enlarged or altered in a manner that increases the demand for off-street loading or off-street parking. 

(F) 	
Where an existing building or use is enlarged by floor area, number of employees, number of residential units, seating capacity, bed spaces, service bays, or other provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the required number of off-street loading spaces and/or off-street parking spaces shall be proportionately or incrementally increased based upon the enlargement of the building or use. 

(G) 	
Where the computations for off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces results in a fractional number greater than ¼ or 0.25, the fractional number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.  The Cumru Township Zoning Officer shall determine or verify the number of off-street loading and parking spaces that are required for a specific use. 

(H) 	
No off-street loading space or off-street parking space shall be utilized for any other use that interferes with its purpose, availability or function. 

(I) 	
All designated off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces shall be continued and maintained so long as the use in which the spaces were originally designed for are still in operation or existence.  Unless otherwise approved by Cumru Township, the designated off-street loading spaces or off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced in size or modified in any manner. 

(J) 	
Common or joint off-street loading or parking spaces may be permitted for residential or non-residential uses, subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The total number of off-street parking spaces required for each permitted use shall be accounted for in the cumulative total for the common or joint off-street parking area. 

(2) 	
The residential or non-residential uses shall share common characteristics and will not have any adverse conflicts.  As part of this requirement, the applicant or developer shall demonstrate that the uses will not generate additional off-street parking demands from employees and patrons during peak hours of operation. 

(3) 	
The common or joint off-street loading or parking spaces shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the principal use(s). 

(4) 	
The individual property owners and/or tenants for each use shall secure a written agreement with the owner(s) of the property in which the common or joint off-street parking facilities are located.  The agreement shall clearly define the specific areas, conditions for use, maintenance, fees, and other terms that may be required by the Cumru Township Solicitor. 



(K) 	
Common or joint off-street loading spaces shall not be permitted.  Each use requiring an off-street loading space shall designate an area meeting the requirements for off-street loading, as specified under Section 1003 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(L) 	
Tractor trailer trucks, trailers from a tractor trailer truck, commercial vehicles exceeding 26,000 pounds and/or vehicles exceeding twenty (20) feet in length may park on an approved lot designated for a permitted use within the AG, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts, provided that the vehicles are properly licensed, registered and stored in an orderly manner on the lot.  No such vehicle should be located within the front yard or within ten (10) feet of the side or rear property line. 

(M) 	
No commercial vehicle or part thereof having a gross weight of more than 26,000 pounds or in excess of twenty (20) feet in length shall be stored or parked along a street or on a parcel of land within the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR and LC Zoning Districts for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours over any seven (7) day period.  All such vehicles shall comply with all pertinent local, state and federal laws. 

(N) 	
Major recreational equipment, including but not limited to boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers or similar equipment, shall not be parked or stored on any public street within Cumru Township.  All such major recreation equipment may be parked or stored on an approved lot, provided it is located as follows: within a carport; within a completely enclosed building; within the side or rear of a lot, but no closer than ten (10) feet to a property line; or on an non-residential lot, which has been previously approved for storing major recreational equipment. 

(O) 	
Unless otherwise permitted as part of the normal functions of a commercial campground or similar use, no major recreational equipment shall be utilized for living, housekeeping or similar activities, when parked or stored on any lot within Cumru Township.  

(P) 	
The deposit or storage of one (1) or more unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles shall not be permitted on any lot within Cumru Township for a period of time exceeding forty-eight (48) hours unless it is part of a permitted automobile repair establishment, junkyard or similar use determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer. The storage of unlicensed, non-inspected, abandoned, wrecked or disabled vehicles on any lot, parcel of land or public streets shall be subject to the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	265 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 1003:  Off-Street Loading Areas 
(A) 	Where required to accommodate a residential or non-residential use, paved off-street loading and unloading space(s) shall be provided with proper access from a public street, common driveway or alley.  All such areas for the loading and unloading of vehicles, and for the servicing of establishments or shops by refuse collection, fuel and other service vehicles, shall be of such size, design and arrangement that they may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of automobile accessways, parking facilities or pedestrian ways. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	266 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
(B) 	Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all loading areas and access drives shall be paved to accommodate the type of vehicles entering and exiting the site.  The paving composition shall comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
(C) 	The loading areas shall not be located within required front yards and shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any side or rear lot line.  All such spaces shall have dimensions not less than twelve (12) feet by forty five (45) feet with a clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet in height.  Alternative designs may be permitted by Cumru Township, provided that the applicant or landowner can demonstrate that the types of trucks that have access to the site do not require the prototypical dimensional requirement for loading and unloading. 
(D) 	The total number of off-street loading spaces shall be determined by the requirements specified on Matrix Chart 10. The required off-street loading spaces shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or required parking area. 
Off-Street Loading Space Requirements  (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  10)  
Land Use Category  Gross Floor Area or Units  Required Spaces  
Residential developments containing townhouse or apartment units  Less than 25 residential units  (1)  1  
26 to 100 residential units (2)  2  
100 to 300 residential units (2)  3  
More than 300 residential units  (2)  4  
Office Buildings, Banks and Financial Institutions  Less than 10,000 square feet  (1)  1  
10,000 to 20,000 square feet (2)  2  
Over 20,000 square feet  (2)  3  
Retail Sales, Professional Service Establishments, Restaurants, Shopping Centers, Mini-Malls and other Commercial Uses  Less than 5,000 square feet  (1)  1  
5,000 to 25,000 square feet (2)  2  
25,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  3  
Over 50,000 square feet  (2)  4  
Institutional and Recreational Uses  Less than 20,000 square feet  (1)  1  
20,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  2  
Over 50,000 square feet  (2)  3  
Manufacturing, Mini-Warehousing, Self-Storage Units, Warehousing , Wholesaling Establishments and other Industrial Uses  Less than 10,000 square feet  (1)  1  
10,000 to 50,000 square feet (2)  2  
50,000 to 100,000 square feet (2)  3  
Over 100,000 square feet (2)  4  
(1) Denotes that the off-street loading requirement may be reduced or eliminated if the applicant or developer provides documentation to Cumru Township that the use will not need or utilize the off-street loading space. (2) Denotes that the off-street loading requirement may be reduced or increased by Cumru Township depending upon the needs and intensity of the use.  

(E) 	Where Matrix Chart 10, as specified under Section 1003(D) of this Zoning Ordinance, does not specify a requirement for the land use activity, or the site conditions do not warrant the specified requirement contained within the table, the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners may consider and require an alternative provision. 
Section 1004: Off-Street Parking Areas 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	267 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
(A) 	
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided whenever: a building is constructed or new use established; the use of an existing building is changed to a use requiring more parking facilities; an existing building is altered so as to increase the amount of parking spaces required; and/or a residential or non-residential use requires off-street parking as specified by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, each off-street parking space shall have a minimum area of one hundred and eighty (180) square feet with the minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet.  In addition, driveways, aisles and maneuvering spaces shall be provided to permit safe and convenient access to and use of the area provided for parking purposes.  Proper access from a street, alley or driveway shall be provided. 

(C) 	
Off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use served.  Off-street parking spaces for other uses shall be provided for on the same lot as the use being served, or in parking facilities within four hundred (400) feet of the principal uses, except in the case of a shopping center or similar grouping of buildings on a lot, in which case all parking areas shall be provided entirely within the lot lines of the property. 

(D) 	
All parking spaces designated for single-family residential units shall be located behind the street right-of-way line. 

(E) 	
Joint parking facilities for two (2) or more uses may be established, provided that the number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the spaces required for each individual use. 

(F) 	
All parking spaces and means of access, other than those relating to a dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use.  The illumination shall be designed in accordance with Section 919 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The illumination shall not be of excessive brightness and shall not produce a light trespass or glare beyond the limits of the off-street parking area. 

(G) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all off-street parking areas and access drives shall be paved and contain marked parking spaces.  The off-street parking areas shall be properly graded to provide convenient vehicular access and proper drainage and shall be maintained in usable condition.  The minimum grade of areas used for parking shall be at least one (1) percent and the maximum grade shall not exceed five (5) percent. Surface water shall not be concentrated onto public sidewalks and other premises. 

(H) 	
The areas designated to comply with the provisions for off-street parking shall not be used for the sale, dead-storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of vehicles. 

(I) 	
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be subsequently reduced to an amount less than that required under this Zoning Ordinance for a similar new building or use. 

(J) 	
The width of aisles within the off-street parking areas shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 

(1) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at ninety (90) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be twenty-four (24) feet in width and may accommodate two (2) way travel. 

(2) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at sixty (60) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be eighteen 

(18) feet in width and shall be restricted to one (1) way travel. 

(3) 	
Where the angles of the parking spaces are at forty-five (45) degrees, the width of the aisle shall be sixteen (16) feet in width and shall be restricted to one (1) way travel. 

(4) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the parking spaces shall not be designed with angles of less than forty-five (45) degrees. 

(5) 	
Regardless of the configuration or angle of the parking space, the area of the parking space shall accommodate a rectangular area with a width of ten (10) feet and a depth of twenty (20) feet. 



(K) 	
Where parking requirements are determined by the number of seats and no permanent seats are provided, the number of parking spaces to be provided shall be based upon the capacity for temporary seats in normal usage. 

(L) 	
The parking areas shall be arranged and marked to provide safe and orderly movement without disrupting traffic or moving other vehicles.  The design of off-street parking areas for all uses shall be such to prevent the back up of vehicles on a public street. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	268 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
(M) 	
Parking areas shall be arranged so that no portion of any vehicle parked within a designated parking space can extend over any property line of the lot on which it is parked. 

(N) 	
Parking areas for non-residential uses, which are designed to contain more than five (5) vehicles shall be screened from the view of persons on any land areas zoned as AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts, which is adjacent to the land on which the non-residential parking area is located.  The screening shall be comprised of a fence, wall and/or landscaping materials of at least four (4) feet in height, which shall be designed to obstruct headlight glare of the parked cars. 

(O) 	
Parking areas and access drives for non-residential uses shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line and street right-of-way line.  The area between the parking area and the lot line or street right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(P) 	
Parking areas and access drives for multi-family residential development shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from an exterior property line and street right-of-way line.  The area between the parking area and the lot line or street right-of-way line shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards specified under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(Q) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the off-street parking areas and access drives for all other residential uses shall be located to comply with the following minimum setback requirements from any property line: five (5) feet for single-family detached units; zero (0) feet for the common property line of a single family semi­detached units and five (5) feet for all other property lines; zero (0) feet for the internal common off-street parking area of multi-family units within the development and twenty  (20) feet from all exterior property lines and existing street right-of-way lines. 

(R) 	
The number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for each use shall be sufficient to accommodate the use and occupants, full-time employees, visitors and customer parking.  The off-street parking spaces required shall be further specified by Matrix Chart 11 and shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or other specified use. 

(S) 	
Where Matrix Chart 11, as specified under Section 1004(R) of this Zoning Ordinance, does not specify a requirement for the land use activity, or the site conditions do not warrant the specified requirement list within the table, Cumru Township may consider and require an alternative requirement. 

(T) 	
Cumru Township may permit a reduction for the total number of off-street parking spaces as part of the subdivision or land development plan.  Where a reduction in the total number of off-street parking spaces is considered, the applicant shall provide documentation to support that the use does not warrant the total number of spaces required. The maximum permitted reduction shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the required total.   

(U) 	
In addition to the required off-street parking spaces specified under Section 1004(R), handicapped parking spaces shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and provisions of all local, state and federal laws.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the total number of handicapped parking spaces shall be determined by  Matrix Chart 12 and shall be located exclusive of any public right-of-way or other specified use: 

(V) 	
In addition to the requirements of Matrix Chart 12, as specified under Section 1004(U), the required handicapped spaces shall be designed in accordance with the following specifications: 

(1) 	
Handicapped parking spaces shall be located within a safe and convenient area, which would result in the shortest reasonable distance from the handicapped parking space to the building or intended use as well as other provisions, such as, cross-slopes, access ramps, elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances. 

(2) 	
Above-grade signs and suitable pavement markings shall be provided at each required handicapped parking space.  The sign and pavement markings shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined curb approach or a curb cut shall be provided to accommodate handicapped individuals, as specified by all locals, state and federal laws.  If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk across the ramp, then the ramp shall be designed with flared sides, as specified by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
All handicap parking shall comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. When there is a conflict between the parking requirements listed under this Section of the Zoning Ordinance and those of the Americans with Disabilities Act, then the most stringent requirement shall govern. 



(W) 	
Off street parking areas shall be suitably designed to control stormwater and minimize erosion.  The minimum grade of areas used for parking shall be at least one (1) percent and the maximum grade shall not exceed five (5) percent. The maximum grade of access drives shall not exceed ten (10) percent.  The surface water shall be directed to stormwater management facilities, which are designed in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township. 

(X) 	
Off-street parking areas shall be suitably landscaped in order to enhance or buffer the surrounding area.  The following landscaping requirements shall be provided for all off-street parking areas containing ten (10) off-street parking spaces: 

(1) 	
A landscaping plan shall be prepared and submitted with the subdivision plan or land development plan. The landscaping plan shall meet the criteria specified under Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Raised concrete or curbed planter islands shall be placed at each end of a row of parking spaces, which begins or terminates at an internal circulation drive, and within each row of parking spaces. The raised planter islands shall be placed so that there are not more than twenty (20) off-street parking spaces in a continuous row without an intervening landscaped planter island.  The raised continuous concrete curbing shall be required around each planting island.  Each such island shall be at least one hundred-eighty (180) square feet in size and planted with suitable landscaping materials. 

(3) 	
The perimeter of the off-street parking area shall be suitably landscaped to provide a visual buffer or to enhance the aesthetics of the area adjacent to the off-street parking area.  The landscaping materials shall be selected from the list contained within Section 914 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Parking areas required to accommodate non-residential uses shall be screened from the view of residential uses located with the AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts.  The screening shall be comprised of a fence, wall and/or landscaping materials of at least four (4) feet in height, which shall be designed to obstruct headlight glare and screen the view of the parked cars. 

(5) 	
Where possible, the use of existing trees shall be incorporated into the design of the off-street parking area or to establish a buffer yard. 



(Y) 	
Off-street parking areas and access lanes located within a parking garage facility shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering and architectural design criteria.  The minimum dimensions of the internal off-street parking spaces within the parking garage facility may be reduced to nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet provided that such spaces are specifically designated for employees and not for visitors or the general public. 


Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  11)  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Residential  Single Family Detached Units  2 parking spaces per unit not including garage spaces  
Single Family Semi-Detached Units  2 parking spaces per unit not including garage spaces  
Multi-Family Townhouse Unit Development  2 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Multi-Family Apartment Unit Development  2 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Cluster Development for the AG, RC, MR and HR Districts  2 parking spaces per unit not including garage spaces  
Group Homes  1 parking space for each employee plus 1 space for each 2 beds  
Convalescent and Nursing Homes  1 parking space for each employee plus 1 space for each 3 beds  
Age Qualified Retirement Communities  1 parking spaces per unit plus 0.5 spaces per unit for overflow parking within the development  
Secondary Housing Unit  1 additional parking space  
Other Residential Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Adult Business and Entertainment Use  1 parking space per 100 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Automobile Sales  1 parking space per 500 square feet of office/retail space plus 1 space per vehicle plus 1 space per employee  

Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	269 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  11)  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Commercial  Automobile Service Stations  1 parking space per 250 sq. feet of office/retail space plus 3 spaces per service bay plus 1 space/ employee  
Banks and Financial Institutions  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Business and Professional Office  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Club, Lodge, Taverns, Taprooms and Social Clubs  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Conference Center or Convention Center  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Convenience Store or Mini-Market  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Home Day Care Facility  2 parking spaces for the residential use plus 2 stacking spaces for loading/unloading   
Commercial Day Care Facility  1 parking space per 6 students plus 4 stacking spaces for loading/unloading plus 1 per employee  
Funeral Homes  1 parking space per 50 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Convenience Store or Mini-Market  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Home Center  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Hotel or Motels  1 parking space per room, plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Kennels  1 parking space per 10 animals kept or housed plus 1 space per employee  
Laundromats and Dry Cleaner  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Medical, Dental, Vision, Counseling and Health Care Services  6 parking spaces per practitioner engaged with the principal services plus 1 space per employee  
Mini-Malls  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Nursery or Landscaping Center  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area for retail sales plus 1 space per employee  
Personal Service Establishment  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Restaurants  1 parking space per 3 seats plus 1 space per employee per shift plus tavern or taproom requirements  
Retail Business Establishment  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Shopping Centers  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee  
Veterinary Hospital or Animal Clinic  4 parking spaces per practitioner engaged with the principal services plus 1 space per employee  
Other Commercial Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Industrial  Construction Services  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Fabrication and Finishing  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Food Processing Facility  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 270 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking  

Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  11)  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Junk Yards, Salvage Yards and Impoundment Facility  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Manufacturing  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Printing and Publishing Facilities  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Quarrying and Mining  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Research Facilities  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Solid Waste Disposal and Reduction  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Truck Service and Maintenance Establishments  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Warehousing, Freight Terminal, Wholesale and Distribution  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Other Industrial Uses  As determine appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Agricultural  General Agricultural Uses  As determine appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Intensive Agricultural Uses  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Commercial Composting and Mushroom Production  1 parking space per 2 employees on the 2 largest shifts combined plus 1 space for each vehicle stored on-site  
Commercial Greenhouse and Tree Farm  1 parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area for retail sales plus 1 space per employee  
Other Agricultural Uses  As determine appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Recreational  Bowling Alleys  4 parking spaces per bowling alley plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Community Recreation Center  1 parking space per 3 seats (auditorium) plus 1 space per 500 square feet (non-auditorium) plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Commercial Recreation Facility  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift  
Golf Courses, Driving Ranges and Miniature Golf Courses  4 parking spaces per tee plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus accessory uses  
Health and Fitness Club  1 parking space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift  
Public or Commercial Swimming Pools  1 parking space per 4 persons of total membership capacity plus 1 space per employee  
Other Recreational Use  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Institutional  Assisted Living Care Facilities, Nursing Homes and Convalescent Homes  1 parking space per 4 beds plus 1 space per employee and visiting medical staff on the maximum shift  
Auditorium, Conference Center, and Public Meeting/Assemblage Facilities  1 parking space per 3 seats, which may be available on chairs, seats, pews, benches or bleachers  
Education Use: Nursery School through the 9th Grade.  1 parking space per 10 students plus 1 space per employee plus auditorium requirements  
Education Use: 10th through 12th Grade; Vocational; or Higher Learning Facility   1 parking space per 4 students plus 1 space per employee plus auditorium requirements  
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 271 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking  

Categorical Off-Street Parking Requirements  (Supplemental  Matrix Chart  11)  
Use  Land Use Category  Off-Street Parking Requirement  
Places of Worship and Religious Facilities  1 parking space per 3 seats, which may be available on chairs, seats, pews, benches or bleachers  
Utility, Governmental or Municipal Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  
Other Institutional Uses  As determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer  

Handicapped Parking Space Requirements  (Supplemental Matrix  Chart 12)  
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required  Total Number of Handicapped Spaces Required  
Less than 5 off-street parking spaces  As required by local, state or federal laws  
5 to 25 off-street street parking spaces  1 additional handicapped space  
26 to 50 off-street street parking spaces  2 additional handicapped spaces  
51 to 75 off-street street parking spaces  3 additional handicapped spaces  
76 to 100 off-street street parking spaces  4 additional handicapped spaces  
101 to 125 off-street street parking spaces  5 additional handicapped spaces  
126 to 150 off-street street parking spaces  6 additional handicapped spaces  
151 to 200 off-street street parking spaces  7 additional handicapped spaces  
201 to 300 off-street street parking spaces  8 additional handicapped spaces  
301 to 400 off-street street parking spaces  9 additional handicapped spaces  
401 to 500 off-street street parking spaces  10 additional handicapped spaces  
501 to 1,000 off-street street parking spaces  2 percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces  
1,000 or more off-street street parking spaces  20 handicapped parking spaces plus 1 percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces  

Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	272 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	273 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
Section 1005: Driveways, Private Roads, Fire Lanes and Fire Apparatus Access Roads 
(A) 	
Driveways or access lanes shall be required to permit accessibility between a public or private street and the existing or proposed use on the lot to which it provides service.  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the driveway or access lane shall be designed in accordance with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All driveways or access lanes shall be so constructed and maintained with materials, which will not wash nor be deposited upon public roads.  No driveways or access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed so as to create a drainage or sedimentation problem on an adjacent property or street 

(2) 	
All driveways serving residential or non-residential uses shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions specified by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
All driveways and access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed as to provide optimum sight distance and visibility at the intersection with the existing or proposed street. 

(4) 	
A permit issued by Cumru Township shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a road, which is currently owned by Cumru Township or proposed to be owned by Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
A permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a road, which is currently owned by the state or proposed to be owned by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
No more than (1) point of ingress and egress shall be established for a residential use unless: the lot contains a single-family dwelling with sufficient frontage (lot width) along two (2) different streets; or if the lot contains a single-family dwelling that is greater than 2.5 times the lot width requirement for the zoning district to which it is located.  



(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to private roads, common driveways and/or shared driveways: 

(1) 	
Common or shared driveways may provide access to not more than three (3) residential lots, provided that such the shared or common driveway has been designed, located and constructed in accordance with the requirements of Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
A private road or service road may be permitted for non-residential uses within the LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts.  The location, design, width, length and construction specifications shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Cumru Township shall not be required to accept the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of any private road, common driveway or shared driveway regardless of its condition or improved status. 



(C) 	
Where required by Cumru Township, a fire lane shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with those provisions specified by Cumru Township. All proposed fire lanes shall be reviewed and inspected by the Cumru Township Fire Marshall.  

(D) 	
Where required by Cumru Township, a fire apparatus access road shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions specified by Cumru Township. 


Section 1006: Highway Frontage Development and Access Management Requirements 
(A) Subdivision and land development activity along the frontage of collector streets and arterial streets shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1) 	All areas for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and the storage or movement of motor vehicles shall be physically separated from the public street or highway by a raised curb, planting strip or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit, except for the necessary accessways or access roads, which supply ingress and egress from such parking, loading or storage area. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	274 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 
(2) 	
Each non-residential use with less than one hundred-fifty (150) feet of frontage along a public street shall have not more than one (1) point of ingress and egress to each such street.  No non-residential use with one hundred-fifty (150) feet or more frontage along a public street shall have more than two (2) points of ingress and egress to any one (1) street for each three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  Where feasible, movement into and out of parking areas shall avoid direct access to or from an arterial street or major collector. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, where there is more than one (1) driveway to an off-street parking facility, consideration should be given to limit the driveways to one (1) way travel either as a point of ingress or a point of egress to the off-street parking facility.  The width of such entrances and exits, as measured at the right-of-way line, shall conform to the following schedule: 

(a) 	
For one (1) way travel providing a point of ingress or egress, the minimum width shall be twelve 

(12) feet and the maximum width shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 

(b) 	
For two (2) way travel providing a point of ingress an egress, the minimum width shall be twenty-four (24) feet and the maximum width shall be thirty-six (36) feet 



(4) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the radius of the edge or the driveway apron shall be at designed at a minimum radius of ten (10) feet and a maximum radius of thirty (30) feet. 

(5) 	
The location and width of the point of ingress and/or egress for all driveways and access lanes shall be planned so as not to interfere with the use of adjacent property and with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the collector or arterial street. 


(B) 	
In order to enhance mobility and limit accessibility along collector and arterial streets, the following access management strategies shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development process: 

(1) 	
Driveway cuts along collector and arterial routes should be minimized or consolidated. Where appropriate and permitted by Cumru Township, common driveways for certain land uses or developments may be considered. 

(2) 	
The lot width, type of land use, and the anticipated traffic volumes should determine how many driveway cuts should be permitted along a collector or arterial road. Where required, the traffic impact study should consider the impacts that could adversely reduce mobility along the collector or arterial route. 

(3) 	
Where appropriate to enhance safety conditions, traffic improvements shall be considered as part of the subdivision and land development plan application, which may include: the installation of traffic signals; the construction of separate right turn lanes and/or left turn lanes; the installation of median barriers to efficiently separate and direct vehicular traffic to its intended destination; and to require the installation of sidewalks, handicapped ramps and crosswalks. 

(4) 	
Inappropriate or unsafe turning movements along collector or arterial streets shall be prohibited. 

(5) 	
Sight distance and visibility at all driveways and access lanes shall be maintained and enhanced by establishing effective setback requirements, limiting the size of signs, minimizing distractions, and establishing a horizontal profile that will provide sufficient right-of-way to accommodate future transportation improvements. 



(C) 	
Where in the best interest of the community, Cumru Township may consider alternative methods of highway frontage development and/or access management strategies provided that the alternative provides consideration for public safety, enhancing mobility and limiting accessibility along collector and arterial streets. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	275 Article 10: Off-Street Loading and Parking 

Article 11: Signs 
Section 1101: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose of the provisions established under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to signs for all land uses, zoning districts and conditions within Cumru Township.  The objectives of these provisions are as follows: to promote and maintain overall community beautification; establish reasonable time, place and manner regulations on the exercise of free speech; promote traffic safety; and promote appropriate and efficient use of land. 

(B) 	
The regulations concerning signs, as established under Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board.  


Section 1102: General Standards and Requirements for all Signs 
(A) 	
Permits:  Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a permit shall be required for all signs within Cumru Township in accordance with the following procedures: 

(1) 	
Two (2) complete permit applications shall be submitted to erect, install, replace, remove and alter signs, as required by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The application shall include the permit fee. 

(2) 	
The permit application shall contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to determine whether the proposed sign conforms with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.  At a minimum, the following information shall be included: 

(a) 	
Two (2) copies of the plans and diagrams drawn accurately to scale depicting the dimensions of the lot, cartway, right-of-way and location of the sign. 

(b) 	
The exact size, dimensions and location of the sign to be placed on the lot or building, together with its type, construction, materials to be used, and the manner of installation. 

(c)	
 Any other useful information, which may be required of the applicant by the Zoning Officer. 



(3) 	
The permit application shall be granted or refused within thirty (30) days from the date of completed application. 

(4) 	
No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, except upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board, granted pursuant to the procedures established for a variance. 



(B) 	
Construction:  All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good condition and repair.  Any sign, which is allowed to become dilapidated or in a state of disrepair may, after thirty (30) days of notification, be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property. 

(C) 	
Location and Placement:  All signs shall be located and placed in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
No sign shall be posted, stapled or otherwise permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within a street right-of-way. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified, no portion of any freestanding sign shall be located within five (5) feet of the street right-of-way line or within twenty (20) feet of a property line. 

(3) 	
All traffic control signs, directional signs, traffic signals or other signs, which are located within a street right-of-way shall be permitted by Cumru Township or Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(4) 	
No sign shall be located, placed or arranged in any manner that interferes with vehicular traffic, including the obstruction of sight distance.  



(D) 	
Area: The area of all signs, which are permitted within Cumru Township are specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following specific provisions shall apply to the area of a sign: 

(1) 	
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, border trim or framing, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing. 

(2) 	
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be determined by calculating the smallest rectangle, which encompasses all of the letters and symbols used for the sign, regardless of the actual shape created by the letters and symbols. 

(3) 	
The area of a sign, painted upon or applied to a building, shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols together with any backing associated with the sign. 

(4) 	
In computing the square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one (1) side of the sign shall be considered as the area of the sign, provided that both faces are identical inside the frame of the sign.  In cases where the signs are not parallel or if an interior angle is created to provide visibility, both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area. Where double faced signs are permitted to be separated by more than three (3) feet, the area of both sides of the sign shall be calculated as part of the total area. 



(E) 	
Height.  The height of all signs, which are permitted within Cumru Township are specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The following specific provisions shall apply to the height of a sign. 

(1) 	
The height of a sign shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of the sign. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified or permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, the maximum height of any sign shall be twenty (20) feet. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, no sign that is a part of or is supported by a building shall be erected, placed or displayed upon the roof of such building, nor shall such sign extend above the height of the building. 

(4) 	
Where the provisions for sign height specified under this Zoning Ordinance do not apply, the Zoning Officer in conjunction with the Zoning Hearing Board may consider a reasonable resolution or remedy. 



(F) 	
Clearance, Visibility and Sight Distance:  The following minimum requirements shall apply to the ground clearance, visibility and sight distance for all permitted signs within Cumru Township. 

(1) 	
All freestanding signs, which are located within twenty (20) feet of a street right-of-way line shall have at least seven (7) feet of clear space between such sign and the average ground elevation.  However, the necessary support structures may extend through such open space. 

(2) 	
Ground signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line. 

(3) 
No ground or freestanding sign shall be located within the clear sight triangle of a street intersection.  The provisions for establishing the clear sight triangle are specified under Section 908 of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The minimum sight distance requirements for pedestrians and vehicles shall be considered and applied to all permit applications involving signs. 



(G) 	
Projection.  An on-premises projecting sign, which is mounted upon a building so that its principal face is a right angle or perpendicular to the wall of the building may be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 276 	Article 11: Signs 
(1) 	All such projecting signs shall extend at least one (1) foot from the building but no more than ten (10) feet from the building. 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 277 	Article 11: Signs 
(2) 	
No sign shall project outward or perpendicular from the face of a building, whereas there is an open area between the ground and the sky. 

(3) 	
The minimum height of a projecting sign shall be at least eight (8) feet from the average ground elevation and no higher than twenty (20) feet above the average ground elevation. 

(4) 	
The maximum area of all projecting signs shall be twenty (20) square feet, as measured on a single side of the projecting sign.  Double-faced projecting signs may be permitted for the same use. 


(H) 	
Maximum Number of Signs:  The maximum number of on-premises signs for a use on a single lot is specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance.  Where multiple uses are contained on a single property, a freestanding sign may be permitted provided it conforms with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(I) 	
Illumination. The following provisions shall apply to the illumination of signs within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Unless otherwise specified within this Zoning Ordinance, signs may be illuminated by direct and non-glaring lighting, provided that such lighting is shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians within a street right-of-way. 

(2) 	
The use of red, green or amber lights on any sign within 200 feet of a street intersection shall be prohibited. 

(3) 	
The use of flashing, transmitted video, or other similar lighting features for signs shall be prohibited. 

(4) 	
The use of intermittent, animated or transmitted visual message signs may be permitted within the LC, HC and GI Zoning Districts.  The message display area or screen of such signs shall not change more than four (4) times per minute.  All such signs shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of­way line and two hundred (200) feet from the AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts.   

(5) 	
The use of illuminated signs within the AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts shall be prohibited unless the illuminated sign is specifically related to emergency management uses, medical facilities, municipal uses, institutional uses, and other similar uses considered appropriate by the Zoning Officer. 



(J) 	
Double Faced Signs:  Any permitted sign may be constructed and installed as a double-faced sign, provided that: it has two parallel surfaces contained within a common frame; the signs are directly opposite from each other; the signs match in size and shape; and are not over three (3) feet apart.  All such signs shall be considered as one (1) sign and only one face of one (1) side of the signs shall be used to calculate the total size of the sign.  Should the two surfaces deviate from being parallel or should they differ in size or shape, the sign shall be considered as two (2) signs. 

(K) 	
Supplementary Sign Regulations for all Zoning Districts:  The following supplementary sign regulations shall apply to all zoning districts within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and all other property lines; no more than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each property being sold; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction is completed. 

(2) 	
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of non-residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least 200 feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from all other property lines; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction is completed. 

(3) 	
Property control or restriction signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least one hundred (100) feet 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 278 	Article 11: Signs 
apart on the same lot or property; and the sign does not contain any personal message, which is considered irrelevant to controlling or restricting the use of a property or lot. 
(4) 	
Temporary signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Special event or promotional signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance. 

(6) 	
Special use signs may be permitted provided they are not considered permanent and they comply with the provisions established under this Zoning Ordinance 


(L) 	
Traffic Control and Directional Signs: Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, all traffic control signs and directional signs shall conform with the following: 

(1) 	
Traffic control and directional signs located within the street right-of-way shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The location, size, type, height, spacing and quantity of the sign (s) shall be stipulated on the permit, as issued by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(2) 	
Traffic control and directional signs located outside the street right-of-way within a lot or on private property shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township.  All such signs shall be located at least two (2) feet from the street right-of-way and ten (10) feet from all other property lines.  The maximum number of signs as well as the maximum height and size of each sign are specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(M) 	
Political Signs:  Political signs, being signs erected in conjunction with a political election, naming a candidate or slate of candidates for a primary or general election or referencing a position in support of or opposition to an issue placed in referendum, shall be installed so as to comply with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Political signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way of any road and shall be placed only on properties with the property owner’s permission. 

(2) 	
Political signs may be posted thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the election. 

(3) 	
Political signs must be removed within five (5) days following the election. 



(N) 	
Removal of Signs:  On-premises signs and off-premises signs that are no longer utilized for the original intent or use shall be removed from the site or changed to accommodate a new sign for the new use within thirty (30) days of occupancy by the new use.  All replacement signs shall conform with the provisions specified under this Zoning Ordinance.  Upon the removal of any sign, whether temporary or permanent, such removal shall include all associated support including the posts, poles, brackets, arms, trailers and other support mechanisms. 


Section 1103: Summarization Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements 
(A) 	
Matrix Chart 13 on the following pages summarizes the categorical sign requirements by type, quantity, height, area, location and permit procedures for each use within Cumru Township.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Matrix Chart 13, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail.   

(B) 	
The provisions specified within this matrix chart shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 279 	Article 11: Signs Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 280 Article  11: Signs Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 281 Article  11: Signs 
SUMMARY CHART FOR CATEGORICAL  SIGN REQUIREMENTS   (SUUPPLEMENTAL MATRIX  CHART  13)  
Use  Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Height  Maximum Size or Sign Area  Setback Requirements  Permitted Zoning Districts  Permit Required 
ROW  Property Line  
Permanent On-Premises Residential  Signs  Individual Name and Street Address  1  10 feet  4 square feet  ----  5 feet  All Districts  No  
Property Control or Restrictions Sign  1 per 100 linear feet  10 feet  2 square feet  2 feet  2 feet  All Districts  No  
Home Occupation Sign  1  10 feet  4 square feet  2 feet  5 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Subdivision or Development Sign containing 20 or more units  2 per main entrance  10 feet  30 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Permanent On-Premises Commercial  or Industrial Signs  Freestanding Sign for Single Use or Ground Sign for a Single Use  1  20 feet  50 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  LC, HC, OC and GI  Yes  
8 feet  50 square feet  10 feet  20 feet  LC, HC, OC and GI  Yes  
Wall or Parallel Sign  8  30 feet, or to permitted building height  20% of building face;max. 200 cum. sq. ft. on one designated side  ----  ----  LC, HC, OC and GI  Yes  
Projecting Sign  1  20 feet  20 square feet  ----  ----  LC, HC, OC and GI  Yes  
Window Sign  ---­ 20 feet  50% of cumulative front window space   ----  ----  LC, HC, OC and GI  No  
Directional or Traffic Control Sign  6 per acre  10 feet  6 square feet per sign  ----  10 feet  LC, HC, OC and GI  Yes  
Non-Residential Developments and Uses  Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Business and Professional Office Parks, Industrial Parks, and Similar Uses  1 per street frontage  20 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  OC and GI  Yes  
8 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  OC and GI  Yes  
Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Hotels, Motels, Conference or Convention Center Uses  1 per street frontage  20 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  OC and GI  Yes  
8 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  OC and GI  Yes  
Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Mini-Malls  1 per street frontage  20 feet  80 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  LC, HC and OC  Yes  
8 feet  80 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  LC, HC and OC  Yes  
Freestanding Sign or Ground Sign for Shopping Center or Shopping Mall  1 per street frontage  20 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  5 feet  30 feet  HC  Yes  
8 feet  100 cumulative square feet for all uses  10 feet  30 feet  OC and GI  Yes  

SUMMARY CHART FOR CATEGORICAL  SIGN REQUIREMENTS   (SUUPPLEMENTAL MATRIX  CHART  13)  
Use  Type of Sign  Maximum Number  Maximum Height  Maximum Size or Sign Area  Setback Requirements  Permitted Zoning Districts  Permit Required 
ROW  Property Line  
Permanent Off-Site Advertising Sign / Billboard  Freestanding Advertising Sign or Billboard along Interstate 176, Route 422 and Route 222 (Expressway) in the HC and GI Zoning Districts  1 per 1,500 linear feet  40 feet  672 square feet  10 feet  30 feet  HC and GI  Yes  
Permanent On-Premises Municipal, Governmental, Recreational, Institutional and other Uses  Freestanding Sign for Single Use or Ground Sign for a Single Use  1 per street frontage  20 feet  50 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
8 feet  50 square feet  10 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Wall or Parallel Sign  6  30 feet, or to permitted building height  20% of building face; max. 50 cum. sq. ft. on one designated side  ----  ----  All Districts  Yes  
Projecting Sign  1  20 feet  20 square feet  ----  ----  All Districts  Yes  
Directional or Traffic Control Sign  4 per acre  10 feet  4 square feet per sign  ----  10 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Agricultural Uses  Produce Sales or Identification Sign  1  10 feet  12 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Temporary On-Premises Signs  Subdivision or Development Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Contractor and Financing Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  Yes  
Real Estate and Marketing Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  No  
Special Event Sign  1  10 feet  32 square feet  5 feet  20 feet  All Districts  No  
General Notes concerning the Summary Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements (1) The matrix chart provides an abbreviated summary of the basic sign requirements for certain uses and activities within Cumru Township.  Additional land use and development requirements may apply.  Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text and the provisions contained within Summary Matrix Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements, the provisions contained within the text shall prevail. (2) Where a discrepancy should exist between the provisions contained within the text portion of the Zoning Ordinance and the provisions contained within Summary Matrix Chart for Categorical Sign Requirements, the provisions contained within the text portion of the Zoning Ordinance shall prevail. (3) The provisions specified within this matrix chart shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  

Section 1104: Sign Requirements for Residential Uses 
(A) 	
An individual nameplate or street address sign may be posted on any residential lot provided it does not exceed four 

(4) square feet in area.  All such signs shall not be located within the street right-of-way and within five (5) feet from all other property lines.  

(B) 	
Property control and restrictions signs including “no trespassing”, “no hunting”, “no solicitation”, and other similar signs may be permitted subject to the following conditions; the area of the sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least one hundred (100) feet apart on the same lot or property; and the sign does not contain any personal message, which is considered irrelevant to controlling or restricting the use of a property or lot. 

(C) 	
Home occupation signs displaying the name and address of the occupant or the profession or activity of the occupant of a dwelling subject to the following conditions: 

(1) 	
No more than one (1) such sign shall be erected for each permitted use or dwelling. 

(2) 	
The area of such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 

(3) 	
The sign shall not be illuminated. 

(4) 	
The height of the sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) above the average ground elevation. 

(5) 	
The sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such building or may be erected in the front yard, but not within the street right-of-way or five (5) feet form any other property line. 



(D) 	
Residential development containing a total of twenty (20) or more residential units may provide a sign for the purposes of identifying the name of the development subject to the following criteria: 

(1) 	
The signs shall be limited to two (2) freestanding or ground signs per entrance to the development. 

(2) 	
The maximum size of the sign shall be thirty (30) square feet per sign. 

(3) 	
The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be ten (10) feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(4) 	
Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed ten (10) feet in height or a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet in area.  

(5) 	
The sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line, twenty (20) feet from all other property lines and shall not be located in the clear sight triangle, as established under Section 908 of this Zoning Ordinance.  The final location of such signs shall be approved by the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 

(6) 	
Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide sufficient evidence to the Zoning Officer that adequate measures have been taken to ensure proper maintenance of the sign and any accompanying landscaping, and that the sign will be durably constructed as to require minimal maintenance. 

(7) 	
The illumination of such signs may be permitted provided that t down-lighting is utilized with low intensity lighting, which is less than 100 watts and is located in a manner so that glare or reflection is not greater than 0.1 footcandle at the street right-of-way line. 



(E) 	
Directional signs may be permitted provided they are utilized within the interior of a residential development, are limited to one (1) directional sign per street, and do not exceed four (4) square feet in size. 


Section 1105: Sign Requirements for Non-Residential Uses 
(A) 	
The maximum number of on-premises signs for a non-residential use shall be limited to the following: 

(1) 	
No more than one (1) ground sign or freestanding sign shall be permitted. 

(2) 	
No more than eight (8) wall or parallel signs shall be permitted, which shall not exceed two hundred 

(200) cumulative square feet or occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the front building facade, whichever is less. 

(3) 	
No more than one (1) projecting sign shall be permitted. 

(4) 	
Unless otherwise directed by Cumru Township, no more than six (6) directional or accessory signs shall be permitted per acre. 



(B) 	
A freestanding or ground sign may be permitted for all non-residential uses and developments, subject to the provisions specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition to those requirements, the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
A business park, professional office park and industrial park may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for each street the development has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  The area of each sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
A freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The freestanding or ground sign may identify the name of the development as well as any individual permitted uses contained within the development provided it is constructed as a single component with the ability to be changed at any time. 



(2) 	
A hotel, motel, conference center or convention center may contain one (1) freestanding sign or ground sign, which shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
The freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The height of all such freestanding signs shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The freestanding or ground sign may identify the name of the development as well as any individual permitted uses contained within the development provided it is constructed as a single component with the ability to be changed at any time. 



(3) 	
A mini-mall containing multiple non-residential uses with less than 30,000 square feet of cumulative floor area may contain one (1) freestanding sign or ground sign for the development, which shall not exceed eighty (80) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
The freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The height of all such freestanding signs shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than twenty (20) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The area of the sign shall not exceed eighty (80) cumulative square feet for all uses.  The total number of individual advertisements on any such sign shall be limited to eight (8) per side. 



(4) 	
A shopping center or shopping mall containing multiple non-residential uses may contain one (1) freestanding or ground sign for each street the development has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  The area of each sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) cumulative square feet and shall meet the following criteria: 

(a) 	
A freestanding sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines.  The height of a freestanding sign shall be no less than seven (7) feet and no more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(b) 	
A ground sign may be permitted in lieu of a freestanding sign provided that it is located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. The maximum height of a ground sign shall be no more than eight (8) feet, as measured from the average ground elevation.  Any wall or fence structure, which supports such signs may not exceed eight (8) feet in height or a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet and shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, vinyl or decorative masonry. 

(c) 	
The freestanding or ground sign may identify the name of the development as well as any individual permitted uses contained within the development provided it is constructed as a single component with the abilities to be changed at any time.  The total number of individual advertisements on any such freestanding sign shall be limited to eight (8) per side. 



(5) 	
All other individual non-residential uses may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign, subject to the provisions specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Non-residential uses within the LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts may utilize illuminated or animated signs that transmit video messages to be displayed or screen provided that such signs shall not change more than four (4) times per minute.  All such signs shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way line and two hundred 

(200) feet from the AG, RC, LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts. 

(D) 	
A municipal, governmental, recreational or institutional use may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for the purposes of displaying the name of the use and its activities or services, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and not more than one (1) sign for each street that the use has more than three hundred (300) feet of frontage.  All other pertinent sign requirements for municipal, governmental, recreational or institutional uses, as defined and specified under this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 

(E) 	
An agricultural use, as  further defined and outlined under Section 804 of this Zoning Ordinance, may have one (1) freestanding or ground sign for the purposes of displaying the name of the use and its activities or services, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. All other pertinent sign requirements for agricultural uses, as specified under Section 1103 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 


Section 1106:   Off-Premises Advertising Signs or Billboards 
(A) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards, as defined by this Zoning Ordinance are permitted by special exception along Interstate 176, United States Route 222 (Expressway) and United States Route 422 within the HC and GI Zoning Districts. 

(B) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall not exceed six hundred and seventy-two (672) square feet.  The spacing of such signs shall be at least 1,500 linear feet apart from another off-premises advertising sign or billboard on the same side of the road. 

(C) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following requirements for setback, separation distance, height and arrangement: 

(1) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of­way line and no further than one hundred (100) feet from the street right-of-way line, as measured on the same side of the street to which the off-premises advertising sign or billboard is located. 

(2) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from all other property lines. 

(3) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from the center of the nearest street intersection or interchange. 

(4) 	
The maximum height of all such off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be no less than twenty 

(20) feet to the bottom edge of the sign and no more than forty (40) feet to the top edge of the sign, as measured from the average ground elevation. 

(5) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising signs or billboards are located and orientated in the same direction, the maximum cumulative surface are of the signs shall not exceed six hundred and seventy-two 

(672) square feet and shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet. 

(6) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising surface signs or billboards are orientated in a back-to-back arrangement, they shall be parallel and directly opposite from each other and shall not be spaced by more that eight (8) feet.  The size and shape of the signs should not deviate from each other and they shall utilize the same support structure. 

(7) 	
When two (2) off-premises advertising surface signs or billboards are orientated in a V-type arrangement, they shall be at least fifteen (15) feet apart at the mid-point distance nor shall the interior angles be greater than forty-five (45) degrees.  The size and shape of the signs should not deviate from each other and they shall utilize the same support structure. 

(8) 	
No off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be located in any manner that disrupts or distracts the operator of a motor vehicle. 



(D) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following design requirements: 

(1) 	
All off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with all local and state codes. As part of this requirement, all permit applications shall include signed and sealed plans from a licensed engineer within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(2) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be constructed and erected on a steel unipole or steel I-beams meeting the minimum standards established by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America and the Institute of Outdoor Advertising. 

(3) 	
The support structures for all off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be constructed and erected on permanent footings, as determined by the licensed engineer responsible for the permit application. 

(4) 	
No off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be constructed and erected that resembles any official marker, logo and/or insignia of any governmental entity or other organization without written consent. 

(5) 	
The off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall not contain vulgar messages or depict any lewd, pornographic, lascivious or other offensive acts.  

(6) 	
The off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be maintained and inspected by the applicant of the permit on a regular basis, but shall not exceed a period of time of more than thirty (30) days.  As part of this requirement, the applicant shall inspect the following: the support structure to determine if is sound and in good repair; the lighting to determine if it operating sufficiently; the display area to determine if is in good condition and free of graffiti; the area within the lease area to determine if it is clear of overgrown vegetation, debris, trash and other unsightly materials; and all other items that should be inspected periodically, as determined appropriate by the Zoning Officer. 



(E) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall be located to comply with the following lighting, display and illumination requirements: 

(1) 	
All off-premises advertising signs or billboards may be illuminated provided that such illumination is directed towards the sign and shielded so as to prevent the illumination from being directed towards the street or any adjacent properties.  Downward illumination or night-friendly illumination is encouraged. 

(2) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards containing flashing, intermittent, oscillating, reflective and/or moving lighting features shall be prohibited. 

(3) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards may incorporate features to provide electronic message displays such as the time, date, temperature, weather and similar information provided it does not disrupt or distract the operator of a motor vehicle. 

(4) 	
Off-premises advertising signs or billboards may incorporate a timed or electronic display change, whereas the display of the sign may change to another sign within a specified period of time.  All such signs may be considered provided the message does not change more than four (4) times per minute and it does not disrupt or distract the operator of a motor vehicle. 

(5) 	
The provision for exterior lighting, as specified under Section 919 of this Zoning Ordinance shall also apply to the illumination off-premises advertising signs or billboards. 



(F) 	
If a special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, the off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be located to comply with the following permit requirements: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a written agreement with the permit application indicating that the owner of the property has agreed to lease the property to the commercial sign or advertising company and has approved the proposed display or message contained on the off-premises advertising sign or billboard. 

(2) 	
Three (3) complete permit applications shall be submitted to Cumru Township, as required by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  The permit application shall include the required permit fee. 

(3) 	
The permit application shall contain the following information: three (3) copies of the plans and diagrams drawn accurately to scale depicting the dimensions of the lot, cartway, right-of-way, location of the sign; the exact size, dimensions and location of the off-premises sign or billboard to be placed on the lot or building, together with its type, construction, materials to be used, support structures, and the manner of installation; and any other useful information, which may be required by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The completed permit application, plans and support diagrams shall be signed and sealed by a licensed engineer within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(5) 	
The permit application shall be granted or refused within sixty (60) days from the date that the special exception application was approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(6) 	
Upon securing the local permit from Cumru Township, the applicant shall be responsible for applying for all necessary permits through the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.  The applicant shall be 




responsible for providing Cumru Township with a copy of the permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 
(G) 	In addition to the provisions established herewith, the applicant and property owner for all off-premises advertising signs or billboards shall comply with all other pertinent provisions, as established by Cumru Township. 
Section 1107: Special Use Signs, Temporary Signs and Promotional Signs 
(A) 	
The following provisions shall apply to special use and temporary signs within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, municipal, philanthropic, educational, institutional, religious, or similar organization, provided the following criteria apply: the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area; no more than two (2) signs shall be permitted; the signs may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year; the sign shall be removed within seven 

(7) days after the commencement of the campaign, drive or event. 

(2) 	
Temporary signs for a yard sale or garage sale provided the following conditions shall apply: the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area; no more than four (4) signs shall be permitted; the signs may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year; the sign shall be removed within two 

(2) days after the commencement of the campaign, drive or event. 

(3) 	
Temporary signs for contractors, developers, architects, engineers, builders, financers and artisans may be permitted on the premises where the work is being performed, provided that the following criteria apply: the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; the sign shall not be illuminated; no more than three 

(3) signs shall be permitted for each street the project area or development has more than 300 feet of frontage; the sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height; and provided that all such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days upon completion of the work. 

(4) 	
Real estate signs for the selling, renting or leasing of residential properties shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: the area of the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet; the spacing of such signs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet apart on the same lot or property; the sign shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line; and the sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the final transaction. 

(5) 	
Political signs, being signs erected in conjunction with a political election, naming a candidate or slate of candidates for a primary or general election or referencing a position in support of or opposition to an issue placed in referendum, shall be installed so as to comply with the Pennsylvania Election Code and all other requirements of Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
Business and advertising signs located within a sports facility or venue subject to the following criteria: the signs shall be located within the permitted sports facility or venue such as a football stadium, little league baseball field or similar playing field owned or operated by a not-for-profit organization or entity organized to promote youth sports teams; the non-profit organization or entity is recognized and authorized in writing as such by the appropriate state and federal agencies; no more than one (1) sign measuring a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be permitted for each fifty (50) square feet of playing field or ground floor stadium area; all such signs shall be made of wood, plastic or metal; and all such signs may be located only on walls, fences, and scoreboards, but shall not be mounted on light poles, roofs or other freestanding surfaces.  



(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to special event or seasonal signs for an existing non-residential use located within a non-residential district, including signs, banners, flags, balloons, floodlights and other similar promotional features: 

(1) 	
The maximum size of a special event sign shall be thirty-two (32) square feet. In the case of more than one (1) sign, the combined area of all signs shall be no more than twenty-four (24) square feet.  

(2) 	
No portion of a ground-mounted sign used to advertise a special event shall exceed the height of fifty (50) inches.  Any banner or wall sign used to advertise a special event shall not extend above the roofline of the building upon which the sign is displayed. 

(3) 	
A special event sign shall be fastened securely.  Ground signs shall be anchored with a metal pipe or other secure support.  Hanging signs shall be secured and not allowed to flap or sag. 

(4) 	
All seasonal signs must be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
The sign shall not obstruct the vision or sight distance of the operator of any vehicle or interfere with normal pedestrian movements.  In no case shall the sign be located within the street right-of-way.  A plot plan showing the location of any special event sign must accompany each permit application. 

(6) 	
The special event sign may be two-sided with different advertisement displays on either side. 

(7) 	
The special event sign shall not contain flashing messages as part of the display. 

(8) 	
No such sign shall remain in place or otherwise be displayed for more than thirty (30) days per event or season, and no person shall exhibit any such sign for more than a total of seventy-five (75) days during any calendar year. 

(9) 	
The use of spot lights, floodlights and other similar promotional features may be utilized provided they comply with the following provisions: they shall not be utilized on the property for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or more than seventy-five (75)  cumulative days in any calendar year; they shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from the property line; they shall be well maintained; and they shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of-way. 

(10) 	
The use of banners, flags, balloons and similar promotional features may be utilized provided they comply with the following provisions: they shall not be utilized on the property for more than 30 consecutive days or more than seventy-five (75)  cumulative days in any calendar year; they shall not be located more than sixty (60) feet in the air, as measured for the average ground elevation where the balloons are permitted; the minimum setback or fall zone to any street right-of-way line or property line shall be one (1) horizontal foot to one (1) vertical foot considering the height of the balloon; they shall be well maintained; and they shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of­way. 

(11) 	
A special event sign permit shall be required for each sign used to advertise any special event during any calendar year.  The property owner, or lessee with the owner's permission, may make one permit application establishing all dates, times and the duration of each separate special event sign proposed to be displayed during a calendar year, or may make separate applications for each such event, providing the total does not exceed the maximum seventy-five (75) day limit. 

(12) 	
The permit applicant shall pay the fee established by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.  The special event sign permit shall be subject to the review and approval of the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to grand opening and promotional signs for a new non-residential use located within a non-residential zoning district, including signs, banners, flags, balloons, floodlights and other similar promotional features: 

(1) 	
The use of promotional signs and features shall be limited to the first sixty (60) days after the initial occupancy permit is issued for the non-residential use. 

(2) 	
The maximum area of a promotional sign shall be limited to two (2) signs, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign.  The promotional signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from all other property lines. 

(3) 	
All promotional banners, flags, balloons, spot lights, floodlights and other permitted promotional features shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line and twenty (20) feet from the property line. 

(4) 	
No other promotional features other than the balloons shall exceed the height of the roofline. 

(5) 	
The promotional signs banners, flags, balloons, spot lights, floodlights and other similar promotional features shall not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any public street right-of-way.  



(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to banners, which are hung and displayed across public street rights-of-way to promote community events including civic, municipal, charitable, philanthropic, educational, institutional, religious, or similar non-profit organizations: 

(1) 	
The applicant must complete and submit a permit to the Cumru Township at least sixty (60) days prior to the desired date of hanging a banner over a public street or way.  The banner(s) may be hung and displayed as set forth by the provisions established within this section of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The hanging of banners must be in complete conformance with the application, as submitted to Cumru Township and as finally approved by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
The hanging of banners is the sole responsibility of the applicant. 

(4) 	
No banner may hang lower than 16 feet over the street or public way. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise approved by Cumru Township, no more than eight (8) banners may be displayed over any particular street or public way. 

(6) 	
Banners may not be hung more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the event being advertised and must be removed no later than seven (7) days after the conclusion of the event being advertised. 

(7) 	
Banners, which are not removed within seven (7) days after the advertised event has concluded shall be removed by the applicant shall be liable for the actual cost of removal. 

(8) 	
Banners hung across streets and other rights-of-way without proper approval or authorization shall be removed by the responsible person(s) shall be liable for the cost of removal. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall assume all liability and responsibility for the display of the banners. 




Section 1108: Nonconforming Signs and Abandoned Signs 
(A) 	
Signs existing at the date of enactment of this Zoning Ordinance, which do not conform to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be considered nonconforming signs and subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Any sign, which is considered nonconforming based upon its location, height, clearance, visibility, projection, quantity and illumination shall only be replaced with a conforming sign. 

(2) 	
Any sign, which is considered nonconforming based upon its surface area shall only be replaced by a conforming sign or a sign that is twenty-five (25) percent less than the surface area of the original nonconforming sign. 

(3) 	
Nonconforming signs may be repaired and/or repainted provided that the modifications do not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign or create any further nonconformities. 



(B) 	
A sign shall be considered to be abandoned if the following conditions apply: a sign erected on a property for a specific use, which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of one (1) year or more; any sign which was previously erected for a prior occupant or business; or any sign which relates to a time, event or purpose which is considered a past event. The following provisions shall apply to signs, which are considered “abandoned signs” within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person a sign, which has been abandoned. 

(2) 	
An abandoned sign shall be removed by the landowner or person controlling the property within thirty (30) days of the abandonment as described by this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Upon the removal of any nonconforming sign or abandoned sign, whether temporary or permanent, such removal shall include all associated structures associated with the sign including, but not limited to, posts, poles, brackets, arms, trailers and supports. 


Section 1109: Prohibited Signs 
(A) 	The following signs shall be considered as prohibited signs, which shall not be permitted within Cumru Township: 
(1) 	
Spinning, animated, twirling or any other moving objects used for commercial advertising purposes with or without a message, whereas the spinning, animation and/or twirling occurs in intervals of less than fifteen (15) seconds or one (1) complete rotation within a fifteen (15) second interval during any given time of the day. 

(2) 	
Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or other message changing devices used for commercial advertising purposes, whereas the flashing, blinking, twinkling, animation and/or message changing occurs in interval of less than fifteen (15) seconds during any given time of the day.  Signs indicating the time and temperature may be permitted, provided that the message or display does not change in intervals of less than fifteen (15) seconds during any given time of the day. 

(3) 	
Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the highest roofline or upon any structure, which extends above the highest roofline of any building. 

(4) 	
Wall signs that partially extend above the roofline. 

(5) 	
Roof signs, which are erected on top of a principal or accessory building. 

(6) 	
Artistic murals, depicting scenic, historical, cultural, educational, or other similar visual scenes, may be painted on the side of a building, provided they are aesthetic, socially acceptable, and that the content has been reviewed and approved by the Cumru Township.  

(7) 	
Balloons, streamers, banners and promotion signs, exceeding the provisions of Section 1107 of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
Portable signs utilized or displayed for more than 48 cumulative hours over any 30 consecutive day period of time.   

(9) 	
Signs located on parked vehicles within twenty (20) feet of the street right-of-way for a period of time exceeding seventy-two (72) cumulative hours over any seven (7) day time period.  All such signs shall not be considered as a permitted off-premises advertising signs or billboards and shall be prohibited. 

(10) 	
Signs located on parked vehicles, which are owned or leased to the company for which the business or use applies, may park at any permitted site provided that provisional spaces on the vehicle are not offered to promote other uses or events. 

(11) 	
Signs containing vulgar messages or depicting any lewd, pornographic, lascivious or other offensive acts. 

(12) 	
Any sign exceeding the provisions for location, placement, type, area, height, clearance, visibility, sight distance, projection, quantity and illumination, as specified within the Cumru Township. 

(13) 	
Caution tape or crime scene tape that is not utilized for emergency management purposes. 

(14) 	
Signs considered as a detriment to the health, safety and/or general welfare of the community shall be prohibited in Cumru Township. 




Article 12: Nonconformities 
Section 1201: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 12 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations pertaining to nonconforming uses, lots, land areas, building and/or structures. 

(B) 	
Through the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance, there exists or will exist certain nonconformities which, if lawful before this Zoning Ordinance was passed or amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations, although such nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance or future amendments thereto. 

(C) 	
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption and on which actual building construction has been diligently conducted upon. 

(D) 	
The provisions established for nonconformities shall be subject to the interpretation of the Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these provisions, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 1202: Nonconforming Lots of Record 
(A) 	
Any lot shown on a recorded subdivision or land development plan on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, which does not meet the minimum size or width requirements of the zoning district to which it is located, may be used for a use permitted by regulations of that zoning district, provided that all yard, height, coverage and open space requirements of the zoning district shall be met.  However, when a developer or applicant has had an application for approval of a preliminary or final subdivision plan, which has been approved prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, no provision and/or regulation in this Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the developer or applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved preliminary or final plan within such time periods as are established within the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
Any lot held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, which does not meet the minimum size or width requirements of the zoning district to which it is located may be used for any use permitted in that zoning district, provided that all yard, height, coverage and open space requirements of the district are met.  However, if two (2) or more lots, combination of lots, or portions of lots with continuous frontage held under single ownership, which are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance.  If all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
No portion of a nonconforming lot or parcel of land shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and/or lot area requirements established by this Zoning Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 1203: Nonconforming Uses of Land 
(A) 	
Lawful uses of land, which at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance become nonconforming, such nonconforming use or uses may be continued by the present or any subsequent owner so long as it remains a lawful nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
A nonconforming land use shall not be enlarged, increased and/or extended in order to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished, except if the owner of such property files within thirty (30) days of the date of discontinuance a certificate of intention to maintain such use.  If such certificate is filed the time period, which a nonconforming use may be discontinued and still be reestablished, such nonconforming use shall be extended by a twelve (12) month period. 

(D) 	
A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use or to a nonconforming use of a less offensive nature.  A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 

(E) 	
No additional structures, which do not conform to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 


Section 1204: Nonconforming Buildings and Structures 
(A) 	
Lawful nonconforming structures or buildings, which at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance becomes nonconforming by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the building or structures, may be continued as long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions listed in the following subsections. 

(B) 	
A nonconforming use, building or structure shall not be enlarged or increased upon land not owned, leased or under an option to purchase at the time of the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged, increased, repaired, maintained or modified in any manner, which will further violate any applicable dimensional requirements imposed by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Total future expansion of a nonconforming building or structure shall not exceed the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The expansion may be permitted by right, provided that such expansion does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area or ground area occupied by the building or structure at the time of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The expansion may be permitted to exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area or ground area occupied by the building or structure at the time of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that a special exception is permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the expansion shall be limited to a single occurrence. 



(E) 	
Any lawful nonconforming building or other structure which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, windstorm or other similar active cause may be reconstructed in the same location, provided that: 

(1) 	
The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the height, area or volume of the damaged or destroyed building or structure. 

(2) 	
Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of damage or destruction and shall be carried on without interruption 



(F) 	
A nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, accident and/or calamity may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use, provided that the reconstructed building or structure does not exceed the area, volume and height of the destroyed buildings or structure.  The reconstruction shall be started within one (1) year from the date the building or structure was destroyed and shall be carried through without interruption. 

(G) 	
No nonconforming structure or building shall be, for any reason, moved for any distance unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 


Section 1205: Nonconforming Use of Structures or Buildings 
(A) 	
Lawful nonconforming structures or buildings, or structures or buildings and land in combination, which exist at the effective date of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions contained within this Article of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
An existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Zoning Ordinance within the zoning district where it is located may be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered up to but not more than twenty five (25) percent of its gross floor and/or use area as it existed at the time of the passage of this Zoning Ordinance or subsequent amendment, provided that the lot or lots upon which the nonconforming structure is situated, were held under single ownership or long-term lease (10 years or more) and purchased or leased prior to the enactment of this Zoning Ordinance. Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the expansion shall be limited to a single occurrence.   

(C) 	
Any enlargement, extension, construction, reconstruction or structural alteration must conform to all other regulations of the zoning district to which the use is located.  In cases where the dimensional provisions of a nonconforming use are not specified by this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Officer shall assign the most restrictive requirements for lot area, building setback, yard setback, building height, building coverage, lot coverage, and other dimensional criteria of a similar permitted use by right within the zoning district to which the use is located. 

(D) 	
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout the building, which was in use for the nonconforming use at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building unless provided for under this Article of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(E) 	
A nonconforming use of a structure, or premises and structure, may be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. Such determination shall be made by a special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall take into consideration the following issues:  the intent of the provisions for the zoning district; the ability to change the use to a conforming use; traffic generation and congestion; noise, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, heat, odor, glare, vibration, or other nuisances; external storage; solid waste disposal; sewer and water facilities; and the general impact of the use compared to the uses within 500 feet of the property lines. 

(F) 	
Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months, the structure or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 

(G) 	
Where a building or structure occupying a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, the status of the nonconforming use shall be eliminated at that point in time.  For the purpose of this subsection, damage or destruction shall be defined as a loss of more than seventy-five (75) percent of the market value at the time of the damage or destruction. 


Section 1206: Registration of Nonconformities 
The burden of proof that the use, lot, structure or building is a nonconformity shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  All known nonconformities shall be a matter of public record and shall constitute sufficient notice and the limitations therein express and implied to any transferee acquiring any right to use or own such property. 
Section 1207: Pre-Existing Planned Residential Communities 
(A) 	
Prior to the enactment of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, a few planned residential communities had been previously considered and approved under alternative zoning regulations such as planned residential developments, cluster developments, and/or lot averaging developments, which were viable land use and development alternatives permitted under the provisions of past ordinances that were in effect at that time. A list of these pre-existing planned residential communities shall be maintained by the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(B) 	
The planned residential communities that fall under the guidelines of Section 1207(A) of this Zoning Ordinance may continue as legal conforming developments provided that all principal and accessory uses are planned, developed and constructed in accordance with the pending application and/or approved plan.  No further subdivision or land development activity shall be permitted unless it is strict compliance with the pending application and/or approved plan. Any minor deviations to the principal or accessory uses or structures may be permitted, provided that a special exception application has been considered and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. 



Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1301: Statement of Intent 
(A) 	
The purpose and objective of the provisions established under Article 13 of this Zoning Ordinance is to establish specific regulations and guidelines for the administration and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Where a conflict or discrepancy should arise concerning  the procedural requirements specified by this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the Cumru Township Solicitor shall review the conflict or discrepancy and advise the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer and/or Zoning Hearing Board of the procedural requirements that should be followed. 

(C) 	
The provisions established for administration and enforcement, as established under Article 13 of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Zoning Officer.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(D) 	
Where “Cumru Township” has been identified as the person authorized to review, issue and/or enforce the provisions of Article 13 of this Zoning Ordinance, such person may include the Cumru Township Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Manager, Secretary, Engineer, Planner, Solicitor and/or other person that has been designated and authorized to conduct such tasks by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 


Section 1302: Zoning Permits, Certificates of Use and Occupancy, and Other Permits 
(A) 	
The following general requirements shall apply to zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, as reviewed and issued by Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Persons desiring to undertake any new construction, structural or site alteration, or changes in the use of a building or lot shall apply for a permit by filling out the appropriate application form and by submitting the required fee. 

(2) 	
Cumru Township shall either issue the appropriate permit or shall refuse the permit, indicating in writing the reason for refusal.  Certain construction activities, alterations or land use activities may require approval of the Board of Commissioners and/or Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
If the permit is refused by Cumru Township, the applicant may appeal the decision to the designated board that has the authority to consider the appeal. 

(4) 	
After the permit has been received by the applicant, he may undertake the action that is specifically referenced on the approved permit application.. 

(5) 	
Upon completion of such action, the applicant may apply to Cumru Township for an occupancy permit (where such a permit is required). 

(6) 	
If Cumru Township finds that the action of the applicant is in accordance with the zoning permit and any other required permit approvals, Cumru Township shall issue an occupancy permit allowing the premises to be occupied. 



(B) 	
The following specific provision shall apply to an application for a zoning permit within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
No person shall erect, alter, convert, move or add to any building, structure or sign, or alter the use of any land or structure, until Cumru Township issues a zoning permit to the person or applicant for said change or construction. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified by this Zoning Ordinance, a zoning permit is not required for normal maintenance and repairs. 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	295 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
(3) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the types of procedural requirements for a use permitted by right, special exception or conditional use: 

(a) 	
A zoning permit may be issued by Cumru Township for all uses permitted by right, subject to the provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(b) 	
A zoning permit may be issued by Cumru Township for all uses permitted as part of a zoning variance application, which has been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board and subject to the provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(c) 	
A zoning permit may be issued by Cumru Township for all uses permitted as part of a special exception application, which has been approved by the Zoning Hearing Board and subject to the provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(d) 	
A zoning permit may be issued by Cumru Township for all uses permitted as part of a conditional use application, which has been approved by the Board of Commissioners and subject to the provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(e) 	
A zoning permit may be issued by Cumru Township for all permitted accessory uses, subject to the provisions and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 



(4) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, all applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by two (2) complete sets of plans accurately drawn to scale indicating or illustrating the following information if applicable: 

(a) 	
The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon shall be drawn to scale.  If required by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance, the required information shall be prepared by a professional architect, engineer, planner or surveyor. 

(b) 	
The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures or signs existing and/or proposed extensions thereto shall be drawn to scale.  If required by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance, the required information shall be prepared by a professional architect, engineer, planner or surveyor. 

(c) 	
The number of lots or dwelling units. 

(d) 	
Off-street parking spaces provided and/or loading facilities. 

(e) 	
Statement indicating the existing or proposed use. 

(f) 	
The detailed scale drawing of the structure, building, sign or other improvement, including the precise dimensions. 

(g) 	
An attested statement or agreement that the applicant is the owner of the premises on which the improvement will be conducted or that the applicant has obtained the consent of the owner or lessor of such premises to improve the property in accordance with the permit application. 

(h) 	
All other information necessary for Cumru Township to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(5) 	
Upon approval or disapproval of the zoning permit, Cumru Township shall return one (1) copy of the permit application and plans to the applicant.  Cumru Township shall indicate that the permit has been approved or disapproved by signing the application. Where appropriate, conditions of approval should be specified on the zoning permit application.  One (1) copy of such plans shall be retained by the Zoning Officer for his permanent records and one (1) copy shall be retained by Cumru Township. 

(6) 	
Approval or denial of the requested zoning permit application shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of application was considered complete by Cumru Township or as specifically referenced under other prevailing codes or ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	296 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
(7) 	
In denying a zoning permit application, Cumru Township shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denial and specify the provision(s) of the Zoning Ordinance and/or other prevailing codes or ordinances that have not been satisfied.  Applicants shall be informed of their rights of appeal and provided with all necessary information to pursue such appeals. 

(8) 	
Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, zoning permits shall expire within one (1) year from date of issuance, if the work described in any permit has not begun.  If the work described in any zoning permit has begun, said permit shall expire after one (1) year, exclusive of any time required for administration and permitting, from date of issuance thereof, within which time said work shall be completed. 


(C) 	
The following specific provision shall apply to an application for a certificate of use and occupancy within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required upon the completion of the work and improvements authorized as part of the zoning permit and/or building permit.  It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building and/or portions thereof in any manner until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
The application for certificate of use and occupancy shall be submitted on such form as Cumru Township may prescribe. 

(3) 	
Cumru Township shall inspect any structure, building, sign, improvements and/or land or portions thereof to determine compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and permit requirements.  If satisfied that the completed work is in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance and permit requirements, a certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued. 

(4) 	
Upon inspection, Cumru Township shall either grant or deny the certificate of use and occupancy in writing, within five (5) days from the date of application or last inspection. 

(5) 	
In situations in which performance standards are imposed, no certificate of occupancy shall become permanent until after the use or facility is fully operating and only after, upon inspection by Cumru Township, it is determined that the facility is in compliance with the performance standards.  After said inspection, Cumru Township shall notify the applicant that the facility is in full compliance with all performance standards and that the certificate of use and occupancy is permanent or that the facility does not comply and that the certificate of use and occupancy is still temporary.  Unless otherwise specified, a temporary certificate of use and occupancy shall not be granted for more than ninety (90) days. 

(6) 	
The certificate of use and occupancy shall be kept on the premises and shall be publicly displayed in a manner required by Cumru Township. 



(D) 	
The following specific provision shall apply to an application for a special use permit, seasonal permits and/or temporary permit within Cumru Township: 

(1) 	
Where a special use, seasonal use or a temporary use are permitted by this Zoning Ordinance, Cumru Township may issue a special use permit, seasonal permit, or a temporary use permit to the applicant. 

(2) 	
A seasonal, special use or temporary permit may be issued by Cumru Township for a use having a periodic, intermittent or short duration of time not exceeding sixty (60) cumulative days within a calendar year. Such uses may include: carnivals; circuses; bazaars; fairs; municipal and civic events; the sale of food, product and similar merchandise; the sale of trees, seasonal flowers or other seasonal items excluding fireworks; and other similar activities conducted by a nonprofit or charitable organization, provided that activities are conducted on the same premises as the use and location of the principal activity of the sponsor. 

(3) 	
All business operations and uses conducted by peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants shall be subject to the provisions specified under Cumru Township Ordinance 683, as may be amended from time to time. 



(E) 	
The owner of the premises occupied by a lawful nonconforming use or structure may secure a Certificate of Nonconforming Use or Structure from Cumru Township. Such certificate shall be authorized by Cumru Township and shall certify to the owner his right to continue such nonconforming use or structure. 

(F) 	
Pursuant to the provisions established by Cumru Township, additional permits may be required by local, regional, county, state and federal agencies, which shall be issued prior to the commencement of any improvement or site activities. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	297 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1303: Zoning Officer 
(A) 	
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be enforced by an agent, to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners, who shall be known as the "Zoning Officer."  The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office and shall continue to serve Cumru Township until such time as the Board of Commissioners declares otherwise. 

(B) 	
The Zoning Officer is responsible to enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and shall have such duties and powers as are referenced by this Zoning Ordinance.  The Zoning Officer's duties shall include, but are not limited to the following: 

(1) 	
Receive, examine and process permit applications for zoning, land use, buildings and signs. 

(2) 	
To issue permits for the construction, alteration, repair, extension, replacement, occupancy, and uses of land, which are in accordance with the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
To record and file all applications for permits and accompanying plans and documents and keep them for public record. 

(4) 	
To inspect nonconforming uses, buildings and lots of records by examining them periodically, with the view of eliminating the nonconforming uses under the existing laws and regulations and to issue certificates of occupancy for them. 

(5) 	
Upon the request of the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board, present to such bodies facts, records and any similar information on specific requests to assist such bodies in reaching their decisions. 

(6) 	
To be responsible for periodic updates to this Zoning Ordinance and the Zoning Map, which is filed with the Cumru Township Manager or Secretary, and to include any amendments thereto. 

(7) 	
To keep an official record of all business and activities, including complaints of a violation of any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and of the action taken consequent to each such complaint. 

(8) 	
Issue permits for uses permitted by right, variance, special exception or conditional use, as specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(9) 	
Perform all other duties, as may be required for the administration of this Zoning Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be held accountable for their actions in accordance with the provisions specified by Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance by the Zoning Officer, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Zoning Hearing Board. 


Section 1304: Zoning Hearing Board 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	298 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
(A) 	
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall appoint three (3) residents and up to three (3) alternates to serve as members of the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the establishment of the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall serve three (3) year terms and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. 

(2) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of Commissioners of any vacancies, which may occur.  Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. 

(3) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall not be an employee of Cumru Township and shall not hold any other office within Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners taken after the member has received fifteen (15) days of advance notice of the intent to take such a vote.  A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. 



(C) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the organization of the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. 

(2) 	
For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Board, but where two members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, the remaining member may act for the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(3) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board, as provided by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a solicitor or attorney to oversee the procedures of the hearing in accordance with the provisions established by of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(5) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with the provisions of Cumru Township and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(6) 	
If requested by the Board of Commissioners, the Zoning Hearing Board shall submit an annual report of its activities to the Board of Commissioners. 



(D) 	
The following provisions shall apply to expenditures and fees for the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties and services, which shall be established by the Board of Commissioners. 

(2) 	
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Commissioners, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services. 

(3) 	
The applicant before the Zoning Hearing Board shall deposit with the designated secretary or treasurer of Cumru Township such a sum of money as shall be deemed sufficient by the Zoning Hearing Board and established in a resolution to pay the cost of the expenses for the hearing. These costs may include compensation in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(4) 	
Funds deposited in excess of the actual cost of the requested hearing shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the proceedings, and, in the event that the cost of the hearing exceeded the funds deposited, the applicant shall pay to the designated secretary or treasurer of Cumru Township the appropriate funds equal to such excess cost.  



(E) 	
The following provision shall apply to the general functions of the Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board: 

(1) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedures specified within Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(2) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider applications for variances, special exceptions, appeals concerning the interpretation of this Zoning Ordinance by the Zoning Officer, and other duties that are specified by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
All appeals and applications made to the Zoning Hearing Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board of Commissioners or Zoning Hearing Board. 

(4) 	
Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this Zoning Ordinance involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the grounds for any challenges to validity of this Zoning Ordinance, the use for which a special exception is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted. 



(F) 	
In all cases before the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission and Zoning Officer may review and comment on the application prior to rendering a decision. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	299 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1305: Public Hearings and Procedures 
(A) 	
The first hearing shall be commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.  Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board shall be held within forty-five (45) days of the prior hearing unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record.  An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case in chief (the part of the hearing in which the applicant presents evidence to support his or her claim or defense) within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the one hundred (100) days, including the first hearing.  Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within one hundred (100) days of the first hearing, held after the completion of the applicant's case in chief.  An applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case in chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings.  Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent, on the record by the applicant and Cumru Township, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an equal number of hearings for rebuttal. 

(B)	
 The Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board shall give notice of the public hearing in accordance with as follows: 

(1) 	
By publishing a notice once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within Cumru Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.  The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication shall be not less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. 

(2) 	
By mailing a notice thereof to the parties of interest at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing. 

(3) 	
By mailing or issuing a notice to the Cumru Township Manager, Zoning Officer, Secretary, Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Berks County Planning Commission (if requested) and to every person or organization who or which shall have registered with the Zoning Hearing Board for the purpose of receiving such notices. 

(4) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or Zoning Officer may mail notice of the hearing to the owner of every lot within five hundred (500) feet of the lot or building in question, provided that failure to give notice, either in part or in full, as stated by this subsection shall not invalidate any action by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(5) 	
The required notices by this section shall state the location of the lot or building that is the subject of the application, as well as the general nature of the request(s) being made by the applicant(s). 

(6) 	
The Board of Commissioners may establish reasonable fees to be paid by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township.  



(C) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct the hearings, or the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision of findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. 

(D) 	
The parties to the hearing shall be Cumru Township, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance or record before the Zoning Hearing Board and any other person, including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Zoning Hearing Board.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided by the Board for that purpose. 

(E) 	
The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by the parties. 

(F) 	
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. 

(G) 	
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. 

(H) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be made available to any party at cost. 

(I) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present. 

(J) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer.  Each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefore.  Conclusions based on any provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or of any act, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.  If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 45 days after the decision of the hearing officer. Where the Zoning Hearing Board has power to render a decision and the Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as required by this Zoning Ordinance, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to urge that such decision is erroneous. 

(K) 	
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him by certified mail not later than the day following its date.  To all other persons who have filed their names and addresses with the Board no later than the last day of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.  


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	300 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	301 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1306: Zoning Variances 
(A) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for zoning variance applications, whereas it is alleged that the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.  The zoning variance application shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions specified by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may require a preliminary application to be issued and reviewed by the Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
In all cases before the Zoning Hearing Board, the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission and Zoning Officer may review and comment on the zoning variance application prior to rendering a decision. 

(D) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance provided that all the following findings are made where relevant in a given case: 

(1) 	
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such condition, and not circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located. 

(2) 	
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property. 

(3) 	
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant. 

(4) 	
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare. 

(5) 	
That the variance as granted by the Zoning Hearing Board is the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue. 



(E) 	
Where the Zoning Hearing Board has jurisdiction over other zoning matters described under this Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall also hear all appeals, which an applicant may elect to bring before it with respect to any municipal ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same lot, parcel, property or development.  In any such case, the Zoning Hearing Board shall have no power to pass upon the non-zoning related issues but shall take evidence and make a record in accordance with the procedures established by this Zoning Ordinance.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact, which shall become part of the record on appeal to the court. 

(F) 	
The approval of a variance if authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, which anticipates construction or modification of a structure, creation of new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a term of one (1) year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter expire and be void, unless said construction, modification, new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards or change of use or occupancy be initiated within said one (1) year term or said term is expressly extended as part of the initial approval.  In the event that the activity anticipated by the variance should not be initiated within one (1) year of the approval or such additional term as may be expressed in the approval, or should the activity which is the subject of the variance be discontinued, the premises or structure or structure situated thereon shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 

(G) 	
For zoning variance applications, where compliance with the minimum dimensional requirements and/or maximum coverage requirements of this Zoning Ordinance are considered to be “de minimis” in terms of their impact, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider such application in accordance with state law. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	302 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1307: Special Exceptions 
(A) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for special exception applications, as permitted under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. By so providing, the Zoning Hearing Board recognizes that certain uses may or may not be appropriate at every location within any specific district and, where it appears that a use permitted by special exception fails to comply with all of the definitional aspects thereof or would be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or welfare of the community at specific locations within a district, that the use would not be permitted there. 

(B) 	
In granting any special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The Zoning Hearing Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may require a preliminary application to be issued and reviewed by the Zoning Officer. 

(C) 	
As part of the submission requirements for a special exception application, a preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the comments issued by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Zoning Officer and/or other agencies that could assist the Zoning Hearing Board with the special exception application.  All such comments shall be made either in writing and presented as evidence during the hearing or as part of sworn testimony at the public hearing. 

(E) 	
The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the following issues prior to rendering its decision on a special exception application: 

(1) 	
That such use is consistent with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  

(2) 	
That such use shall be one, which is specifically authorized as a special exception use within the zoning district wherein the applicant seeks a special exception. 

(3) 	
That the property is suitable for the use desired and that the proposed request is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies established by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
That such special exception shall only be granted subject to any applicable condition and safeguards as required by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(5) 	
That such use shall not adversely affect the general character of the neighborhood and/or property values of the adjacent uses. 

(6) 	
That such use shall not adversely affect the health, safety and/or welfare of residents or property owners within the general neighborhood. 

(7) 	
That there will be no adverse effect of the proposed special exception upon the logical, efficient and economical extension of public facilities and services, including, public water, sanitary sewers, streets, police and fire protection, public schools, and all other similar facilities and services that are considered appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board. 

(8) 	
That the proposed location of any residential or non-residential use is suitable with respect to probable effects upon highway traffic and assures adequate access arrangements in order to protect major streets and highways from undue congestion and hazard. 

(9) 	
Where applicable, the adequacy of sanitation and public safety provisions shall be considered, whereas, a, letter or certificate of adequacy of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply  from the municipal or governmental health agency with jurisdiction shall be considered and deemed advisable. 

(10) 	
The Board may impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are necessary to assure that the intent of the Zoning Ordinance is complied with, which conditions may include, but are not limited to, harmonious design of buildings, planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements and adequate standards of parking and sanitation. 



(F) 	
The approval of a special exception, if authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, which anticipates construction or modification of a structure, creation of new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards for a property or structure situated thereon, shall be valid and remain in effect for a term of one (1) year from the date of said approval and shall thereafter expire and be void, unless said construction, modification, new or revised lot lines or dimensional standards or change of use or occupancy be initiated within said one (1) year term or said term is expressly extended as part of the initial approval.  In the event that the activity anticipated by the special exception should not be initiated within one (1) year of the approval or such additional term as may be expressed in the approval or should the activity, which is the subject of the special exception be discontinued, the premises or structure situated thereon shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.  Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, an extension of time may be granted by Cumru Township for a period of time considered appropriate by the applicant and Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
As part of the special exception application, the Zoning Hearing Board may consider certain background studies, plans and/or reports that may be required as supplemental documentation to support the special exception application.  The Zoning Hearing Board shall reserve the right to either, require, not require, or defer the submittal of certain background studies, plans and/or reports as part of the special exception application.  If not required or deferred as part of the special exception application, the required background studies, plans and/or reports shall be appropriately considered by Cumru Township as part of the application for a subdivision plan, land development plan and/or permit. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	303 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1308: Conditional Uses 
(A) 
The Board of Commissioners shall hear requests for conditional use applications, as permitted under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  By so providing, the Board of Commissioners recognize that certain uses may or may not be appropriate at every location within any specific district and, where it appears that a conditional use fails to comply with all of the definitional aspects thereof or would be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or welfare of the community at specific locations within a district, that the use would not be permitted there. 

(B) 	
In granting any conditional use, the Board of Commissioners may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. 

(C) 	
As part of the submission requirements for a conditional use application, a preliminary subdivision plan or preliminary land development plan shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
Prior to the commencement of the conditional use hearing or during the proceedings of the conditional use hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the comments of the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer, the appointed professional consultants and/or other agencies that could assist the Board of Commissioners with the merits of the conditional use application. All such comments shall be made either in writing and presented as evidence during the hearing or as part of sworn testimony at the conditional use hearing. 

(E) 	
All of the standards for conditional uses hereinafter set forth shall, where relevant, apply to all conditional uses within Cumru Township and are deemed definitional in character so that the failure to comply with any standards shall be deemed a failure to bring the applicant within that definitional aspect for which a conditional use may be granted; or, in the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, such failure to comply with the standards may be deemed a basis for the impositions of appropriate conditions to such grant.  It is further the intention of the Board of Commissioners that the standards hereinafter described shall be deemed additional standards and shall in no way impair any other applicable standard described elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance. Where there is a conflict between the standards set forth in this article and other standards elsewhere established by this Zoning Ordinance or other applicable ordinances, it is intended that the more stringent thereof shall apply, and it is not the intent of this article to abrogate or impair any other such standards or requirements. 

(F) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall consider the following general issues and site requirements prior to rendering its decision on a conditional use application: 

(1) 	
That such use is consistent with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) 	
That the property is suitable for the use desired and that the proposed request is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies established by this Zoning Ordinance. 

(3) 	
The minimum and maximum dimensional requirements for the proposed use within the appropriate zoning district shall be held in compliance by the applicant. 

(4) 	
The applicant shall establish by a fair preponderance of credible evidence that the use intended at the location intended shall not be contrary to the public health, safety, morals and/or public welfare. 

(5) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the capacity of the road system providing access to the property or lot in question has sufficient capacity to accommodate the use and that when the incremental increase in traffic attributable to the proposed use is superimposed upon the existing use of the road shall not lower the level of service of the roads or any portions thereof or any street intersections below a level of service “C”. 

(6) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the interior traffic circulation for the proposed use at the proposed location, including but not limited to acceleration and deceleration lanes where required at the proposed entrances to the location, shall be adequate to provide safe and convenient circulation for users of the facility, visitors to the facility, employees of the facility and all emergency vehicles that may require entrance thereon. 

(7) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation the facility or use provides safe and convenient pedestrian access and internal circulation within the grounds of the facility and particularly for points of access from the facility to the parking areas. 

(8) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that adequate screening and buffering is provided between the lands in question and surrounding residential uses and residentially zoned districts to screen the facility from view and preclude any glare from lighting or noise from being ascertainable beyond the boundaries of the property. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the local fire departments have the abilities to provide adequate fire protection and emergency management services for the proposed use. 

(10) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that adequate water storage is available within the region for fire-fighting purposes, which shall include but not be limited to pumping at all hours, at a minimum of 25 pounds per square inch (psi) pressure, without impairing the uses of the water supply for ordinary purposes on the premises and shall be in compliance with all applicable governmental regulations. 

(11) 	
Where in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners, the use or facility may require supervision and protection, the applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that additional security measures will be accounted for by the owner or site manager so the facility or use does not create a continuous burden on the emergency management services and providers. 

(12) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the existing or proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities have sufficient capacity for the proposed use. Where on-lot sewage disposal methods are permitted, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to determine if on-lot sewage disposal is a viable option considering the proposed use, wastewater flow and site characteristics. 

(13) 	
The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that the existing or proposed municipal water supply facilities have sufficient capacity for the proposed use.  Where water supply 




Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	304 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	305 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
methods are permitted, the applicant shall consult with a qualified hydrogeologist to determine if on-lot water supply is a viable option considering the proposed use, groundwater supply and site characteristics. 
(14) 	The applicant shall provide evidence with supporting documentation that there will be no increase in surface water runoff and erosion within the property or at the boundaries of the facility as a result of the site improvements, as specified by Cumru Township. 
(G) 	The following provisions shall apply for the public hearing procedures and administrative requirements for all conditional use applications within Cumru Township: 
(1) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the application pursuant to public notice within sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application.  The request for a hearing shall be accompanied by a completed application on required form.  The date for the scheduling of the first hearing may be extended by the applicant on the record or in writing addressed to the Board of Commissioners, in which event the date agreed upon by the applicant shall be considered timely for purposes of this subsection. 

(2) 	
As part of the conditional use hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall consider those comments issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Zoning Officer, Engineer, the appointed professional consultants and all other agencies providing comments, as may be authorized by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(3) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall conduct the hearing or the Board of Commissioners may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer.  The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board of Commissioners.  However, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to Cumru Township, may waive decision or findings by the Board of Commissioners and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final. All hearings must be completed no later than one hundred (100) days after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas. 

(4) 	
Any substantial revisions to the application or plan made by the applicant subsequent to filing of the application or plan or its review by the Planning Commission shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Planning Commission as specified by this Zoning Ordinance.  In such event, the Zoning Officer shall secure from the applicant a written extension of the date within which the Board of Commissioners must hold a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.  If the applicant fails to execute the extension, the Board of Commissioners shall decide the conditional use application on the basis of the plan and application as originally filed. 

(5) 	
A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made by a certified court reporter, whose appearance fee shall be reimbursed through the application fee paid to Cumru Township as part of the initial application. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by Cumru Township or by any party requesting an original transcript.  In either case, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the party or person requesting such copies. 

(6) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application within forty-five (45) days after the last hearing before the Board of Commissioners.  Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact, reasons or conclusions based thereon.  Any conclusions based upon this Zoning Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, or any rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.  A copy of the decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day following its date. 

(7) 	
If, after the conclusion of the public hearing(s), the application is amended or revised, the Board of Commissioners shall hold one or more public hearings thereon as may be necessary and shall issue a new decision thereon in conformance with the procedure established in this section.  In the event that the Board of Commissioners fail to commence the public hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing or fail to complete the hearing no later than 100 days after the completion 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	306 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
of the applicant's case-in-chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.  When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because the Board of Commissioners failed to commence the hearings, complete the hearings, or render a decision as required by this section, the Board of Commissioners shall give public notice of the decision within ten (10) days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this section.  If the Board of Commissioners shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.  Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(H) 	
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the applicant for a conditional use approval from obtaining all other required approvals mandated by Cumru Township as well as other pertinent laws, ordinances and regulations that have been adopted by local, state and federal agencies.  This may include the submission of a subdivision plan and/or land development plan to be prepared by the applicant and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(I) 	
Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Commissioners in its decision and order, a conditional use approval shall expire if the applicant does not secure a permit or, if no permit is required, then a use and occupancy permit, within twelve (12) months from the date of the written approval relating to the conditional use application, unless, the applicant makes written application to the Board of Commissioners for an extension of time, which shall be based upon reasonable cause shown.  No formal hearing shall be required by the Board of Commissioners in the consideration of such application.  Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, an extension of time may be granted by Cumru Township for a period of time considered appropriate by the applicant and Cumru Township..  

(J) 	
As part of the conditional use application, the Board of Commissioners may consider certain background studies, plans and/or reports that may be required as supplemental documentation to support the conditional use application. The Board of Commissioners shall reserve the right to either, require, not require, or defer the submittal of certain background studies, plans and/or reports as part of the conditional use application.  If not required or deferred as part of the conditional use application, the required background studies, plans and/or reports shall be appropriately considered by Cumru Township as part of the application for a subdivision plan, land development plan and/or permit. 


Section 1309: Amendments 
(A) The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the contents of this Zoning Ordinance including the Zoning Map.  Any amendment, supplement, reclassification or change may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, or by a petition to the Board of Commissioners from a property owner within Cumru Township.  The Board of Commissioners, by resolution adopted at a stated or special meeting, shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed change, amendment or repeal and cause notice thereof to be given as follows: 
(1) 	
By publishing a notice once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.  The first publication shall be not more than thirty (30) days or less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.  

(2) 	
The notice shall also set forth the principal provisions of the proposed change, amendment or repeal in reasonable detail and a reference to a place in Cumru Township where copies of the proposed change, amendment or repeal may be examined or purchased at a charge not exceeding the cost thereof.  Full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending such hearing. 

(3) 	
If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the authorized representatives of Cumru Township at points deemed sufficient along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens.  The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one (1) week prior to the date of the hearing. In addition to the requirement that notice be posted along 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	307 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
the property, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by Cumru Township at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area being rezoned as evidenced by tax records within the possession of Cumru Township.  The notice shall include the location, date and time of the public hearing.   
(B) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall refer each petition or proposal for change or amendment, whether under this article or under another article, to the Planning Commission, who shall consider whether or not such proposed change or amendment would be, in the view of the Planning Commission, consistent with and desirable in furtherance of the Comprehensive Plan upon which this Zoning Ordinance is based, as the same may be modified from time to time.  The Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendations and conclusions to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days.  The Board of Commissioners shall take such recommendations and conclusions into consideration in reaching its decision, but shall not be bound thereby. 

(C) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall submit the proposed zoning amendment to the Berks County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing for its review and comments.  The Board of Commissioners shall take such comments into consideration in reaching its decision, but shall not be bound thereby. 

(D) 	
The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(E) 	
If the zoning amendment is changed substantially or revised to include land previously not affected by it, the Board of Commissioners shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the zoning amendment. 

(F) 	
If the zoning amendment is enacted by the Board of Commissioners, an endorsed copy of the zoning amendment shall be forwarded to the Berks County Planning Commission within thirty (30) day of enactment.   


Section 1310: Curative Amendments 
(A) 
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this Zoning Ordinance, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Board of Commissioners with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard.  All such landowner curative amendments shall be decided as provided in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
Cumru Township by formal action, may declare this Zoning Ordinance or portions thereof substantively invalid and propose the preparation of a municipal curative amendment to overcome such invalidity.  All such municipal curative amendments shall be decided as provided in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(C) 	
All landowner curative amendments and/or municipal curative amendments shall be referred to the Cumru Township Planning Commission and the Berks County Planning Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to the initial hearing date to provide both agencies with an opportunity to submit recommendations. 

(D) 	
The advertisement, posting and scheduling of the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(E) 	
If the landowner curative amendment and/or the municipal curative amendment is enacted by the Board of Commissioners, an endorsed copy of the amendment shall be forwarded to the Berks County Planning Commission within thirty (30) day of enactment. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	308 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 1311: Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan Implementation Agreement 
(A) 	
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance has been adopted in accordance with: the requirements of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended; with the goals, objectives and policies established within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan; and with consideration for the overall character of Cumru Township considering issues relative to growth, development, preservation and redevelopment.  

(B) 	
As part of the provisions established within the Intergovernmental Agreement for the implementation efforts associated the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, Cumru Township has forwarded a complete copy of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, to Brecknock Township, Kenhorst Borough, Mohnton Borough, Shillington Borough, the Governor Mifflin School District, and the Berks County Planning Commission for municipal and intergovernmental review under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(C) 	
The purpose statements and community development objectives should be utilized when considering amendments to the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009.  All future amendments to the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 should be generally consistent with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  Prior to the adoption of any future amendments, Cumru Township should follow the procedural guidelines referenced in the Intergovernmental Agreement for the implementation efforts associated the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 


Section 1312: Appeals 
(A) 
All appeals concerning the review, application, interpretation and decisions authorized by this Zoning Ordinance shall be in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
All appeals concerning an alleged error in the processing or enactment of any components of this Zoning Ordinance shall be raised by appeal taken directly from the action of the Board of Commissioners to the appropriate court, which shall not be filed later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.  


Section 1313: Filing Fees and Costs 
(A) 
The Board of Commissioners shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses as well as the collection procedures for zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, special exceptions, variances and appeals and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Ordinance.  The resolution or schedule of the fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the Cumru Township Zoning Officer. 

(B) 	
The Board of Commissioners may alter or change the schedule of the fees by resolution in accordance the appropriate provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 1314: Violations, Penalties and Remedies 
(A) 
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by Cumru Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by Cumru Township as a result thereof.  No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.  If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, Cumru Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determines otherwise as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment. 

(C) 	
Nothing contained in this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than Cumru Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance. 

(D) 	
In the event any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, or in case any land, building or structure for which a use and occupancy permit is required is conveyed or possession otherwise transferred to a bona fide purchaser or lessee without obtaining such certificate of occupancy and delivering the same to such bona fide purchaser or lessee at or prior to conveyance or transfer of possession, whichever first occurs, the Board of Commissioner, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of Cumru Township any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or land or the conveyance thereof, or to prevent in or about such premises any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. 


Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	309 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 	310 Article 13: Administration and Enforcement 
Article 14: Municipal Enactment 
Section 1401: Municipal Adoption by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners    
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 was initially adopted on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 686, which was an implementation effort relating to the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 is hereby amended, restated and enacted on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 689. 
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners 
President 
Vice-President 
Member 
Member 
ATTEST: 

Member Cumru Township Secretary 
Section 1402: Effective Date 
The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 shall become effective upon municipal adoption by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 



Cumru Township 
Subdivision and Land Development  Ordinance of 2009 

Table of Contents 
Page Article 1: General Provisions 
Section 101: Preamble 1 Section 102: Short Title 1 Section 103: Purpose 1 Section 104: Community Development Objectives 2 Section 105: Application and Interpretation 2 Section 106: Severability 3 Section 107: Repealer 3 Section 108: Effective Date 3 

Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201: General Interpretation 4 Section 202: Specific Terms 4 
Article 3: Application Procedures 
Section 301: General Procedures 23 Section 302: Authority and Jurisdiction 23 Section 303: Sketch Plan Application and Review 24 Section 304: Preliminary Plan Application and Review 24 Section 305: Final Plan Application and Review 27 Section 306: Plans Exempted from Standard Procedures 30 Section 307: Land Development Plans 32 Section 308: Application Fees 32 Section 309: Modifications 32 Section 310: Municipal Improvements and Contributions 32 Section 311: Municipal Approval and Recording of Plans 33 Section 312: Appeals         33 

Article 4: Plan Requirements 
Section 401: Statement of Intent 34 Section 402: Sketch Plan        34 Section 403: Preliminary Plan        35 Section 404: Final Plan 39 Section 405: Environment Impact Assessment 44 Section 406: Community Facilities Impact Assessment      45 Section 407: Traffic Impact Assessment 45 Section 408: Utility Impact Assessment        48 Section 409: As-Built Plan or Improvements Plan      48 
Page Article 5: Design Standards and Specifications Section 501: Statement of Intent 51 Section 502: Street Design Standards 52 Section 503: Street Construction and Improvement Specifications 58 Section 504: Street Names and Addresses 58 Section 505: Street Signs and Lighting 58 Section 506: Blocks, Lots and Parcel 59 Section 507: Curbs, Sidewalks, Trails and Greenways 60 Section 508: Monuments and Markers 61 Section 509: Driveways and Access Lanes 62 Section 510: Off-Street Parking and Loading 64 Section 511: Easements and Rights-of-Way 64 Section 512: Stormwater Management 65 Section 513: Riparian Buffers 66 Section 514: Erosion and Sedimentation Control 68 Section 515: Sanitary Sewage Disposal 69 Section 516: Water Supply        70 Section 517: Well Head Protection 73 Section 518: Utilities         73 Section 519: Exterior Lighting        73 Section 520: Landscaping        76 Section 521: Woodland Extraction for Subdivision and Land Development 80 Section 522: Tree Protection and Replacement 81 Section 523: Community Facilities       82 Section 524: Parks, Recreation and Open Space 82 Section 525: Solid Waste Management 84 

Article 6: Contracts, Fees and Contributions 
Section 601: Statement of Intent 85 Section 602: Improvement Guarantees and Contracts 85 Section 603: Acceptance of Streets and Other Improvements 87 Section 604: Maintenance Guarantee 87 Section 605: Public Utilities and Municipal Authorities      87 Section 606: Final Release from the Improvement Bond 87 Section 607: Contributions and Fees 88 

Article 7: Administration  and Enforcement 
Section 701: Statement of Intent 89 Section 702: Amendments 89 Section 703: Records         90 Section 704: Preventive Remedies 90 Section 705: Appeals         90 Section 706: Enforcement Remedies 90 
Page 
Article 8:  Municipal Enactment  
Section 801:  Municipal Adoption by the Board of Supervisors  91  
Section 802:  Effective Date         91  

Appendices  
Appendix A:  Subdivision and Land Development Plan Application Form  
Appendix B:  Model Formats for Municipal Approval and Recording  
Appendix C:  Summary Chart of Street Design Standards and Specifications  
Minimum Sight Distance Requirements and Street Intersections  


Article 1: General  Provisions 
Section 101:   Preamble 
An Ordinance establishing regulations, specifications and restrictions for the subdivision and development of land within the Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and for said purposes establishing application procedures, plan requirements, design standards, improvement specifications, and providing for the administrative enforcement and amendment provisions in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. 
Section 102:   Short Title 
This Ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as the "Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009”. 
Section 103:   Purpose 
(A) 	
The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 has been adopted in accordance with: the requirements of Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code; the goals, objectives and policies established within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan; and consideration for the overall character of Cumru Township considering issues relative to growth, development, preservation and redevelopment.  In addition, the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is designed to accomplish the following: 

(1) 	
To create and maintain conditions that are favorable to the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of Cumru Township 

(2) 	
To identify, protect and preserve the physical and environmental amenities within Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
To provide opportunities for growth and development by considering environmental limitations, existing land uses, infrastructure, and the suburban characteristics of Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
To provide for a system of conservation areas through the preservation of floodplains, steep slopes, woodlands and farmlands, as well as providing areas for passive and active recreation. 

(5) 	
To achieve and sustain a high quality natural resource system (water, biotic, land and air) to protect public health and safety, and support and protect a diversity of ecosystems. 

(6) 	
To conserve and enhance scenic resources that reflects the natural, historical, agricultural, and cultural heritage within Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
To provide for the orderly, efficient, integrated, and harmonious development of land within Cumru Township that will meet the needs of existing and future residents. 

(8) 	
To provide for the efficient and orderly extension of community facilities and services, which meet the needs of the community while staying within the fiscal budget limitations of Cumru Township. 

(9) 	
To provide parks, recreation facilities and open space areas, which meet the needs of the residents within the community and the region. 

(10) 	
To improve, maintain and plan sanitary sewage disposal facilities and water supply facilities in an effort to meet the needs of the community, protect the environment and support development consistent with land use plans. 

(11) 	
To ensure that basic utility services and facilities, including sanitary sewage facilities, water supply facilities, communication systems and energy supplies are available to serve existing and prospective uses within Cumru Township. 

(12) 	
To plan, design, construct and maintain a safe, efficient and diversified transportations system, which optimizes mobility, strengthens the economy and protects the environment. 

(13) 	
To achieve a high level of intergovernmental planning by coordinating efforts with local and regional groups within the public and private sectors. 

(14) 	
To assure the equitable and just processing of subdivision and land development plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the observance by both the applicant and municipal officials. 

(15) 	
To implement past planning efforts including: the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan; the Cumru Township Act 537 Plan; and the Berks County Comprehensive Plan (Vision 2020). 

(16) 	
To execute and comply with the Berks County Conservation Zoning Incentive Program. 

(17) 	
To make a reasonable effort to comply with the Intergovernmental Agreement for the implementation efforts associated the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan 



(B) 	
The purpose statements contained under Section 103 of the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 are intended to provide overall guidance and direction, as well as to establish the foundation for community growth, development, preservation and redevelopment efforts within Cumru Township.  Should one (1) or more purpose statements become unfeasible or cannot be implemented for any reason, the validity of this Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall not be invalid or unconstitutional. 


Section 104:   Community Development Objectives 
The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 attempts to emulate through its regulations the goals, objectives and policies of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  These regulations have been established with considerations to the physical characteristics, population trends, housing characteristics, existing land use characteristics, community facilities and services and existing transportation characteristics of Cumru Township. 

Section 105:  Application and Interpretation 
(A) 	
Except as hereinafter provided, all subdivision or development of land within Cumru Township shall be in conformity with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements to meet the stated purposes indicated under Sections 103 and 104 of this Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Where the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall be complied with unless otherwise directed by the Board of Commissioners. 

(D) 	
Where the provisions of any other municipal statute, ordinance, or regulations impose greater restrictions than those specified in this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the provisions of such other municipal statute, ordinance, or regulation shall be complied with unless otherwise directed by the Board of Commissioners. 

(E) 	
Where the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance conflict with the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be complied with unless otherwise directed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 

(F) 	
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

(G) 	
No site improvements shall be made to any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(H) 	
Unless and until a subdivision and/or land development plan has been approved and recorded in accordance with all standards and provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, no lots within a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold and no permits shall be issued in order to erect any building upon land within a development. 

(I) 	
Where under special and unique conditions, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in an unnecessary hardship, such reasonable exceptions thereto may be made, provided it will not affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and property owners of Cumru Township. 

(J) 	
After approval or endorsement by the Cumru Township Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners, the subdivision or land development plan shall be recorded in the office of the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 


Section 106: Severability 
Should any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 107: Repealer 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, together with the amendments and supplements thereto, are hereby repealed to the extent that the same conflict with the provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance; provided however, that the provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any provision of such repealed ordinance or to punish any offense against any such repealed ordinance committed prior to the effective date of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
Section 108:  Effective Date 
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners initially enacted the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 687.  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 690.  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 shall become effective upon municipal adoption.  


Article 2: Definitions 
Section 201:  General Interpretation. 
(A) 	
For the purpose of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, certain terms and words are defined under Section 202. The following guidelines shall be utilized to interpret the terminology of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance: 

(1) 	
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 

(2) 	
Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 

(3) 	
Words in the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. 

(4) 	
The word "shall", “must” or “will” is mandatory. 

(5) 	
The word "may" or “should” is permissive. 

(6) 	
The word "person" includes “individual”, “corporation”, “partnership”, “organization”, “association”, “trust”, or other similar entities. 

(7) 	
The words "used for" include "designed for", "arranged for", "intended for", "maintained for", or "occupied for". 

(8) 	
The word "building" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof". 

(9) 	
The word “structure” includes “building” and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase “or part thereof”. 

(10) 	
The word “street” includes “expressway”, “arterial”, “highway”, “thoroughfare”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “court”, “lane” and “road”. 

(11) 	
The word “watercourse” includes “channel”, “creek”, “ditch”, “drain”, “dry run”, “spring”, “stream” and “swale”. 



(B) 	
Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. 


Section 202:   Specific Terms 
Terms or words used in this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall be construed as defined below.  When terms, phrases or words are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply. 
Abut:	  The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another.   
Access Drive:  An improved cartway or paved service road designed to provide vehicular access between the public 
road and the off-street parking area for the designated use. 
Access Point: A clearly defined point of ingress and egress for vehicles at the street line. 
Accessory Building or Structure: A building subordinate to the principal building on a lot and used for purposes 

customarily incidental to those of the principal use. 

Accessory Use: A subordinate use of a portion of a lot, which is customarily incidental to the main or principal use of 
land or of a building on a lot. 
Acre: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 

Act:  The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 247: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Act 537: The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as may be amended from time to time. 
Act 537 Plan:  The Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Board of Commissioners in accordance 

with Pennsylvania Act 537, as amended. 
Adjacent: The state of being side by side, next to or adjoining one another. 
ADT (Average Daily Traffic): The average number of vehicles that pass over a given point per day. 
Agent:  Any person other than the applicant or developer who, acting for the applicant or developer, submits 

subdivision or land development plans to Cumru Township for the purpose of obtaining approval. 
Alluvial Soils:  Soils, which have been formed in alluvium and deposited by past stream or flooding conditions. 
Alluvium: Soil material such as sand, silt or clay that has been deposited on land by past stream or flooding 

conditions. Alteration(s):  Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, joists, rafters, headers, or enclosed walls, or any enlargement 
or modification thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving of such building from one location or position to another, or any other change of use of a building or a lot. Annexation:  The act of adding, joining or uniting one (1) lot or parcel of land to another lot or parcel of land in order 
to create out of the said two (2) lots or parcels of land a larger lot or parcel of land intended for separate use, building 
development, or transfer of ownership. Applicant:  A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and assigns. 
Application for Development: Every application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of construction or development including but not limited to an application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan. 
Appointing Authority:  The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Architect: An architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Berm:  An earth mound with a uniform side slope covered with grass, shrubbery or ground cover and which is 

designed and intended to obstruct views, create landscape interest, impound water and/or to establish final grade. 

Block: A tract of land or a lot or group of lots bounded by streets, public parks, railroad rights-of-way, water courses 
or bodies of water, boundary lines of Cumru Township, or by any combination of the above. 
Board:  The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Board of Commissioners: The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Buffer Yard:  A continuous strip of land, which is clear of all buildings and paved areas and is adequately landscaped 

in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Building:  Any combination of material forming any structure, which is erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, whereas the framed components or structural parts are designed for the complete enclosure (with walls and a roof) and support for individuals, animals or property of any kind. 
Building Area: The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of all primary and accessory buildings on a lot, excluding unroofed porches, paved terraces, steps, eaves and gutters, but including all enclosed extensions.  This definition shall not be construed as or compared to the definitions for “lot area (building)” or “building lot area”.  
Building Coverage:  The percentage of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings. 
Building Envelope: The area of a lot that has no building or construction restrictions such as, building set back requirements, rights-of-way, easements, floodplains, wetlands, slopes over 20 percent in grade, or similar restrictions as defined within the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Building Frontage:  The front of a building considering the location of the main entrance and the public street providing access.  For corner lots, the building frontage shall be established along both streets to which the building has frontage or access. 
Building Height:  The vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the average roof height, as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by Cumru Township. 
Building Length:  The longest horizontal dimension of a building, as measured in a single straight direction. 
Building Setback: The minimum distance a building must be setback from the ultimate street right-of-way line (where it exists) or from the street legal right-of-way line (where the ultimate right-of-way does not exist) of the street immediately adjacent thereto. 
Building Setback Line: The line within a property establishing the minimum required distance between any building, or portions thereof, to be erected or altered and a street right-of-way (except the right-of-way of a service street).  The distance shall be measured at right angles from the street right-of-way line, which abuts the property, and the building setback line shall be parallel to said right-of-way line. 
Carbonate Geology Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which are generally underlain by geological features with limestone and dolomite characteristics, as defined and further regulated under Section 507 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Cartway:  The portion of a street right-of-way, whether paved or unpaved designed for vehicular use. 
Centerline (Street): A line measured midway between and parallel to the street right-of-way line, or as otherwise defined on plans and deeds of record. 
Certificate of Use and Occupancy: A statement issued and enforced by the Zoning Officer or other code official designated by Cumru Township, whereas upon the completion, conversion, extension or modification of a new building or existing building, a certificate of compliance is issued and the building can be lawfully occupied for the intended use or activity. 
Clear Cutting:  The removal or destruction of all vegetation from an area of land, or the removal or cutting of more than ninety (90) percent of the woodlands on any lot or parcel of land.  
Clear Sight Triangle: An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection, as prescribed by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, which shall be measured thirty (30) inches above the ground elevation to ten (10) feet above ground elevation.  The area is further defined by connecting three (3) points consisting of the point of intersection of the streets and a point located at a specified linear distance along the centerline of the intersecting streets. 
Commercial Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, retail sales, businesses, offices, personal services, banks, financial institutions, restaurants, communications, recreation, and other similar commercial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Commercial Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for a business or trade activity of any kind, including construction, excavating, earthmoving equipment, or similar equipment, regardless of the use, excluding a Class I and II motor vehicle, which is properly licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a development, designed and intended for use or enjoyment of all residents of the development in which it is located. Common open spaces shall not include: land areas within street rights-of-way; required open areas between buildings; required open areas between buildings and street rights-of-way, driveways and parking areas; and other areas that may be specified within the Zoning Ordinance.  No dwelling unit, accessory building or parking area may be located within common open spaces. 
Common Parking Area: A parking facility other than those provided within the lot lines of a lot on which one (1) single-family detached dwelling, one (1) single-family semi-detached dwelling, or one (1) townhouse is located. 
Completion: The act of bringing to a condition of physical completeness and readiness for use and occupancy. 
Comprehensive Plan. The Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Conditional Use:  A use in a particular zoning district by approval of the Board of Commissioners in accordance with the specific criteria set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
Conservation Overlay Districts:  Overlay provisions established to consider conservation management, environmental resource protection, natural resources, and open space preservation.  These provisions are intended to supplement and enhance the existing underlying zoning district regulations for certain land areas and water features including: floodplains; wetlands and hydric soils; steep slopes; woodlands; riparian buffers; and carbonate geology. 
Conservation Use: The preservation and utilization of land and surface water as wildlife habitats, forests, farmland, meadows, wetlands, lakes, streams, rivers, and other similar uses or features that involve no site improvements other than those required for education, recreation or municipal uses. 
Consistency: An agreement or correspondence between matters being compared, which denotes a reasonable rational, similar, connection or relationship. 
Construction:  The placement of materials and equipment in a defined area to be assembled, built, applied and/or demolished in a temporary or permanent manner, as approved by the designated officials of Cumru Township. 
Construction Site: The total necessary land area required for all buildings or uses within a unified development before a zoning permit may be issued. 
Conversion: To change or adapt land or structures to a different use, occupancy or purpose. 
County: The County of Berks, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
County Planning Commission: The Berks County Planning Commission. 
Court:  A portion of a lot unoccupied above grade but partially or wholly surrounded by the walls of a structure or buildings. 
Critical Environmental Area: An area of land or water with one or more of the following characteristics: steep slopes; floodplain; wetlands; hydric soils; high water table soils; land subject to hazardous, municipal or industrial waste; fault areas; sinkholes; stream corridors; estuaries; habitats of endangered species; and/or other protected areas, species or habitats listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory. 
Crosswalk:  A defined area within a public or private street right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from one side of the street or block to the other side of the street or block. 
Curb Line: The point where the face of the curb meets the edge of the cartway.  If no curb exists, the curbline shall be considered the edge of the improved cartway. 
Dedication:  The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use. 
Deed: A written document whereby an estate in real property is described, conveyed and recorded. 
Deed Restriction:  Clauses included in a deed or other recorded document, which restricts, controls or limits the general use of a defined parcel of land or development. 
Density: The total number of residential dwelling units per acre or lot area. 
Depression: A low place or elevation of any size surrounded by higher ground on all sides and having no natural outlet for surface drainage. 
Designated Common Open Space: The area designated as “common open space” within a residential development, containing open areas for recreational uses and natural resource conservation. 
Developer: Any landowner, agent of such landowner, equitable owner, or tenant with the permission of the landowner, for whom subdivision or land development plans are being or have been made. 
Development:  Any man made change to improved or unimproved land, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the installation of utilities, filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations. 
Development Plan: A proposal for the development of land, prepared in accordance with the provisions specified by Cumru Township, including a plan for subdivision or land development, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.  The phrase "provisions of the development plan" when used in this Ordinance shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition. 
Diameter at Breast Height: The diameter of a tree trunk, as measured fifty-four (54) inches from the ground surface. 
Distance Between Buildings:  The shortest horizontal distance between buildings. 
District: A portion of Cumru Township within which certain uniform regulations, permitted uses, procedural requirement, utility provisions and dimensional specifications, or combinations thereof, as they apply under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Driveway: A privately owned and improved access drive, which provides vehicular access between a public road or an approved private road into the lot or parcel having frontage on the road. 
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof arranged, intended, designed or used as the living quarters for one 
(1) or more families living independently of each other.  Such buildings as hospitals, hotels, boarding, rooming, lodging houses, nursing homes, motels and institutional residences are not included in the definition of dwelling. The following dwelling types are further defined as follows: 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling:  A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family and having no common wall with an adjacent building. 
Single-Family Semi-Detached Dwelling: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied exclusively as a residence for two (2) families, one (1) family living on each side of a vertical common wall. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for three (3) or more families.  Individual dwelling units may share up to three (3) part walls with other units and either have a common outside access areas or have individual outside access areas.  Types of such buildings shall include townhouses, apartments and/or condominiums. 
Townhouse: A building arranged, designed and intended to be occupied exclusively as a residence for one (1) family, which is one (1) of a group of three (3) or more such buildings, placed side by side and separated by unpierced vertical common walls, each dwelling having at least one (1) separate entrance from the outside. 
Apartment Building: A building on a single lot arranged, designed and intended to be occupied as a residence for two (2) or more families, and in which the dwelling units may be separated horizontally and/or vertically. 
Condominium:  Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common open space solely for the owners of those portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act, as amended, or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, as amended. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, single-family dwelling constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania intended for permanent occupancy contained in one (1) unit, or in two (2) or more units designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. 
Modular or Manufactured Home:  Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on the building site. Housing units defined as mobile homes are excluded from this definition. 
Secondary Housing Unit:  A separate housing unit that is secondary or independent from the primary housing unit or permitted use, which may consist of guest houses and/or accessory apartments, which are designed in accordance with the provisions specified under Section 712 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement: A defined parcel area of land or right-of-way, which is granted or conveyed for the limited use of land for public, quasi-public or private purposes. 
Egress: A point of exit from a property. 
Electric Substation: An assemblage of equipment for purposes other than generation or utilization through which electric energy in bulk is passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics to meet the need of the general public. 
Elevation: The horizontal alignment of a surface above mean sea level, as it exists in pre-development conditions or as it is proposed in post development conditions. 
Centerline Elevation:  The elevation of the street at the midpoint of the street. 
Curb Elevation: The elevation of the street at the curb line. 
First Floor Elevation:  The elevation of the level of living space at the main entrance of the building. 
Garage Elevation:  The elevation of the garage floor at the center of the garage door. 
Employees: The total number of workers (including both part-time and full-time) present on a parcel of land at any given time, other than temporary or occasional construction workers. 
Engineer: A professional engineer, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Environmental Impact Assessment Report: A detailed written report that provides discussion of significant environmental impacts and provides reasonable alternatives, which would avoid or minimize adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the human environment. 
Erosion:  The removal of soil, rock or surface particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other agents. 
Excavation: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel or rock is dug into, cut, quarried, or moved. 
Facade: The front of a building facing a public or private street or any other building face that is given special architectural treatment. 
Farm: An area of land, including all buildings, accessory buildings, farm buildings and one (1) single-family detached principal dwelling, which are utilized as part of an agricultural operation and where the primary source of income is derived from property. 
Farm Animals: The raising and ownership of chickens, turkey, sheep, goats, hogs, pigs, cattle, horses, and other similar animals, which are common to a farm in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Farm Building: A barn, silo or any building used for the storage of agricultural equipment or farm produce, or housing livestock or poultry.  The term "farm building" shall not include dwellings. 
Fence: A manmade barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof.  The term "fence" shall be deemed to include a wall. 
Fire Apparatus Access Road: A road that provides fire apparatus access from the fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof.  This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway. 
Floodplain Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Floodplain Ordinance, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners via Ordinance Number 552 on November 18, 1997, as may be amended from time to time.  
Floodplain Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined within the Flood Insurance Study, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which principally include areas located along the major creeks and waterways of Cumru Township.  The Floodplain Overlay District is further defined and regulated under Section 502 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Geographic Information System (GIS):  A computer-based system that links the geographic location of map features to text information or databases. 
Geometric Design: The dimensions of a facility and the relationships of its features such as alignment, profile, grades, widths, sight distances, clearances, and slopes. 
Ghost Lakes: Transient surface bodies of water formed in depressions after heavy rainfall events. 
Glare:  A sensation of brightness within a visual field, which may cause annoyance, discomfort, loss of vision and/or the ability to focus 
Governing Body: The Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks County. 
Grade:  The inclination of a street, surface area, site improvement or structure, whereas the grade is generally expressed by measuring the vertical rise or fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance. 
Grade Plane: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at the exterior walls.  Where the finished ground levels slope away form the exterior walls, the referenced plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building. 
Greenway: A linear corridor of open space including natural features such as waterways, stream valleys, ridgelines, and scenic vistas, or along man-made features such as railroad beds or abandoned canals, which provide areas for wildlife habitats and recreational uses. 
Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the ground or finished grade to the highest point of a building or structure.  
High Water Table Soils: Surface soils, which are within three (3) feet of the seasonal high water table.  High water table soils are further defined, described and mapped by the Soil Survey of Berks County. 
Highway Access Point:  A place of ingress/egress from or access to a street or highway created by a driveway or another street or highway.  Measurement between them shall be from the centerline of one (1) such point to the centerline of another such point. 
Highway Frontage:  The lot dimensions measured along the right-of-way line of any one (1) street or highway abutting a lot. 
Hydric Soil: A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. Hydric soils are defined, described and mapped by the Soil Survey of Berks County. 
Impervious Coverage: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Impervious Surface: All impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Improvement:  Any type of structure, paved area and/or physical changes to the land, including but not limited to, grading, paving, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks, street signs, traffic control devices, monuments, utilities, water supply facilities and sewage disposal facilities. 
Improvement Setback:  The minimum distance an improvement must be set back from a street right-of-way and/or property line. 
Improvements Agreement:  An agreement (in a form and manner acceptable to Cumru Township) requiring the applicant or developer to install the improvements required by this Ordinance and any improvements or amenities, which appear on the approved subdivision or land development plan. 
Industrial Use:  A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, assembling, manufacturing, distributing, processing, storing or warehousing of products and materials, and other similar industrial uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Ingress:  A point of entrance to a property 
Institutional Use: A use or activity that includes, but not limited to, educational uses, hospitals, medical centers, health care uses, churches, religious uses, assisted living care facilities, and other similar institutional uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Jurisdictional Determination (JD) -A site survey and review performed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers to assess and officially determine whether or not a defined parcel of land or water body is subject to wetlands regulations. 
Land Development: Any of the following activities: 
(1) 	
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving: a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features. 

(2) 	
A subdivision of land. 

(3) 	
Development in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Landowner:  The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition). A lessee under a written lease who has written authorization of the legal owner shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
Landscape Architect: A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Loading Space: A defined space located within a lot or parcel of land, which has accessibility to a public street, for temporary use of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise and materials to the principal use and building contained on the lot or parcel of land. 
Lot:  A designated parcel, tract, or area of land, established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, regardless of size or ownership, which is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required.  The term “lot” shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term. 
Corner Lot:  A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two (2) streets having an interior angle of intersection not greater than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees.  The front yard and lot width requirements shall apply to each street to which the corner lot has frontage.  The other yards shall be designated as side yards. 
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, the sides of which do not abut a street. 
Reverse Frontage Lots: Lots that have frontage on two (2) public streets while restricting vehicular access solely from the public street which would front along the commonly identified rear of the lot. 
Through Lot.  An interior lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
Flag Lot or Keyhole Lot: An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated extension from a street to the principal part of the lot.  The flag or keyhole shape of the lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise land locked interior parcel. 
Lot Area (Gross):  The total space contained within the lot lines. 
Lot Area (Net):  The total space contained within the lot lines, excluding the following land and water areas: 100 percent of all areas exclusively contained within the existing, future and ultimate limits of street rights-of-way; 100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as common open space; 100 percent of all areas exclusively designated as an easement to accommodate third party utilities, vehicular access, municipal uses and/or stormwater improvements. Pursuant to the terms of this definition, the following formula for calculating the net lot area is hereby specified: 
GLA  – 100% of ROW – 100% of COS – 100% of ESM  = NLA 
GLA = Gross Lot Area ROW = Total area exclusively within the limits of the existing, future and ultimate street right-of-way COS = Total area exclusively designated as common open space ESM = Total area exclusively designated as an easement for utilities, vehicular access, municipal uses and/or 
stormwater improvements 
NLA = Net Lot Area  

The net lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located.  The net lot area calculations shall utilize the order or hierarchy of features specified by the formula, whereas, land and water areas shall not be calculated or classified in more than one (1) category. 
Lot Area (Building):  The required net lot area for an approved lot, excluding the following natural features:  100 percent of the total area exclusively designated as the floodway; 100 percent of the total area exclusively delineated as wetlands; and 50 percent of the total area exclusively designated as Category 3 Slopes.  Pursuant to the terms of this definition, the following formula for calculating the building lot area is hereby specified: 
NLA  – 100% of FW – 100% ofWET – 50% of C3S  = BLA 
NLA = Net Lot Area 
FW = Total area exclusively designated as the floodway 
WET = Total area exclusively delineated as wetlands 
C3S = Total area exclusively designated as Category 3 Slopes 
BLA = Net Lot Area  

The provisions and the formula for calculating the required building lot area shall only apply to newly created lots, which have been considered as part of a subdivision or land development application.  The building lot area for all proposed lots shall be no smaller than 50 percent of the required net lot area for the zoning district in which the lot is located.  The building lot area calculations shall utilize the order or hierarchy of features specified by the formula, whereas, land and water areas shall not be calculated or classified in more than one (1) category.  If required by Cumru Township, special studies, delineations and/or calculations shall be completed by the applicant in order to accurately verify the limits of the natural features. 
Lot Coverage: The percentage of a lot covered by all impervious surfaces, as determined by the Cumru Township Engineer or Zoning Officer. 
Lot Depth:  The mean average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Lot Frontage:  That portion of a lot, which fronts on a single street. 
Lot Line:  The property line forming the front, rear or side boundary of a lot. 
Front Lot Line: The line separating a lot from a street.  The front lot line is also the street line. 
Rear Lot Line: The lot line, which is opposite the front lot line. The rear line of any triangularly or irregularly shaped lot shall be established such that it will be at least ten (10) feet long. 
Side Lot Line:  Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Street or Alley Lot Line:  A lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. 
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Lot Width: The width of a lot measured at the legal right-of-way line of the street immediately adjacent thereto, unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Ordinance. 
Maintenance Guarantee:  A form of security, which may be required of a developer by Cumru Township in order to assure stability of improvements within a subdivision or land development over a given period of time, as prescribed by this Ordinance. 
Marker: A metal pipe or pin of a least ¾ inch diameter and at least 30 inches in length utilized to mark or identify certain property corners or boundary limits. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide, utilizing the most current National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
Mediation:  A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the parties themselves create and consider acceptable. 
Monument: A stone or concrete monument with a flat top of at least 4 inches in diameter or square, a flat bottom of at least 6 inches in diameter or square, and at least 30 inches in length utilized to mark or identify certain property corners, boundary limits or rights-of-way. All stone monuments shall contain an indented cross or ¼ inch drill hole to signify the center of the mark.  All concrete monuments shall contain a copper or brass dowel (plug) and shall have a distinctive feature on the top face to signify the center of the mark.  
MPC: The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended and codified. 
Municipality:  Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Municipal Use:  A use owned and maintained by Cumru Township for public recreation area, park, swimming pool, golf course, spectator sports, municipal offices, police station, water and sewage facilities, utilities, community centers, solid waste disposal areas, recycling centers, composting facilities, road materials and equipment storage and similar governmental or municipal uses. 
Obstruction: Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, structure, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill or other matter, which may impede, retard or change the normal direction or path of air, water or any modes of transportation.  
Occupancy: The possession of any structure, building, land area or water body, with the intent to remain for the purpose of residing, conducting business, or performing social, recreational, cultural, educational, municipal, governmental, institutional, religious, charitable, or similar uses.   
Permanent Occupancy: Occupancy for a period in excess of 120 consecutive days within one calendar year. 
Temporary or Seasonal Occupancy:  Occupancy for a period less than 120 consecutive days within one calendar year. 
Official Map:  A legally adopted map that depicts the location of existing and proposed streets, public utilities, public facilities and/or public areas, which may be adopted the by Cumru Township Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Official Zoning Map:  The Zoning Map of Cumru Township. 
Open Area: Land or water areas in which no buildings or impervious surfaces are located. 
Open Space: The unoccupied space, land area, or water body, that is located on approved lot or development, which is open to the sky and not occupied by buildings, structures, sidewalks, off-street parking areas, access drives and/or other impervious areas. 
Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 or any provisions or amendments thereof, enacted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
PA: The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Park:  A tract of land, designed and utilized by the general public for active and/or passive recreation purposes. 
Parking Lot: An off-street area designed solely for the parking of motor vehicles, including driveways, passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto. 
Parking Perimeter: The external limits of the permitted or approved off-street parking area. 
Parking Space: A reasonably level space, available for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle, not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep, which shall have an area of not less than one hundred and eighty (180) square feet exclusive of passageways or other means of circulation or access. 
Paved Area: The percentage of lot area covered by any and all impervious materials, such as buildings, paved parking areas, paved walks, terraces and similar surfaces, which do not normally absorb rainfall. 
Performance Guarantee: A form of security, which may be required of a developer by Cumru Township in order to assure that certain improvements within a subdivision or land development are sufficiently completed in accordance with the approved plan over a given period of time, as prescribed by this Ordinance. 
Permit: A document issued by the proper regulatory agency authorizing the applicant to undertake certain activities as specified on the application or permit. 
Permitted Use: A use permitted in a particular district to occupy or use land for a specific purpose in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, when such use is permitted by right. 
Person: The term shall be construed to include an individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, limited liability company, firm, trust, business trust, estate, foundation, municipality, governmental entity, public utility, other association or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
Plan: A proposal for development, subdivision or land development, including all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public facilities, which complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sketch Plan: An informal plan, drawn to scale, indicating existing features of a tract and the general layout of the proposed subdivision or land development. The plan shall be presented for discussion purposes only and not for formal review or approval. 
Preliminary Plan:  A tentative subdivision or land development plan (including all required supplementary data) accurately prepared and showing all lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, streets, utilities, municipal improvements and other features, as required by this Ordinance. 
Final Plan:  A complete subdivision or land development plan (including all required supplemental data) accurately prepared and showing all lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, streets, utilities, municipal improvements and other features required by this Ordinance.  All such final plans shall be prepared for the consideration of municipal approval and recordation, as required by this Ordinance. 
Annexation Plan: A complete and accurately prepared plan showing the transfer of certain land areas from one parcel of land to another parcel of land.  All such annexation plans shall be prepared as final plans for the consideration of municipal approval and recordation, as required by this Ordinance. 
Minor Land Development Plan:  A complete land development plan with minor improvements or impacts that is accurately prepared and showing all lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, streets, utilities, municipal improvements and other features required by this Ordinance. All such minor land development plans shall be prepared as final plans for the consideration of municipal approval and recordation, as required by this Ordinance. 
Minor Subdivision Plan: A complete subdivision plan containing three (3) or fewer lots with minor improvements or impacts that is accurately prepared and showing all lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, streets, utilities, municipal improvements and other features required by this Ordinance. All such minor subdivision plans shall be prepared as final plans for the consideration of municipal approval and recordation, as required by this Ordinance. 
Plan of Record or Record Plan: An accurate set of plans of the entire tract, subdivision or land development showing all distinctive features and improvements as proposed to be constructed including lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, street, curbs, sidewalks, pathways, monuments, markers, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, buildings, structures, signs, stormwater management facilities, sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, utilities, landscaping, common open space, and other significant features determined appropriate by the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer.  All such Plans of Record shall be prepared at the scale required by the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 
As-Built Plan: An accurate set of plans of the entire tract, subdivision or land development showing all distinctive features and improvements as actually constructed including lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, street, curbs, sidewalks, pathways, monuments, markers, off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, buildings, structures, signs, stormwater management facilities, sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, utilities, landscaping, common open space, and other significant features determined appropriate by the Cumru Township Engineer and Zoning Officer.  All such As-Built Plans shall be prepared at the same scale as the approved Final Plan and shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 
Planning Commission:  The Cumru Township Planning Commission, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Preservation or Protection: When used in connection with natural and historic resources, shall include means to conserve and safeguard these resources from wasteful or destructive use, but shall not be interpreted to authorize the unreasonable restriction of forestry, mining or other lawful uses of natural resources. 
Principal Building: A building in which a principal use on a lot is carried on. 
Principal Use:  The main or primary purpose for which any land, structure or building is designed, arranged or intended, and for which they may be occupied or maintained under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Ordinance, only one (1) principal use shall be permitted on a lot. 
Professional: An occupation practiced or performed by an individual who has been formally educated or trained for such occupation and who is typically, but not necessarily, licensed or certified in such occupation. 
Public Grounds or Land Areas:  All such areas including: parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities; and publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites. 
Public Hearing:  A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by Cumru Township the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 
Public Meeting: A forum held pursuant to notice under the requirements of this Ordinance, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and the “Pennsylvania Sunshine Law”. 
Public Notice: Notice published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within Cumru Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing. 
Recreation Area (Active): Land area containing recreational facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in physical or energetic functions, primarily group functions.  Active recreation areas may include, but not limited to, athletic fields, basketball courts, baseball fields, softball fields, football fields, soccer fields, tennis courts, playgrounds, tot lots, community centers, golf courses, hockey rinks, skateboard areas, swimming pools and volleyball courts.  
Recreation Area (Passive):  Land area containing recreation facilities, which may require visitors or participants to become involved in quiet functions that do not require physical or energetic functions.  Passive recreation areas may include, but not limited to: common open space; trails for walking or bicycling; surface water for canoeing or fishing; land preserve areas for hunting; pavilions; picnic areas; cultural centers; scenic vistas; and amphitheaters.  
Recreation Facilities:  Land, water, buildings, structures, apparatuses and/or equipment, which are required to accommodate recreational uses. 
Recreational Uses: An active or passive recreational use designed to accommodate physical, leisure, sporting or relaxation activities on land or water.  Recreational uses may include, basketball, baseball, football, bicycling, walking, jogging, running, golfing, fishing, boating, hunting, hockey, skating, skateboarding, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, exercise/fitness, bowling, billiards, bird watching, picnicking, equestrian events, rodeos, automobile racing events, demolition derby events, motorcycle exhibitions, shooting ranges, or any other similar recreational uses, as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Residential Use: A use within a permitted dwelling unit, designed and utilized as the living quarters for one (1) or more families living independently of each other.  Residential uses may be permitted within single family detached units, single family semi-detached units, two family attached units, mobile homes, apartment units, townhouse units, and secondary housing units, provided the type of dwelling unit is a permitted use within the zoning district to which it is located, and provided that the dwelling unit is designed to comply with the standards and specifications referenced by the Zoning Ordinance. 
Resubdivision: Any change of lot lines, as identified on a previously approved subdivision plan. Any change of lot lines, replattings, or new division of land shall be considered as constituting a new subdivision of land. 
Retail Use: A commercial establishment devoted to the sale of products and services to patrons within an enclosed building.  Retail uses may include establishments selling food, groceries, beverages, clothing, business or office supplies, entertainment items, furniture, home improvement supplies, household products, personal care supplies, building supplies, sporting goods, equipment, machines, computers, electronics, pet supplies, medical supplies, agricultural supplies, automobile supplies, firearms, and other similar retail uses as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Retention Pond:  A reservoir, formed from soil or other material, which is designed to detain a certain amount of surface water within a defined area, which may also be designed to permanently or temporarily accommodate storm water runoff over a period of time. Retention ponds may also receive and relinquish surface water, but shall maintain a certain volume of water that may vary depending upon seasonal or climatic conditions. 
Review:  The formal or informal evaluation of a subdivision plan or land development plan, including all supplemental plans, reports, profiles and drawings, by the designated persons, agencies, consultants, officials and/or staff members of Cumru Township. 
Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is dedicated or reserved to accommodate streets, utilities, stormwater management facilities, traffic control facilities, curbs, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, street lights, and other public improvements. 
Legal Right-Of-Way: The existing width or area of land, which is currently owned and maintained by Cumru Township, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or other public agency or authority. 
Ultimate or Required Right-Of-Way: The width or area of land, which is determined necessary to  reserve and/or dedicate  in order to accommodate future public improvements. 
Riparian Buffer Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of stream valleys, floodplains, wetlands, hydric soils, high water table soils with hydric components, and steep slopes, as further defined and regulated by this Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sanitary Facilities: The required plumbing fixtures within a dwelling unit including a sink, toilet, bathtub or shower, which are functioning and compliant with the provisions of Cumru Township.   
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System:  A system designed to collect, convey, treat and dispose of sewage from users in compliance with local, county, state and federal regulations. 
On-Lot System:  A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage or holds sewage from only one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a neighborhood area. 
Public or Municipal System: A sewage disposal system which collects, conveys, treats and disposes of sewage from more than one (1) source by a system of pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant. 
Optional System Requirement:  A special or unique use of land, which because of its wastewater disposal requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot sewage disposal methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal treatment system.  The selected method for wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment shall be consistent with the Cumru Township Act 537 Plan, the Cumru Township Sewer Use Ordinance, and Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act. 
Screen or Screening: An assemblage of permissible materials, which are strategically arranged so as to effectively block or obstruct the views between adjacent or adjoining properties from ground level to a height of six (6) feet above grade level, or as determined by the Zoning Officer. 
Seasonal Pool: An essential and unique wetland habitat, which is typically small, shallow, ephemeral water bodies, and have no permanent inlet or outlet.  Seasonal pools are filled by rain and snow melt, which typically dry-up for a period of time during the summer season.  They are considered essential since they support a number of species that require temporary wetland habitats for survival.  
Setback Requirements: The setback requirements as established for any building or structure within the applicable Zoning District for which it is located. 
Shade Tree: A deciduous tree, which normally grows with a single trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters sunshine during specific seasons during the year. 
Sight Distance:  The length of roadway visible to a driver of a standard passenger vehicle at any given point along the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic.  Horizontal sight distance measurements shall be made in each direction from a point 10 feet from the edge of the cartway and 3.5 feet above the road surface to a point 3.5 feet above the centerline of the road. 
Sign: Any structure, building, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or other representations utilized for announcement, direction, identification or advertisement.  The word "sign" includes the word "billboard", but does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political unit, nor public traffic or directional signs. 
Single and Separate Ownership:  The ownership of a lot by one or more persons, whereas the ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining land areas. 
Slope: Topographic conditions in which the percentage of vertical to horizontal relief is computed utilizing standard rise over run calculations and/or as defined by this Ordinance. 
Soil Survey of Berks County: A document issued by the United States Department of Agriculture identifying the locations of soil groups within certain areas and providing detailed information concerning the characteristics of the soil groups. 
Soil Percolation Test: A field test conducted to measure the absorption rate of water into the ground or soil at a given depth and location, whereas the results are utilized to determine the suitability for on-lot sewage disposal facilities, stormwater management facilities and/or other site improvements. 
Solicitor:  The legal consultant or attorney appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Solid Waste: Waste, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous materials. 
Special Exception:  A use by which the Zoning Hearing Board may grant permission to an applicant within a particular zoning district for the occupancy or use of land or water for a specific purpose, as specified within the Zoning Ordinance. 
Steep Slopes: Areas of land in which the topographical conditions exceed a certain slope in pre-development conditions, as further defined under the Zoning Ordinance.  The following slope categories are hereby defined as part of the Steep Slope Overlay District: 
Category 1 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 8 and 15 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 8 and 15 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 2 Slopes:  All land areas in which the topographical conditions have a range of slope between 15 and 25 percent in slope in pre-development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes between 15 and 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category or any greater category prevail. 
Category 3 Slopes: All land areas in which the topographical conditions exceed a slope of 25 percent in pre­development conditions, whereas the vertical elevation changes exceeds 25 feet over a minimum horizontal distance of 100 feet, as measured in any given direction, over which steep slopes of this category prevail. 
Steep Slope Overlay District: A conservation overlay of land and water, which have been defined by Section 504 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Stormwater: Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation in the form of rain, snow, sleet, hail or ice. 
Stormwater Management:  A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a defined area or development, while promoting the protection and conservation of surface water, groundwater and groundwater recharge. 
Stormwater Management Facilities: Those controls and measures including, by not limited to, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, storm sewers, basins, infiltration systems, swales, watercourses, and floodplains, used to implement a storm water management regulations. 
Stormwater Ordinance: The Schuylkill River and Conestoga River Stormwater Management Ordinance, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners via Ordinance Number 663 on March 21, 2006, as may be amended from time to time. 
Story:  That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above, including basements and mezzanines, and as further defined by the appropriate building codes adopted by Cumru Township. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties.  The word "street" includes thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway and similar terms. The functional classification of all existing streets has been defined in the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 
Expressways:  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide, interstate, or regional travel and movements between major urban areas. Expressways contain the most heavily traveled routes (10,000 to 100,000 trips per day) and including multi-lane roadways.  This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities.  The system is designed for relatively high speeds (50 to 65 MPH) with a minimum of interference to through traffic.  Expressways facilitate truck transport by providing optimum conditions.  Mobility is the principal function and accessibility should be limited to carefully planned interchanges to preserve the functional classification of expressways. 
Arterials (Minor and Major Arterial):  Routes providing for corridor movements that represent substantial statewide or regional travel and movements between major urban areas.  Arterial routes contain heavily traveled routes (5,000 to 25,000) including multi-lane roadways.   This system provides links between developed areas and adjacent towns and cities. The system is designed for relatively high speeds (35 to 55 MPH) with a minor interference to through traffic. Arterial routes facilitate truck transport by providing favorable conditions. Mobility is the major function and accessibility should be limited to preserve the functional classification. 
Collectors (Minor and Major Collector):  Routes that serves primarily regional or intra-county trips and represents those routes with shorter travel distances than arterial routes.  Collector roads contain well-traveled roads (500 to 10,000 trips per day) leading to specific destinations or to expressways and arterial routes.  The system is designed for moderate speeds (25 to 45 MPH) with some interference with designed intersections to permit through traffic.  Depending upon its structural integrity and design, collector routes can facilitate lightweight truck transport. Mobility is a significant function and accessibility should be limited to street intersections and driveways in order to preserve the functional classification of collector roads. 
Minor Streets or Local Access Streets: Roads that primarily serve local trips and represents those routes with shorter travel distances than collector routes.  Local roads contain low volume to moderately traveled roads (less than 500 trips per day) leading to collector and arterial routes.  The system is designed for lower speeds (20 to 35 MPH) with interference with a number of designed intersections.  Local roads are typically designed to facilitate lightweight truck transport for local deliveries.  Mobility is a minor function and accessibility to street intersections, driveways and adjacent land areas is significant for local roads. 
Marginal Access Roads: Roads that serve specific land uses, which are parallel or adjacent to an expressway, arterial or major collector roads.  Marginal access roads are typically designed to accommodate the use(s) they directly serve.  Accessibility between selective points is an essential design element with control at the point of destination. Many marginal access roads are privately owned and maintained. 
Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other end. 
Internal Street: A minor street used for circulation and access within a development involving multi-residential, commercial and/or industrial land uses. 
Service Street (Alley): A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two (2) or more properties. 
Public Street:  An improved cartway within a dedicated right-of-way that is owned and maintained by Cumru Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Private Street:  An improved cartway within a defined right-of-way that is not owned and maintained by Cumru Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Pedestrian Path: An improved lane, sidewalk, trail or path, which is specifically designated for pedestrian use either along a street or contained within a park, common open space area, off-street parking area and/or other areas approved for community use.  
Bicycle Lane:  An improved travel lane, trail or path, which is specifically designated for persons riding bicycles and other permitted non-motorized vehicles. 
Street Frontage: The lot dimension measured along the street line or right-of-way line of any one street or highway abutting a lot. 
Street Line: The dividing line between a lot and the outside boundary of a public street, road or highway right-of-way legally open or officially mapped by a municipality or higher governmental authority, between a lot and the outside boundary of a street shown on a recorded subdivision or land development plan, or between a lot and a private street or road over which the owners or tenants of one or more lots held in single and separate ownership have a right-of-way. 
Structure:  Any manmade object having an ascertainable stationary location or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.  The term structure shall include, but not limited to, buildings, signs, fences, walls, towers, swimming pools, porches, garages, flagpoles, windmills, water towers, silos, solar energy collectors, and similar structures. 
Permanent Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for more than one (1) year, provided the structure complies with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Temporary Structure: A structure to be utilized for a specific purpose for less than one (1) year, provided the structure complies with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 
Subdivider: Any landowner, whether an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, or an agent of said landowner authorized by the applicant, which undertakes the subdivision or development of land in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township. 
Subdivision: The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development.  The subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than ten (10) acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted 
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance:  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009, as initially adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 687. The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 690. 
Substantial Damage:  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its previous condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, addition, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement to a structure, whereby the cost of such improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvements occurred. 
Surveyor: An individual registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land, establish locations, and perform the requirements of a survey. 
Township: Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania. 
Township Engineer: The Cumru Township Engineer or Engineering Consultant appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Township Planner:  The Cumru Township Planner or Planning Consultant appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Tract: One or more lots assembled for the purposes of subdivision or land development. 
Transient: The temporary passing or crossing from one thing or person to another, or from place to place, provided the passing or crossing is temporary and not permanent.  
Use:  The specific purpose for which land, water, signage, structures, or buildings are designed, arranged or intended, to be utilized, occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, residence, business or operation, which may be carried on thereon or therein.  The term "permitted use" or any equivalent term utilized within the Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed to include any non-conforming use. 
Permanent Use:  A permitted use conducted on a lot for more than one (1) year, provided the permanent use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Seasonal or Special Use: A permitted use conducted on a lot during certain defined segments of the year, provided the seasonal use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Temporary Use: A permitted use conducted on a lot for less than a one (1) year period of time, provided the temporary use complies with all provisions of Cumru Township. 
Utility: A service, facility, apparatus or use, which provides electric, telephone, cable, sewer, water, natural gas, and similar utility services, to customers within a defined service area, grid, neighborhood region, or municipality.  
Community Utility: A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a public utility provider, municipality, municipal authority, homeowners association, or private agency for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area. 
Private Utility: A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a private or independent utility provider for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area 
Public Utility:  A utility, which is owned, operated or maintained by a public utility provider for the purposes of providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, energy, telephone, or other utility services within a defined service area. 
Vehicle: Any motor vehicle utilized for any lawful use, which is properly licensed and inspected in accordance with all local, state and federal laws. 
Waste:  A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.  The term waste shall also include and apply to waste that may be considered as either hazardous, contaminated, toxic, residual, municipal or recyclable, as further defined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and/or other agency having jurisdiction. 
Water Supply System: A system designed to transmit water from the source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state agencies and the Township. 
On-Lot Water Supply System: A water supply system, which transmits water from a source on the lot to one (1) dwelling, principal use or lot. 
Community Water Supply System: A temporary water supply system which transmits from a common source to more than one (1) dwelling, principal use and/or lot within a single neighborhood.  A community water supply system may be permitted on a temporary basis for developments, which are to be permanently serviced by a public water supply system. All such community water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Public or Municipal Water Supply System: A system of water collection, storage, transmission and delivery, which are to service a community, but not confined to a neighborhood.  All such public or municipal water supply systems shall be designed to provide adequate pressure, distribution and storage for fire protection 
Optional System Requirement: A special or unique use of land, which because of its waster supply requirements may have the option to utilize on-lot water supply methods or connect to a private, community, public or municipal water supply system.  The selected method for water supply shall be consistent with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
Watercourse:  A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, channel, swale, pond, lake, or other body of surface water carrying or holding water, whether natural or artificial. 
Watershed:  The total land area where water drains into a particular watercourse.  
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.  The major characteristics of wetlands include vegetation, soil and hydrology. 
Wetlands Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of land and water, which include areas of wetlands, as further defined and regulated under Section 503 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Woodlands: An area of land in which one (1) or more contiguous acres are mostly occupied or covered by healthy mature trees (12 inches in caliper).  The area of the woodlands shall be measured from the drip line of the outer trees.  
Woodland Extraction: The clear cutting of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in caliper) to provide area for development on an individual lot. 
Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District:  A conservation overlay of woodlands and forested areas, which are further defined, categorized and regulated under Section 505 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a structure(s), which lies between the structure(s) and a lot line and which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted.  
Front Yard: A yard extending the full width of the lot between a structure and the front lot line.  On lots abutting more than one public street other than an alley the front yard requirement shall apply fronting each public street. 
Rear Yard:  A yard extending the full width of the lot between a structure and a rear lot line. 
Side Yard:  A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a structure and the nearest side lot line. 
Zoning: Division of all of the land of an entire political subdivision into districts having different regulations pertaining to use of land; height, area, bulk and use of buildings; yard requirements; and in some states density of population. Zoning is affected by local ordinance under the police power of the state granted by specific legislation generally termed an "enabling act". 
Zoning Hearing Board:  The Cumru Township Zoning Hearing Board, as established and appointed by the Board of Commissioners to hear matters in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. 
Zoning Map: The Cumru Township Zoning Map. 
Zoning Officer:  The agent or official designated by the governing body to administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance, as appointed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Zoning Ordinance: The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009, as initially adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 686.  The Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance of 2009 has been amended and restated on June 16, 2009 as part of Cumru Township Ordinance 689. 
Article 3: Application Procedures 
Section 301: General Procedures 
(A) 	
Article 3 of this Ordinance provides an overview of the general procedures for the application, submission, review and the approval of all proposed subdivision plans or land development plans within Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
All subdivision plans and/or land development plans within the corporate limits of Cumru Township shall be subject to the review of Cumru Township and the Berks County Planning Commission, as well as all other local, county, state or federal agencies, as deemed necessary by Cumru Township, in accordance with the procedures specified within this Ordinance. 

(C) 	
For all proposed subdivision plans and/or land development plans, except those exempted from standard procedures, a sketch plan, preliminary plan, and a final plan must be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. Those plans exempted from standard procedure shall comply with the procedures identified under this Ordinance. 

(D) 	
The application for subdivision and land development has been included within Appendix A of this Ordinance. 


Section 302: Authority and  Jurisdiction 
(A) 
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall have jurisdiction of subdivision and land development activity within Cumru Township.  In order to assist the Board of Commissioners in its consideration of all subdivision plans and/or land development plans, the Board of Commissioners hereby decrees that the Cumru Township Planning Commission shall serve the following functions: 

(1) 	
All plans proposing subdivision and/or land development, upon submission to Cumru Township shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review. 

(2) 	
The Planning Commission shall consider all plans, profiles, reports, and other pertinent information that has submitted by the applicant as part of the subdivision plan and/or land development plan. 

(3) 	
The Planning Commission shall consider the review of any staff members or professional consultants of Cumru Township prior to issuing a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. 

(4) 	
The Planning Commission shall consider the review of the Berks County Planning Commission, as well as other local, county, state and/or federal agency plan prior to issuing a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. 

(5) 	
The Planning Commission shall consider any written responses or requests submitted by the applicant prior to issuing a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners 

(6) 	
Upon review of the information submitted as part of the subdivision plan and/or land development plan, the Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners concerning the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of such subdivision plans and/or land development plans. 

(7) 	
Where appropriate, the Planning Commission may also provide recommendations to the Board of Commissioners or Zoning Hearing Board concerning the interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. 



(B) 	
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall consider the recommendations offered by the Planning Commission prior to taking action on any proposed subdivision plan and/or land development plan. 


Section 303:   Sketch  Plan Application and  Review 
(A) 	
A sketch plan shall be considered as an unofficial submission to Cumru Township for the purposes of informal review and discussion between the applicant and the Planning Commission. 

(B) 	
A sketch plan is recommended as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan.  For maximum usefulness, sketch plans should contain the information specified by Section 402 of this Ordinance. 

(C) 	
The applicant shall meet with the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled public meeting or at a special public meeting to informally discuss the Sketch Plan.  As part of this process, the following issues should be discussed: 

(1) 	
The compatibility of the proposed development with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) 	
The compatibility of the proposed development with the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan. 

(3) 	
The application procedures that may be required to obtain municipal approval, as specified under the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(4) 	
The conceptual suitability of the proposed development considering land use, community facilities, utilities, transportation, and other infrastructure needs.  



(D) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission may schedule a public meeting to conduct a site review of the area being considered for the subdivision plan and/or land development plan. The applicant may be present to provide a presentation of the proposed concept plan and site improvements. 

(E) 	
Cumru Township may recommend that a sketch plan be submitted as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan.  The sketch plan shall not be considered as an official plan submission in accordance with the review procedures and provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(F) 	
Based upon the informal discussion at the public meeting, the Planning Commission shall provide direction to the applicant considering the merits of the sketch plan. 


Section 304: Preliminary Plan  Application  and  Review 
(A) 
When a preliminary plan is required for a subdivision plan or land development plan, the applicant or developer shall comply with the application and review procedures, which are hereby established within this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The continuation or validity of a current preliminary plan application or an approved preliminary plan application shall be in accordance with provisions established by Cumru Township and by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  

(C) 	
When filing a preliminary plan for review and consideration, the applicant shall make an official submission to Cumru Township at least fifteen (15) business days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Cumru Township Planning Commission. 

(D) 	
An official submission of a preliminary subdivision plan and/or a preliminary land development plan shall include the following information: 

(1) 	
Eight (8) completed copies of the application (refer to Appendix A) of a subdivision plan or land development plan; 

(2) 	
Eight (8) complete copies of the proposed preliminary plan, which shall comply with the requirements of Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance.  If requested by Cumru Township, additional copies of the proposed preliminary plan shall be supplied to Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Four (4) copies of all other supportive plans, profiles, reports and other documentation, as may be required under Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance.  If requested by Cumru Township, additional copies of all other supportive plans, profiles, reports and other documentation shall be supplied to Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
Filing or submission fees shall be required in order to cover all administrative costs and review fees, as permitted under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The filing fees shall be established by Cumru Township, which may be revised or amended by municipal ordinance or resolution.  

(5) 	
No application shall be deemed filed and accepted for review until all information required under this Ordinance have been received, the application fees have been fully paid, and any other administrative requirements for submission have been met. 



(E) 	
Upon determination that the application is complete by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, copies of the proposed preliminary plan shall be distributed as follows: 

(1) 	
To the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners; 

(2) 	
To the Cumru Township Planning Commission; 

(3) 	
To the Cumru Township Environmental Advisory Committee; 

(4) 	
To the Cumru Township Engineer; 

(5) 	
To the Cumru Township Planning Consultant; 

(6) 	
To the Cumru Township Zoning Officer; 

(7) 	
To the Cumru Township Solicitor; and 

(8) 	
To the Berks County Planning Commission. 



(F) 	
At the discretion of the Cumru Township Planning Commission, additional copies of the proposed preliminary plan shall be submitted and distributed as follows: 

(1) 	
To the Cumru Township Parks and Recreation Board; 

(2) 	
To the Cumru Township Historical Commission; 

(3) 	
To any appointed or designated professional consultants of Cumru Township; 

(4) 	
To the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; 

(5) 	
To the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection; 

(6) 	
To the Berks County Soil Conservation District; 

(7) 	
To the Governor Mifflin School District; 

(8) 	
To the Cumru Township Emergency Management Coordinator; 

(9) 	
To the Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer; and 

(10) 	
To other local, county, state or federal agencies that are considered appropriate by Cumru Township to review the proposed preliminary plan. 



(G) 	
No application shall be deemed filed and accepted for review until all supplementary data, reports, and studies as may be required under Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance have been received, application fees have been fully paid, and any other requirements for submission specified herein have been met. 

(H) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission in conjunction with the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor shall review the preliminary plan to determine if it conforms to the provisions established by Cumru Township.  The Planning Commission may recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as they may deem necessary.  The review or report of the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(I) 	
The Berks County Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to determine if it conforms with local, county, state and federal provisions, as further outlined within the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The Berks County Planning Commission may recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as they may deem necessary.  The review or report of the Berks County Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(J) 	
Where considered appropriate by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, the proposed preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the appropriate professional consultants of Cumru Township, who may provide engineering, architectural, planning and/or legal advice to Cumru Township.  If requested, the review or report of the professional consultants shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(K) 	
Where considered appropriate by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, the proposed preliminary plan shall be reviewed by other local, county, state or federal agencies, as identified under this Ordinance of the Cumru Township.  If requested, the review or report of the local, county, state or federal agencies shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(L) 	
When a preliminary plan has been officially accepted for review by Cumru Township, such preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, or at the discretion of the Planning Commission, at a special public meeting.  During the review of the preliminary plan, the Planning Commission shall consider the written reports of the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer, Solicitor and Berks County Planning Commission, as well as other local, county, state, or federal agencies that have been requested to review the preliminary plan. 

(M) 	
Upon consideration of the written reports, the Planning Commission shall make a formal recommendation concerning the status of the preliminary plan to the Board of Commissioners.   The recommendation shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners within ninety (90) days from the date the preliminary plan was officially accepted for review by Cumru Township. 

(N) 	
During the course of the review of the preliminary plan by the Planning Commission and prior to any action by the Board of Commissioners within the required ninety (90) day period, the proposed preliminary plan may be revised by the applicant.  Upon the submission of a revised preliminary plan, the applicant shall sign a statement withdrawing any previously submitted preliminary plans from consideration and a new ninety (90) day time period for formal review and notification shall commence from the date of submission of the revised preliminary plan.  The revised preliminary plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least seven (7) days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Planning Commission. 

(O) 	
Following the review of the preliminary plan and the accompanying reports and recommendations issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer, Solicitor and the Berks County Planning Commission, as well as other local, county, state, or federal agencies that have been requested to review the preliminary plan, the Board of Commissioners shall approve, approve with conditions, table, or reject the proposed preliminary plan.  Conditions for approval must be clearly stated in writing or by resolution.  If rejected, the Board of Commissioners shall specify the reasons for rejection the preliminary plan, including citation of or reference to the pertinent sections of the codes and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(P) 	
The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be rendered no later than ninety (90) days after the date of the regular Planning Commission meeting next following the date upon which the applicant has made a complete submission to Cumru Township.  However, if the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission is more than thirty (30) days after the submission date, the first day of the ninety (90) day review period shall commence on the thirtieth (30th) day after a complete submission has been given by the applicant. This review period may be extended by mutual agreement by the applicant and Cumru Township. 

(Q) 	
Approval or approval with conditions of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan.  Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout shown on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan.  The final plan must also be reviewed and considered by Cumru Township, as outlined under this Ordinance. 

(R) 	
Where a conflict or discrepancy should arise concerning the procedural requirements specified by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the Cumru Township Solicitor shall review the conflict or discrepancy and advise the Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant and Zoning Officer of the procedural requirements that should be followed. 

(S) 	
The provisions established for administration and enforcement, as established under this Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and/or Solicitor.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.   In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and/or Solicitor. 


Section 305: Final  Plan  Application  and  Review 
(A) 	
When a final plan is required for a subdivision plan or land development plan, the applicant or developer shall comply with the application and review procedures, which are hereby established within this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The continuation or validity of a current final plan application or an approved final plan application shall be in accordance with provisions established by the Cumru Township and by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  

(C) 	
Where a final plan application is preceded by a preliminary plan application, the applicant shall submit the final subdivision plan or final land development plan within twelve (12) months of the approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of Commissioners.  An extension of time may be granted to the applicant if the request has been made in writing and provided that extenuating conditions prevent the applicant from submitting a final plan for municipal review and consideration.  The length and terms of the time extension shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of Commissioners. However, if the time period between the approval date of the preliminary plan and the application date of the final plan extends beyond the extension date specified by the Board of Commissioners, the applicant shall file a new preliminary plan in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

(D) 	
Where a final plan application is preceded by a preliminary plan application, Cumru Township may permit the submission of a final subdivision plan or final land development plan in phases or sections, provided that such submission covers at least twenty-five (25) percent of the overall development or a reasonable portion of the approved preliminary plan, as considered appropriate by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission. 

(E) 	
When filing a final plan for review and consideration, the applicant shall make an official submission to Cumru Township at least fifteen (15) business days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Cumru Township Planning Commission. 

(F) 	
An official submission of a final subdivision plan and/or a final land development plan shall include the following information: 

(1) 	
Eight (8) completed copies of the application (refer to Appendix A) of a subdivision plan or land development plan; 

(2) 	
Eight (8) complete copies of the proposed final plan, which shall comply with the requirements of Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance.  If requested by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, additional copies of the proposed final plan shall be supplied to Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Four (4) complete copies of all other supportive plans, profiles, reports and other documentation, as may be required under Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance.  If requested by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, additional copies of all other supportive plans, profiles, reports and other documentation shall be supplied to Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
Filing or submission fees shall be required in order to cover all administrative costs and review fees, as permitted under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The filing fees shall be established by the Cumru Township, which may be revised or amended by municipal ordinance or resolution.  

(5) 	
No application shall be deemed filed and accepted for review until all information required under this Ordinance have been received, the application fees have been fully paid, and any other administrative requirements for submission have been met. 



(G) 	
Upon determination that the application is complete by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, copies of the proposed final plan shall be distributed as follows: 

(1) 	
To the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners; 

(2) 	
To the Cumru Township Planning Commission; 

(3) 	
To the Cumru Township Environmental and Agricultural Advisory Committee; 

(4) 	
To the Cumru Township Engineer; 

(5) 	
To the Cumru Township Planning Consultant; 

(6) 	
To the Cumru Township Zoning Officer; 

(7) 	
To the Cumru Township Solicitor; and 

(8) 	
To the Berks County Planning Commission (if required or requested). 



(H) 	
At the discretion of the Cumru Township Planning Commission, additional copies of the proposed final plan shall be submitted and distributed as follows: 

(1) 	
To the Berks County Planning Commission; 

(2) 	
To the Cumru Township Parks and Recreation Department; 

(3) 	
To the Cumru Township Historical Commission; 

(4) 	
To the appointed or designated professional consultants of Cumru Township; 

(5) 	
To the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation; 

(6) 	
To the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection; 

(7) 	
To the Berks County Soil Conservation District; 

(8) 	
To the Governor Mifflin School District; 

(9) 	
To the Cumru Township Emergency Management Coordinator; 

(10) 	
To the Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer; and 

(11) 	
To other local, county, state or federal agencies that are considered appropriate by Cumru Township to review the proposed final plan. 



(I) 	
No application shall be deemed filed and accepted for review until all supplementary data, reports, and studies as may be required under Articles 4 and 5 of this Ordinance have been received, application fees have been fully paid, and any other requirements for submission specified herein have been met. 

(J) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission in conjunction with the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor shall review the final plan to determine if it conforms to the provisions established by Cumru Township.  The Planning Commission may recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as they may deem necessary.  The review or report of the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(K) 	
If requested by Cumru Township, the Berks County Planning Commission shall review the final plan to determine if it conforms with local, county, state and federal provisions, as further outlined within the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  The Berks County Planning Commission may recommend changes, alterations or modifications, as they may deem necessary.  The review or report of the Berks County Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(L) 	
Where considered appropriate by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, the proposed final plan shall be reviewed by the appropriate professional consultants of Cumru Township, who may provide engineering, architectural, planning and/or legal advice to Cumru Township.  If requested, the review or report of the professional consultants shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(M) 	
Where considered appropriate by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, the proposed final plan shall be reviewed by other local, county, state or federal agencies, as identified under this Ordinance of the Cumru Township.  If requested, the review or report of the local, county, state or federal agencies shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Cumru Township Planning Commission for consideration at a regularly scheduled public meeting or special public meeting. 

(N) 	
When a final plan has been officially accepted for review by Cumru Township, such final plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, or at the discretion of the Planning Commission, at a special public meeting.  During the review of the final plan, the Planning Commission shall consider the written reports of the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer, Solicitor and Berks County Planning Commission, as well as other local, county, state, or federal agencies that have been requested to review the final plan. 

(O) 	
Upon consideration of the written reports, the Planning Commission shall make a formal recommendation concerning the status of the final plan to the Board of Commissioners.   The recommendation shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners within ninety (90) days from the date the final plan was officially accepted for review by Cumru Township. 

(P) 	
During the course of the review of the final plan by the Planning Commission and prior to any action by the Board of Commissioners within the required ninety (90) day period, the proposed final plan may be revised by the applicant. Upon the submission of a revised final plan, the applicant shall sign a statement withdrawing any previously submitted final plans from consideration and a new ninety (90) day time period for formal review and notification shall commence from the date of submission of the revised final plan.  The revised final plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least seven (7) days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Planning Commission. 

(Q) 	
Following the review of the final plan and the accompanying reports and recommendations issued by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer, Solicitor and the Berks County 

Planning Commission, as well as other local, county, state, or federal agencies that have been requested to review the final plan, the Board of Commissioners shall approve, approve with conditions, table, or reject the proposed final plan.  Conditions for approval must be clearly stated in writing or by resolution.  If rejected, the Board of Commissioners shall specify the reasons for rejection the final plan, including citation of or reference to the pertinent sections of the codes and ordinances adopted by Cumru Township. 

(R) 	
The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be rendered no later than ninety (90) days after the date of the regular Planning Commission meeting next following the date upon which the applicant has made a complete submission to Cumru Township.  However, if the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission is more than thirty (30) days after the submission date, the first day of the ninety (90) day review period shall commence on the thirtieth (30th) day after a complete submission has been given by the applicant. This review period may be extended by mutual agreement by the applicant and Cumru Township. 

(S) 	
The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing, which shall be issued to the applicant within fifteen 

(15) days following the decision. 

(T) 	
The approved final plan shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(U) 	
Where a conflict or discrepancy should arise concerning the procedural requirements specified within this Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, the Cumru Township Solicitor shall review the conflict or discrepancy and advise the Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission of the procedural requirements that should be followed. 

(V) 	
The provisions established for administration and enforcement, as established under this Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.  In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission. 


Section 306: Plans  Exempted  from  Standard  Procedures 
(A) 	
Annexation Plans: Where the sole purpose of the proposed plan is to annex a lot or parcel to an adjacent lot or parcel, the applicant shall follow the following procedures: 

(1) 	
A final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Sections 305 and 404 of this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
The proposed annexation plan shall indicate that the purpose of the plan is for annexation purposes only and that no new building lots are proposed as a result of the annexation plan. 

(3) 	
Where appropriate, the lots or parcels of land affected by the annexation shall be joined as a common deed and new deed descriptions shall be prepared for recording purposes. 

(4) 	
Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall pay all municipal fees and contributions resulting from the annexation plan. 

(5) 	
The approved annexation plan shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 



(B) 	
Revised Plan of Record:  Any revision, replatting or resubdivision of land, which includes changes to the approved final and recorded plan shall be considered a revised plan of record, which shall be prepared in accordance with the following procedures: 

(1) 	
A final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Sections 305 and 404 of this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Lot lines may be changed from those on the approved final and recorded plan may be considered, provided that in making such changes: no lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller than 

the minimum dimensions required by the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance; the easements or rights­of-way shall not be changed; the street locations and block sizes shall not be changed; no lot or tract of land shall be created that does not have proper access or abut an existing or proposed street; the area devoted to open space and recreational areas shall not be reduced. 

(3) 	
The revised plan of record shall specifically identify that this plan shall supersede the previously approved final and recorded plan considering the following references or revisions. 

(4) 	
Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall pay all municipal fees and contributions resulting from the revised plan of record. 

(5) 	
The approved revised plan of record shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with the provisions this Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Minor Subdivision Plans: Where the sole purpose of the proposed plan is to create three (3) or fewer lots with minor improvements or related impacts, a minor subdivision plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following procedures: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall meet with the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant and Zoning Officer to determine if the subdivision will involve minor improvements or related impacts.  If the proposed subdivision will result in major improvements or related impacts, the applicant shall comply with the standard application procedures established within this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
A final plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Sections 305 and 404 of this Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall pay all municipal fees and contributions resulting from the minor subdivision plan. 

(4) 	
The approved minor subdivision plan shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 



(D) 	
Minor Land Development Plans: Where the sole purpose of the proposed plan is to develop a lot or tract of land with minor improvements or related impacts, a minor land development plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following procedures: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall meet with the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant and Zoning Officer to determine if the land development plan will involve minor improvements or related impacts.  As a general guideline, the development of a property involving the construction, expansion or redevelopment of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and/or the disturbance of less than 10,000 square feet of land area could qualify the development as a minor land development plan.  If the proposed land development plan will result in major improvements or related impacts, the applicant shall comply with the standard application procedures established within this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
A final land development plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Sections 305 and 404 of this Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall pay all municipal fees and contributions resulting from the minor land development plan. 

(4) 	
The approved minor land development plan shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 




Section 307: Land Development Plans 
(A) 	
Unless specifically stated within this Ordinance, a complete "land development plan", shall be prepared and submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration.  The complete land development plan shall accurately show lot lines, easements, rights-of-way, streets, utilities, municipal improvements and other features required by this Ordinance.  All such preliminary and final land development plans shall be prepared to comply with the standard review and submission procedures established under this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
Section 306(D) of this Ordinance provides specific provisions for minor land development plans. 


Section 308: Application Fees 
(A) 	
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall establish by municipal resolution or ordinance, a fee schedule for the submission and processing of all applications pertaining to this Ordinance.  The proposed application shall not be considered by Cumru Township until all pertinent fees are paid in full.  All such fees shall be utilized to pay for all administrative costs as well as all review fees for any professional consultants designated by Cumru Township.  

(B) 	
The applicant shall be required to pay any review fees required by the Berks County Planning Commission, as well as any other local, state, county or federal agency, which have been requested to review the proposed application in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
If the expenses incurred by Cumru Township for the review of an application exceed the total fees that have been paid by the applicant, such excess expenses shall be paid by the applicant prior to the release of the final plans by Cumru Township. 


Section 309: Modifications 
(A) 
The provisions of this Ordinance are intended as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the residents and land owners of Cumru Township.  At the discretion of the Board of Commissioners, these provisions may be waived or modified on a case by case basis and where deemed necessary in the public interest, provided that such modification shall not have the effect of nullifying the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
If the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of this Ordinance is demonstrated by the applicant to be unreasonable and causes undue hardship to his property, the Board of Commissioners may grant a waiver of such mandatory provision.  As part of this procedure, the applicant shall submit a written waiver request to the Planning Commission for review and comment.  The waiver request shall reference the applicable section of this Ordinance and indicate the reason or purpose for such a request.  The Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners for each waiver requested by the applicant.  The Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners shall consider all waiver requests at a regularly scheduled public meeting or at a special public meeting. 

(C) 	
The list of such modifications shall be entered in the minutes of the Cumru Township Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners. If granted, the waiver shall be accurately referenced on the proposed plan. 


Section 310:   Municipal Improvements and Contributions 
(A) 	
All conditions, standards and provisions pertaining to the guarantee and/or the installation of all required site and municipal improvements have been included under Article 6 of this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
All conditions and provisions pertaining to all developer contributions and impact fees have been included under Article 6 of this Ordinance. 


Section 311: Approval and  Recording  of  Plans 
(A) 	
After the completion of the procedures required within Ordinance, the Cumru Township Planning Commission shall place their endorsements on at least five (5) copies of the approved final plan, which shall be considered by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners.  The plans recommended for approval shall be dated and signed by at least a majority of the members on the Planning Commission. 

(B) 	
After the completion of the procedures required within this Ordinance, Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall place their endorsements on at least five (5) copies of the approved final plan, which is to be recorded.  The plans shall be dated, sealed and signed by at least a majority of the Board of Commissioners. 

(C) 	
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any approved final plan after it has been endorsed by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, unless the approved plan has been resubmitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration, as required within this Ordinance. 

(D) 	
After the approved final plan has been properly endorsed by the Cumru Township Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners, the applicant shall submit the approved final plans to the Berks County Planning Commission for their endorsement.  No plan may be legally recorded unless such plan has been properly endorsed by Cumru Township and the Berks County Planning Commission. 

(E) 	
After the approved final plan has been properly endorsed by Cumru Township and the Berks County Planning Commission, the applicant shall record the approved final plans with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date the approved final plan was endorsed by Cumru Township.  If the applicant fails to record the approved final plan within the ninety (90) day time period, the action of Cumru Township shall become null and void. 

(F) 	
After the approved final plan has been recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds, the applicant shall provide Cumru Township with one (1) certified copy of the recorded plan plus one (1) copy of the approved plan in an electronic format acceptable to the Cumru Township. 


Section 312:   Appeals 
(A) 
The decisions of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of the Cumru Township and by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
All provisions for amendments, records, preventative remedies and enforcement procedures are further specified under Article 7 of this Ordinance and by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 



Article 4: Plan Requirements 
Section 401:  Statement  of Intent 
(A) 	
Article 4 of this Ordinance provides the basic plan requirements for all proposed subdivision plans or land development plans within Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions established for plan requirements, as established under this Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and/or Solicitor.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.   In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and/or Solicitor. 


Section 402:   Sketch Plan Requirements 
(A) 
A sketch plan shall be considered as an unofficial submission to Cumru Township for the purposes of informal review and discussion between the applicant and Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
When a sketch plan application is submitted to Cumru Township, the sketch plan shall contain at least the following data, legibly drawn to scale, but not necessarily showing precise dimensions: 

(1) 	
Name or identifying title of the proposed subdivision or land development. 

(2) 	
The name and address of the record owner, equitable owner, developer, engineer, architect, planner and/or surveyor. 

(3) 	
Tract boundaries, accurately labeled 

(4) 	
Total acreage of the tract and total acreage being considered for development. 

(5) 	
North arrow. 

(6) 	
Written and graphic scales. 

(7) 	
Significant natural, topographical, physical and environmental features. 

(8) 	
A statement of the existing use and proposed use of the property being subdivided and/or developed. 

(9) 	
Proposed street and lot layout of the development. 

(10) 	
Proposed sewer and water facilities that will service the development. 

(11) 	
Other information or documentation that may be considered essential for the subdivision or land development, as determined by Cumru Township.  



(C) 	
If requested by Cumru Township, the applicant shall provide additional information or other documentation to understand the conceptual plan and/or to provide direction to the applicant. 

(D) 	
The sketch plan may be required by Cumru Township as a prerequisite to the formal submission of a preliminary subdivision and land development plan. The sketch plan shall not be considered as an official plan submission under the review procedures and provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 403: Preliminary Plan Requirements 
(A) 	
A preliminary plan shall be considered as an official submission to Cumru Township for the purposes of formal review and discussion between the applicant and the Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise exempted from the standard application procedures of this Ordinance, all preliminary subdivision plans or preliminary land development plans shall contain the plan requirements specified this section. Any modifications to these plan requirements shall be subject to the provisions of Section 309 of this Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all preliminary plan applications shall be subject to the following drafting or general layout standards: 

(1) 	
The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, except under the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling one hundred (100) feet if the average size of the proposed lots within the subdivision is five (5) acres or larger; 

(b) 	
The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling twenty (20) feet if the average frontage or lot width is less than fifty (50) feet; or 

(c) 	
The plan shall be prepared at a scale ranging between one (1) inch equaling twenty (20) feet and one (1) inch equaling fifty (50) feet if the applicant can sufficiently demonstrate that the scale is necessary to depict the amount of detail required by this Ordinance of the Code while conforming with the provisions for permitted sheet sizes. 



(2) 	
The plan and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on sheets no smaller than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no greater than thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. 

(3) 	
If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet. 

(4) 	
Where the preliminary plan shows the proposed subdivision or land development of only a part of the applicants total property, a sketch shall be required, showing the prospective street system and tentative lot layout of the remainder of the property, so that the total site improvements may be considered in relation to existing conditions.  To prevent undue hardship in the case of extremely large properties, the Planning Commission may, based upon existing natural or man-made features, limit the area for which the prospective street system and tentative lot layout shall be sketched. 



(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all preliminary plan applications shall include the following general information: 

(1) 	
Name or identifying title of the proposed subdivision or land development. 

(2) 	
North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date, including the month, day and year that the original drawing was completed, and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for each plan revision. 

(3) 	
A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal boundaries, and recorded subdivision plans existing within one thousand (1,000) feet of any part of the property. In addition, the name and approximate distance to the closest recognized city, town or village, or the approximate distance to the nearest existing street, shall be shown and a title, scale and north point shall be indicated. 

(4) 	
Name and address of the record owner, equitable owner and applicant or developer. Where requested by Cumru Township, the relationship between all parties seeking subdivision or land development plan approval shall be confidentially disclosed to Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor, architect or planner responsible for the plan. 

(6) 	
Names of all adjoining record owners, with reference to their respective tax parcel identification numbers and their deed reference, as recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(7) 	
Names of all adjoining subdivision or land development plans, if any, with the appropriate plan book reference, as recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(8) 	
Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided or developed, showing bearings and distances. 

(9) 	
A statement of total acreage of the property and the total area being subdivided or developed. 

(10) 	
A statement of the existing use and proposed use of the property being subdivided and/or developed. 

(11) 	
Zoning data including all of the following which are applicable: 

(a) 	
Existing zoning district designations, requirements, use and bulk regulations; 

(b) 	
Any zoning district boundary lines traversing the land area proposed for the subdivision or land development; 

(c) 	
Any changes in the existing zoning including any variances, conditional uses, or special exceptions that have been granted; and/or 

(d) 	
Any changes in the existing zoning proposed to be requested by the applicant or developer. 



(12) 	
Other general information that may be considered essential for the subdivision or land development, as determined by Cumru Township. 



(E) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all preliminary plan applications shall include the following existing and natural features: 

(1) 	
Contour lines determined by acceptable surveying practices at vertical intervals of at least two (2) feet for land with average natural slope of twenty (20) percent or less, and at intervals of at least five (5) feet for land with average natural slope exceeding twenty (20) percent. 

(2) 	
Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations refer.  Where reasonably practicable, the datum used shall be a known, established benchmark. 

(3) 	
All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not constructed), on or abutting the tract, including names, right-of-way widths, cartway (pavement) widths, and centerline road grades. 

(4) 	
All existing buildings or other structures located within the proposed development. 

(5) 	
All existing man-made features within the proposed development and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed development.  This may include, but not limited to, sanitary sewer facilities, on-lot sewage facilities, water supply facilities, wells, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, stormwater management facilities, culverts, bridges and railroad lines.  Where applicable, the size, type, material and invert elevations shall also be identified on the preliminary plan. 

(6) 
All existing natural features within the proposed development and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed development. This may include, but not limited to, water courses, floodplain areas, natural drainage patterns, soil types with descriptions, delineated wetlands, hydric soils, high water table soils, tree masses, steep slopes, sinkholes and rock out-crops. 

(7) 	
The location, size and ownership of all existing utilities and utility rights-of-way within the proposed development.  A statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use shall be included on the preliminary plan. 

(8) 	
The location, dimensions and ownership of all access rights-of-way or easements within the proposed development.  A statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use shall be included on the preliminary plan. 

(9) 	
Other existing or natural features that may be considered essential for the subdivision or land development, as determined by Cumru Township. 



(F) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all preliminary plan applications shall be accurately designed considering the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Location, dimensions and functional classification of all proposed streets and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership, maintenance and use. 

(2) 	
Suggested street names. 

(3) 	
Location and dimensions of all proposed easements and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use. 

(4) 	
Location, layout, dimensions and areas of all existing and proposed lots within the development. 

(5) 	
The minimum building setback lines for each lot within the development. This shall include the front, side, rear and reverse setbacks, as determined acceptable by the Zoning Officer. 

(6) 	
A statement of the intended use of all lots and parcels within the development. 

(7) 	
Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and parcels being developed.  The residue parcel shall be included as a separate lot, not intended for development. 

(8) 	
The location of all existing and proposed street monuments. 

(9) 	
The location of all existing and proposed property markers. 

(10) 	
The location of proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities and their relationship to existing sanitary sewage disposal facilities. 

(11) 	
Location of proposed water supply facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed water supply facilities and their relationship to existing water supply facilities. 

(12) 	
Location and arrangement of proposed stormwater management facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed stormwater management facilities and their relationship to existing stormwater management facilities. 

(13) 	
Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for public use, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership, operation, maintenance and use. 

(14) 	
Where on-lot sewage disposal is proposed, the location of the probe and percolations test sites shall be shown on the preliminary plan.  The results of such tests shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(15) 	
Other design elements relating to zoning, land use, community facilities, emergency management, utilities, stormwater management and transportation, as determined by Cumru Township. 



(G) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all preliminary plan applications shall be accompanied with the following supplemental or supporting information: 

(1) 	
Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets. 

(2) 	
Profiles along the centerline of each proposed street shown on the Preliminary Plan. Such profiles shall show at least the following information, properly labeled: 

(a) 	
Existing (natural) and proposed finished grades along the centerline and at the right-of-way line for both sides of each proposed street. 

(b) 	
The elevation, grades and length of all vertical curves. 

(c) 	
Existing and proposed storm sewer mains, manholes, inlets and culverts. 

(d) 	
Existing and proposed sanitary sewer main and manholes. 

(e) 	
Existing and proposed water distribution system and all appurtenances. 

(f) 	
All profiles shall show pipe crossings, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, and any other underground utility crossings. 

(g) 	
Profiles shall extend to points of connection with existing lines. 



(3) 	
Upon consulting with the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant, the profile sheets shall be drawn at one of the following sets of scales: 

(a) 	
One (1) inch equals ten (10) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals one (1) foot vertical; 

(b) 	
One (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals two (2) feet vertical; 

(c) 	
One (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals four (4) feet vertical; or 

(d) 	
One (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical. 



(4) 	
A stormwater management plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 512 of this Ordinance. 

(5) 	
A riparian buffer plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 513 of this Ordinance. 

(6) 	
A sediment and erosion control plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts, which may be required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of Cumru Township, as well as all other local, county, state or federal laws and/or permitting procedures. 

(8) 	
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall review all Plans when access is proposed onto a state road or when encroachment is proposed within a state right-of-way.  All applicable permits shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation prior to municipal approval. The Highway Occupancy Permit Number shall be noted on the plan. 

(9) 	
Where considered appropriate by Cumru Township, the preliminary plan application shall be accompanied with the following supplemental reports: 

(a) 	
An environmental impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 405 of this Ordinance. 

(b) 	
A community facilities impact to comply with the provisions of Section 406 of this Ordinance. 

(c) 	
A traffic impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 407 of this Ordinance. 

(d) 	
A utility impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 408 of this Ordinance. 

(e) 	
A landscaping plan and lighting plan to comply with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 



(10) 	
Where considered necessary to meet the community development objectives specified by this Ordinance, Cumru Township may require additional studies to address concerns relative to zoning, land use, environmental features, natural habitats, community facilities, emergency management, utilities, flooding, stormwater management and transportation. 




Section 404:   Final Plan Requirements 
(A) 	
A final plan shall be considered as an official submission to Cumru Township for the purposes of formal review and discussion between the applicant and the Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise exempted from the standard application procedures of this Ordinance, all final subdivision plans or final land development plans shall contain the plan requirements specified this section.  Any modifications to these plan requirements shall be subject to the provisions of Section 309 of this Ordinance. 

(C) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all final plan applications shall be subject to the following drafting or general layout standards: 

(1) 	
The final plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, except under the following conditions: 

(a) 	
The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling one hundred (100) feet if the average size of the proposed lots within the subdivision is five (5) acres or larger; 

(b) 	
The plan may be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equaling twenty (20) feet if the average frontage or lot width is less than fifty (50) feet; or 

(c) 	
The plan shall be prepared at a scale ranging between one (1) inch equaling twenty (20) feet and one (1) inch equaling fifty (50) feet if the applicant can sufficiently demonstrate that the scale is necessary to depict the amount of detail required by this Ordinance of the Code while conforming with the provisions for permitted sheet sizes. 



(2) 	
The plan and all submitted prints thereof, shall be made on sheets no smaller than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no greater than thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. 

(3) 	
If the final plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet. 

(4) 	
Where the final plan shows the proposed subdivision or land development of only a part of the applicants total property, a sketch shall be required, showing the prospective street system and tentative lot layout of the remainder of the property, so that the total site improvements may be considered in relation to existing conditions.  To prevent undue hardship in the case of extremely large properties, the Planning Commission may, based upon existing natural or man-made features, limit the area for which the prospective street system and tentative lot layout shall be sketched. 

(5) 	
All final plans shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to Cumru Township with the anticipation that such plan may be approved by Cumru Township and released for recording with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds.  



(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all final plan applications shall include the following general information: 

(1) 	
Name or identifying title of the proposed subdivision or land development. 

(2) 	
North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date, including the month, day and year that the original drawing was completed, and the month, day and year that the original drawing was revised, for each plan revision. 

(3) 	
A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, municipal boundaries, and recorded subdivision plans existing within one thousand (1000) feet of any part of the property. In addition, the name and approximate distance to the closest recognized city, town or village, or the approximate distance to the nearest existing street, shall be shown and a title, scale and north point shall be indicated. 

(4) 	
Name and address of the record owner, equitable owner and applicant or developer. Where requested by Cumru Township, the relationship between all parties seeking subdivision or land development plan approval shall be confidentially disclosed to Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
Name and address of the registered engineer, surveyor, architect or planner responsible for the plan. 

(6) 	
Names of all adjoining record owners, with reference to their respective tax parcel identification numbers and their deed reference, as recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(7) 	
Names of all adjoining subdivision or land development plans, if any, with the appropriate plan book reference, as recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(8) 	
Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided or developed with accurate distances to hundredths of a foot and bearings to one-quarter (1/4) of a minute. These boundaries shall be determined by accurate field survey, which shall be balanced and close with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet; provided, however, that the boundary adjoining additional unplatted land of the applicant (for example, between separately submitted final plan sections) is not required to be based upon field survey, and may be calculated. The location and elevation of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be indicated, along with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided. In addition, the engineer or surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of the survey, the drawn plan, and the placement of the monuments. 

(9) 	
A statement of total acreage of the property and the total area being subdivided or developed. 

(10) 	
A statement of the existing use and proposed use of the property being subdivided and/or developed. 

(11) 	
Zoning data including all of the following which are applicable: 

(a) 	
Existing zoning district designations, requirements, use and bulk regulations; 

(b) 	
Any zoning district boundary lines traversing the land area proposed for the subdivision or land development; 

(c) 	
Any changes in the existing zoning including any variances, conditional uses, or special exceptions that have been granted; and/or 

(d) 	
Any changes in the existing zoning proposed to be requested by the applicant or developer. 



(12) 	
A note relative to the "Certification of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan and Offer of Dedication" shall be provided on the final plan and shall be duly acknowledged and signed by the owner or owners of the property before an officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds. A sample certification note has been included within Appendix B of this Ordinance. 

(13) 	
A note relative to the "Certification of Accuracy" shall be provided on the final plan and shall be duly acknowledged, signed and sealed by the professional engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, or land planner, responsible for preparing the final plan.  A sample certification note has been included within Appendix B of this Ordinance. 

(14) 	
A note relative to the certification of any supplemental studies, plans, reports and/or assessments conducted to support the final plan shall be duly acknowledged, signed and sealed by the professional responsible for preparing the supplemental studies, plans, reports and/or assessments.  All such certification notes shall be subject to the approval of the Cumru Township Engineer and Solicitor. 

(15) 	
Certificates for municipal endorsement of the final plan by the Cumru Township Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners.  Sample endorsement or certification notes have been included within Appendix B of this Ordinance. 

(16) 	
A blank space measuring three and one-half (3.5) inches by six (6) inches shall be provided on the final plan, preferably adjacent to the certificates of municipal endorsement, by which the endorsement stamp of the Berks County Planning Commission may be applied. 

(17) 	
A blank space measuring three (3) inches square shall be left along the lower edge of the final plan, preferably adjacent to the certificates of municipal endorsement, by which the Berks County Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge receipt and recording of the final plan when it is presented. 

(18) 	
Other general information that may be considered essential for the subdivision or land development, as determined by Cumru Township. 



(E) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all final plan applications shall include the following existing and natural features: 

(1) 	
Contour lines determined by acceptable surveying practices at vertical intervals of at least two (2) feet for land with average natural slope of twenty (20) percent or less, and at intervals of at least five (5) feet for land with average natural slope exceeding twenty (20) percent. 

(2) 	
Location and elevation of the datum to which contour elevations refer.  Where reasonably practicable, datum used shall be a known, established benchmark. 

(3) 	
All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not constructed), on or abutting the tract, including names, right-of-way widths, cartway (pavement) widths, and centerline road grades. 

(4) 	
All existing buildings or other structures located within the proposed development. 

(5) 	
All existing man-made features within the proposed development and within 50 feet of the proposed development.  This may include, but not limited to, sanitary sewer facilities, on-lot sewage facilities, water supply facilities, wells, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, stormwater management facilities, culverts, bridges and railroad lines.  Where applicable, the size, type, material and invert elevations shall also be identified on the final plan. 

(6) 	
All existing natural features within the proposed development and within 50 feet of the proposed development. This may include, but not limited to, water courses, floodplain areas, natural drainage patterns, soil types with descriptions, delineated wetlands, hydric soils, high water table soils, tree masses, steep slopes, sinkholes and rock out-crops. 

(7) 	
The precise location, size and ownership of all existing utilities and utility rights-of-way within the proposed development.  A statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use shall be included on the final plan. 

(8) 	
The precise location, dimensions and ownership of all access rights-of-way or easements within the proposed development.  A statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use shall be included on the final plan. 

(9) 	
Other existing or natural features that may be considered essential for the subdivision or land development, as determined by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant or Zoning Officer. 



(F) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all final plan applications shall be accurately designed considering the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Location, dimensions and functional classification of all proposed streets and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership, maintenance and use. 

(2) 	
The names of all existing and proposed streets, as approved by Cumru Township, Berks County Emergency Management Agency (Berks County 911) and the Post Office having jurisdiction. 

(3) 	
The precise location and dimensions of all proposed easements and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership and use. 

(4) 	
The precise location, layout, dimensions and areas of all existing and proposed lots within the development.  All such dimensions, arc lengths and curve radii shall be shown and defined to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) foot.  Bearings or deflection angles at changes in direction of line as well as central angles of all curves shall be shown to the nearest fifteen (15) seconds 

(5) 	
The minimum building setback lines for each lot within the development. This shall include the front, side, rear and reverse setbacks, as determined acceptable by the Zoning Officer. 

(6) 	
A statement of the intended use of all lots and parcels within the development. 

(7) 	
Lot numbers and a statement of the total number of lots and parcels being developed. The residue parcel shall be included as a separate lot, not intended for development. 

(8) 	
The location and elevation of all existing street monuments and/or the proposed street monuments to be set as a condition of municipal approval. 

(9) 	
The location and type of all existing property markers and/or the proposed property markers to be set as a condition of municipal approval. 

(10) 	
The location of proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed sanitary sewage disposal facilities and their relationship to existing sanitary sewage disposal facilities. 

(11) 	
Location of proposed water supply facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed water supply facilities and their relationship to existing water supply facilities. 

(12) 	
Location and arrangement of proposed stormwater management facilities, with a statement of any conditions governing the ownership, operation and maintenance of the proposed stormwater management facilities and their relationship to existing stormwater management facilities. 

(13) 	
Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for public use, with a statement of any conditions governing their ownership, operation, maintenance and use. 

(14) 	
Where on-lot sewage disposal is proposed, the location of the probe and percolations test sites shall be shown on the final plan.  The results of such tests shall be submitted to Cumru Township for review and consideration. 

(15) 	
Other design elements relating to zoning, land use, community facilities, emergency management, utilities, stormwater management and transportation, as determined by Cumru Township. 



(G) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all final plan applications shall be accompanied with the following supplemental or supporting information: 

(1) 	
Typical street cross-section drawing(s) for all proposed streets. 

(2) 	
Profiles along the centerline of each proposed street shown on the Final Plan. Such profiles shall show at least the following information, properly labeled: 

(a) 	
Existing (natural) and proposed finished grades along the centerline and at the right-of-way line for both sides of each proposed street. 

(b) 	
The elevations, grades and length of all vertical curves. 

(c) 	
Existing and proposed storm sewer mains, manholes, inlets and culverts. 

(d) 	
Existing and proposed sanitary sewer main and manholes. 

(e) 	
All profiles shall show pipe crossings, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains, and any other underground utility crossings. 

(f) 	
Profiles shall extend to points of connection with existing lines. 

(g) 	
Proposed water distribution system and all appurtenances (if applicable). 



(3) 	
Upon consulting with the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant, the profile sheets shall be drawn at one of the following sets of scales: 

(a) 	
One (1) inch equals ten (10) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals one (1) foot vertical; 

(b) 	
One (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals two (2) feet vertical; 

(c) 	
One (1) inch equals forty (40) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals four (4) feet vertical; or 

(d) 	
One (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal, and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical. 



(4) 	
A stormwater management plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 512 of this Ordinance. 

(5) 	
A riparian buffer plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 513 of this Ordinance. 

(6) 	
A sediment and erosion control plan shall be prepared in accordance with Section 514 of this Ordinance. 

(7) 	
Final designs of any bridges or culverts, which may be required. Such designs shall meet all applicable requirements of Cumru Township, as well as all other local, county, state or federal laws and/or permitting procedures. 

(8) 	
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall review all Plans when access is proposed onto a state road or when encroachment is proposed within a state right-of-way.  All applicable permits shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation prior to municipal approval. The Highway Occupancy Permit Number shall be noted on the plan. 

(9) 	
Where considered appropriate by Cumru Township, the final plan application shall be accompanied with the following supplemental reports: 

(a) 	
An environmental impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 405 of this Ordinance. 

(b) 	
A community facilities impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 406 of this Ordinance. 

(c) 	
A traffic impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 407 of this Ordinance. 

(d) 	
A utility impact assessment to comply with the provisions of Section 408 of this Ordinance. 

(e) 	
A landscaping and lighting plan to comply with the applicable provisions of Cumru Township. 

(f) 	
The appropriate planning modules for the planned sewage disposal facilities for the subdivision or land development plan, as may be required by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department  of Environmental Protection. 



(10) 	
Where considered necessary to meet the community development objectives specified by this Ordinance, Cumru Township may require additional studies to address concerns relative to zoning, land use, environmental features, natural habitats, community facilities, emergency management, utilities, flooding, stormwater management and transportation. 

(11) 	
Where required by Cumru Township, the supplemental or supporting information submitted with the final plan shall be recorded as part of the approved final plan. 

(12) 	
All conditions, standards and provisions pertaining to the guarantee and/or the installation of all required improvements have been included within this Ordinance.  Where required by Cumru Township, a municipal improvements agreement shall be properly executed between Cumru Township and the developer prior to municipal approval. 

(13) 	
All conditions and provisions pertaining to contributions and fees have been included within this Ordinance.  All pertinent agreements shall be properly executed between the Cumru Township and the applicant prior to municipal approval. 





Section 405:   Environmental Impact Assessment 
(A) 	
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) shall be completed for all subdivision and land development applications. A formal report shall be submitted with the subdivision or land development application. 

(B) 	
The EIA shall consider potential impacts relating to environmental, ecological and other natural features.  Specific attention shall be provided to floodplains, wetlands, hydric soils, high water table soils, steep slopes, woodlands, carbonate geological formations, endangered habitats, biodiversity corridors and other natural features identified by Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
When a formal EIA Report is not required by Cumru Township, all such potential impacts, mitigation measures or other issues relating to the EIA shall be addressed as part of the subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(D) 	
When a formal EIA Report is required by Cumru Township, the format and contents of the EIA Report should be as follows: 

(1) 	
Statement of purpose:  This section shall indicate the design standards specified that have been addressed and whether the applicant is attempting to demonstrate compliance or justify noncompliance with those design standards. 

(2) 	
Description of existing conditions:  This section shall present a description of existing characteristics of the property, including geology, topography, ground and surface water, soils, vegetation, ecology, and the existing improvements and uses. 

(3) 	
Description of the proposed action:  This section shall describe the proposed action, including types, locations and phasing of proposed site disturbances and construction, together with proposed future ownership and maintenance of the property and the proposed improvements. A description of the proposed action must either be included within or accompany the EIA Report. 

(4) 	
Proposed mitigation measures:  This section shall describe all measures proposed by the applicant to control potential and adverse environmental impacts, which may occur as a result of the proposed action and as identified by the Cumru Township Engineer in his report on the application. 

(5) 	
List of professional and qualifications: The names, addresses, telephone numbers, resumes and qualifications of the persons directly responsible for preparing the EIA Report shall be provided. 



(E) 	
All maps that are utilized as part of an EIA or are contained within the EIA Report shall be prepared at an appreciable scale utilizing information obtained from reliable sources.  All such maps should accurately depict the location of the property and all proposed site improvements for the subdivision or land development plan. 

(F) 	
The documentation presented as part of an EIA or included within an EIA Report shall be subject to the review and consideration by Cumru Township as part of the proposed application for subdivision or land development. 



Section 406: Community Facilities  Impact  Assessment 
(A) 
A Community Facilities Impact Assessment (CFIA) shall be completed for all subdivision and land development applications.  Where required by Cumru Township, a formal report shall be submitted with the subdivision or land development application. 

(B) 	
The CFIA shall consider potential impacts relating to community facilities and municipal services.  Specific attention shall be provided to parks, recreation, open space, emergency management services, historical and cultural resources, educational facilities, and municipal services. 

(C) 	
When a formal CFIA Report is not required by Cumru Township, all such potential impacts, mitigation measures or other issues relating to the CFIA shall be adequately addressed with the appropriate agency, board, organization or authority. 

(D) 	
When a formal CFIA Report is required by Cumru Township, the format and contents of the CFIA should contain a detailed description of the proposed uses and activities, the potential impacts, and the recommended mitigation measures to be considered.  The CFIA Report shall be submitted to the appropriate agency, board, organization or authority for review and consideration. 

(E) 	
The documentation presented as part of a CFIA or included within a CFIA Report shall be subject to the review and consideration of Cumru Township, as part of the proposed application for subdivision or land development. 



Section 407: Traffic  Impact  Assessment 
(A) 	
A Traffic Impact Study (TIS) shall be submitted to Cumru Township in the following conditions: 

(1) 	
A residential subdivision or land development which has or will have twenty-five (25) or more lots and/or dwelling units. 

(2) 	
A non-residential subdivision of five (5) or more lots. 

(3) 	
A non-residential land development containing 20,000 square feet or more of gross floor area. 

(4) 	
Any non-residential land development within one quarter (1/4) mile of an intersection involving an arterial road or two collector roads. 

(5) 	
Cumru Township reserves the right to require a traffic study for any subdivision or land development other than a minor residential subdivision, lot annexation, and plan for revision to lot lines when Cumru Township deems such a study necessary to adequately review the impact of the subdivision or land development on existing and proposed roads 

(6) 	
Cumru Township may require that a TIS be completed as part of an initial application or as part of a supplemental application considering the cumulative impact of the development over time. 



(B) 	
The TIS shall be prepared by a qualified professional traffic engineer with verified experience in preparing such transportation plans and studies. 

(C) 	
The area for the TIS shall be based upon sound engineering judgment and an understanding of existing traffic conditions at the site as well as the area that is likely to be affected b the development.  Prior to the commencement of work on the TIS, the applicant shall consult with the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant regarding the overall content of the TIS as well as the area to be studied as part of the TIS. 

(D) 	
Unless otherwise directed by Cumru Township, the TIS shall contain the following: 

(1) 	
The study area boundary and identification of the roadways included within the study area. 

(2) 	
A general description, including: 

(a) 	
The size and location of existing and the proposed land use activity and dwelling types. 

(b) 	
Construction staging and the completion dates of the proposed development. 

(c) 	
Existing land uses, including any approved or proposed subdivision or land development activity that may have an impact. 

(d) 	
A description of the existing roadways and intersections (geometries and traffic signal control) as well as improvements contemplated by landowners, developers or governmental agencies. 

(e) 	
The TIS shall include documentation of the existing and proposed transit service within 1,000 feet of the site of the development. 



(3) 	
Analysis of existing conditions, including: 

(a) 	
Daily and Peak Hour(s) of Traffic Volumes.  Schematic diagrams depicting daily and peak hour(s) traffic volumes within the study area.  Turning movement and mainline volumes shall be presented for the three (3) peak hour conditions (AM, PM and site generated) while only mainline volumes are required to reflect daily traffic volumes.  The source and/or method of computation for all traffic volumes shall be included. 

(b) 	
Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points utilizing techniques described in derivative Highway Capacity Manual, latest edition or derivative nomographs, an assessment of the relative balance between roadway volumes and capacity shall be described.  The analysis shall be performed for existing conditions (roadway geometry and traffic signal control) for the appropriate peak hours. 

(c) 	
Level of Service at Critical Points.  Based upon the results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A through F) shall be computed and presented for all movements.  Included in this section shall also be a description of typical operating conditions at each level of service. 

(d) 	
A tabulation of accident locations during the most recent three-year period shall be provided. 



(4) 	
Analysis of future conditions without the proposed development.  The future year(s) for which projections are to be made shall be specified by Cumru Township and will be dependent on the timing or phasing of the proposed development.  The following information shall be included: 

(a) 	
Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes.  This section shall clearly indicate the method and assumptions used to forecast future traffic volumes.  The schematic diagrams depicting future traffic volumes shall be similar to those specified by Cumru Township in terms of location and times (daily and peak hours). 

(b) 	
Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Locations.  The ability of the existing roadway system to accommodate future traffic (without site development) shall be described in this section. If roadway improvements or modifications are committed for implementation, the volume/capacity analysis shall be presented for these conditions.  In case of existing signalized intersections, traffic signal timing shall be optimized to determine the best possible levels of service that can be obtained utilizing existing roadway geometry and traffic signal equipment. 

(c) 	
Levels of Service at Critical Points.  Based upon the results obtained in the previous section, levels of service (A through F) shall be determined. 



(5) 	
Trip Generation.  The amount of traffic generated by the development shall be presented in this section for daily and three peak hour conditions.  The trip generation rates used in this phase of the analysis shall be justified and documented to the satisfaction of Cumru Township.  Trip Generation (latest edition) published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be utilized. 

(6) 	
Trip Distribution.  The direction of approach for site generated traffic shall be presented in this section for the appropriate time periods.  As with all technical analysis steps, the basic method and assumptions used in this work shall be clearly stated so that Cumru Township can replicate these results. 

(7) 	
Traffic Assignment.  This section shall describe the utilization of study area roadways by site generated traffic. The proposed traffic volumes shall be combined with the anticipated traffic volumes specified by the TIS in order to describe mainline and turning movement volumes for future conditions with the site developed in accordance with the implementation schedule for the proposed site improvements. 

(8) 	
Analysis of Future Conditions with Development.  This section shall describe the adequacy of the roadway system to accommodate future traffic with development of the site.  Any unique characteristics of the site or within the study area affecting traffic shall be considered.  If staging of the proposed development is anticipated, analysis for each stage of completion shall be considered.  The following information shall be included: 

(a) 	
Daily and Peak Hour(s) Traffic Volumes, Mainline and turning movement volumes shall be presented for the highway network in the study area as well as driveways and internal circulation roadways for the appropriate time periods. 

(b) 	
Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points.  A volume/capacity analysis shall be performed for the appropriate peak hours for future conditions with the site developed as proposed. 

(c) 	
Levels of Service at Critical Points.  As a result of the volume/capacity analysis, the level of service on the study area roadway system shall be computed and described for all movements. 



(9) 	
Recommended Improvements.  In the event that the analysis indicated a decrease in the level of service for any movements will occur on study area roadways, a description of the proposed improvements to remedy the deficiencies shall be provided.  These proposals should not include committed projects by Cumru Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  The following information shall be included: 

(a) 	
Proposed Recommended Improvements.  This section shall include the location, nature and extent of proposed improvements to assure sufficient roadway capacity.  Cost estimates shall be included for the recommended improvements. 

(b) 	
Volume/Capacity Analysis at Critical Points:  An iteration of the volume/capacity analysis shall be described, which demonstrates the anticipated results of making these recommendations. 

(c) 	
Levels of Service at Critical Points.  As a result of the revised volume/capacity analysis presented within the TIS, levels of service for the roadway system shall be presented. 



(10) 	
Conclusion.  The last section of the TIS shall include a clear and concise description of the conclusions. 



(E) 	
The applicant shall provide advanced notification to the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant regarding any meetings that may be scheduled with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(F) 	
On-site traffic improvements may be required by Cumru Township in order to control traffic patterns, to lessen traffic congestion, to facilitate the adequate provision for future community or transportation improvements, and/or when clearly in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare. On-site traffic improvements may include, but are not limited to, cartway widening, right-of-way dedication, shoulder stabilization, vertical or horizontal curve realignment, grading and/or traffic control devices.  The TIS shall include a list of recommendations for on-site traffic improvements and shall assure safe interior circulation patterns by separating vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site whenever possible. 

(G) 	
On-site pedestrian improvements may be required by Cumru Township in to order to improve non-motorized modes of transportation, and/or when clearly in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare.   On-site traffic improvements may include, but are not limited to, sidewalks, crosswalks, bicycle lanes, walking trails and handicapped ramps. The TIS shall include a list of recommendations for pedestrian improvements. 

(H) 	
The applicant shall incur the cost of all required TIS as well as all on-site traffic and pedestrian improvements that may be required by Cumru Township or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(I) 	
The documentation, analysis and recommendations presented within the TIS shall be subject to the review and consideration of Cumru Township, as part of the proposed application for subdivision or land development. 



Section 408: Utility Impact  Assessment 
(A) 	
A Utility Impact Assessment (UIA) shall be completed for all subdivision and land development applications. Where required by Cumru Township, a formal report shall be submitted with the subdivision or land development application. 

(B) 	
The UIA shall consider potential impacts relating to sewage disposal, water supply and other utility services. Specific attention shall be provided to the capacities and condition of the existing utility infrastructure as well as the ability to accommodate the additional utility demands of the subdivision or land development. 

(C) 	
When a formal UIA Report is not required by Cumru Township, all such potential impacts, mitigation measures or other issues relating to the UIA shall be adequately addressed with the appropriate agency, board, organization or authority. 

(D) 	
When a formal UIA Report is required by Cumru Township, the format and contents of the UIA should contain a detailed description of the proposed uses and activities, the potential impacts and the recommended mitigation measures to be considered.  

(E) 	
The documentation presented as part of a UIA or included within a UIA Report shall be subject to the review and consideration of Cumru Township, as part of the proposed application for subdivision or land development. 

(F) 	
Where considered appropriate by Cumru Township, the UIA Report shall be submitted to the appropriate agency, board, organization or authority for review and consideration 


Section 409: As-Built  Plans  or  Improvement  Plans 
(A) 	
Upon the completion of all site improvements required by the approved final plan and subsequent improvements agreement, the applicant or any successor of interest to the applicant, shall supply Cumru Township with a complete set of as-built plans or improvement plans for the entire tract showing all lot lines as deeded and all surface and subsurface improvements as actually constructed. 

(B) 	
The as-built plans or improvement plans shall be prepared at the same scale as the approved final plan. 

(C) 	
The as-built plans shall be made on sheets no smaller than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and no greater than thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. 

(D) 	
The applicant or any successor of interest to the applicant shall submit the as-built plans or improvement plans to Cumru Township for review and consideration prior to the acceptance of any municipal improvements within the development.  The as-built plans or improvement plan shall contain the following information: 

(1) 	
Street cartway and right-of-way, including the width, horizontal curves, vertical curves, curb radius, transitions for the cartway and curb, and center line road grades; 

(2)	
 Sidewalk and handicapped ramps, including the location, width and alignment; 

(3) 	
Driveways and curb cuts, including the locations and widths; 

(4) 	
Curbs, including elevations along all transitions involving horizontal curves and intersections; 

(5) 	
Street monuments with elevations; 

(6) 	
Public utilities, including gas, electric, cable and telephone; 

(7) 	
Stormwater management facilities, including all detention basins, retention basins, infiltration trenches, pipes, catch basins, manholes, outlet structures, emergency spillways, berms and all other structures, with locations, elevations, dimensions, widths, lengths, slopes, inverts, volume and material; 

(8) 	
Erosion and sedimentation control facilities, including location, type and specifications for permanent facilities; 

(9) 	
Sanitary sewer facilities, including treatment facilities, pump stations, collection and conveyance facilities, manholes, clean-outs and laterals, with locations, dimensions, widths, lengths, slopes, inverts and material; 

(10) 	
Water supply facilities, including treatment facilities, booster pump stations, mains, valves, fire hydrants, service lines, and connections, with locations, dimensions, widths, lengths, slopes, inverts and material; 

(11) 	
Streetlights, including location, type, size and intensity; 

(12) 	
Street and traffic control signs, including location, type and size; 

(13) 	
Street addresses for each lot or building; 

(14) 	
Landscaping and planting materials, including location, diameter and size; 

(15) 	
Easements and rights-of-way, including location, width, description and purpose; 

(16) 	
Tract boundaries and lot lines, including locations and descriptions; 

(17) 	
Any additional information required by the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 



(E) 	
The following wording shall be required to be placed on the as-built plans or improvement plans: 

(1) 	
Well and sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 
Individual owners of lots must receive approval from the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer for a sewage permit prior to undertaking the construction of an on-lot sewage disposal system or building that will need to be served by such a system. 

(3) 	
The Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners have not passed upon the feasibility of any individual lot or location within a lot being able to sustain any type of well or sewage system. 

(4) 	
All on-site sewage disposal easements shall remain free and clear of all encroachments including, but not limited to, sheds, buildings or other structures. No grading without the prior written permission of the Richmond Township Board of Commissioners shall be permitted. 

(5) 	
Cumru Township shall have the right, but not the duty, to replace or maintain any drainage facilities shown within the easement(s) provided on the lot(s) at the lot owner’s expense. 

(6) 	
All drainage easements shall remain free and clear of all impediments including, but not limited to, sheds, fences, trees, shrubs, or other plantings or structures.  No grading without the prior written permission of the Township Board of Commissioners shall be permitted. 

(7) 	
Representatives of Cumru Township shall have the right to inspect the drainage facilities located on the lot(s) from time to time as deemed necessary. 



(F) 	
The Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall review the as-built plans to determine if they are complete and acceptable.  Upon determining if the as-built plans are acceptable, the applicant or developer shall provide Cumru Township with the following: 

(1) 	
One (1) complete mylar set of as-built plans or improvement plans; 

(2) 	
Three (3) complete paper copies of the as-built plans or improvement plans, of which one (1) complete set shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds; and 

(3) 	
One (1) complete copy of the as-built plans or improvement plans in an electronic format acceptable to the Cumru Township Planning Commission, Engineer and Planning Consultant. 

(4) 	
An aerial photograph of the project site extending 500 feet beyond the tract boundaries shall be provided at a scale of 1”=200’ or larger. 






Article 5: Design Standards  and Specifications 
Section 501:  Statement  of Intent 
(A) 	
Article 5 of this Ordinance provides the design standards and specifications of the improvements for all proposed subdivision plans or land development plans within Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions established for design standards and specifications, as established under this Ordinance shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.   In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor. 

(C) 	
The design standards and specifications contained within Article 5 are intended as the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be applied as such by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor in reviewing all subdivision plans and land development plans. 

(D) 	
Whenever other regulations established by Cumru Township impose more restrictive standards, specifications and requirements than those contained herein, such other regulations shall prevail. 

(E) 	
Where, in the opinion of the Cumru Township Planning Commission after consulting with the Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor, that the literal application of these design standards and/or required improvements would, in certain cases, cause undue hardship and/or is clearly unreasonable, the Planning Commission may recommend such reasonable exceptions. All such exceptions shall be consistent with the purpose statements and community development objectives of this Ordinance and shall be the minimum relief necessary to achieve the desired results. The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners shall have the power to grant such exceptions, as recommended by the Planning Commission, upon written request by the applicant.  The written request submitted by the applicant shall include the section number, requirement, relief being requested, and justification for the request 

(F) 	
The design standards and specifications identified within this Ordinance may be modified in the case of plans for complete communities, neighborhood units or other large scale developments which, in the opinion of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission, achieve substantially the objectives of these regulations and which are further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the subdivision or land development plan. 

(G) 	
Land subject to hazards of life, health, or property, such as may arise from fire, floods, disease, or other causes, shall not be subdivided or developed unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless the subdivision or land development plan shall show adequate safeguards against them, which shall be approved by the appropriate regulatory agencies. 

(H) 	
Subdivision and land development plans shall give due recognition to the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan, the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance, the Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, and other planning or land use document that has been adopted by Cumru Township. 

(I) 	
All proposed improvements that are to be considered as part of the proposed subdivision or land development shall be planned and designed with consideration to nearby developments or neighborhoods.  Cumru Township may advise the applicant to include special notes or design criteria that should be added to the plan.  

(J) 	
All required improvements that are required to support a subdivision or land development shall be installed by the applicant or developer in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 


Section 502:   Street Design  Standards 
(A) 	
General Standards:  The following general design standards shall be applied to the proposed streets and transportation system providing service to a subdivision or land development: 

(1) 	
The location, arrangement, extent, grade and width of all streets shall conform to the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan and/or to all other "official transportation plans", or such parts thereof, as may have been adopted by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
All proposed subdivisions or land developments applications shall have adequate access to the public street system of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
The proposed street system shall extend existing or recorded streets at the same width as the existing or recorded streets, but in no case at less than the required minimum width identified within this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Where, in the opinion of the Cumru Township, it is desirable to provide for street access to an adjoining property, street stubs shall be extended to the boundary of such property.  The street stub shall meet the width requirements for a minor street or cul-de-sac street. The developer of the tract shall properly grade the street stub and provide an eight (8) inch stone base.  The street stub or right-of-way shall be granted as an easement to Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
If required by the Cumru Township, new minor streets shall be designed and located to facilitate through traffic.  In addition, the applicant shall give consideration to the extension and continuation of collector streets into and from adjoining properties. 

(6) 	
Where a proposed subdivision or land development is of sufficient size to warrant an interior circulation system, a clear hierarchy of streets shall be designed and established and noted on the plan. 

(7) 	
Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of improper width, grade or alignment, Cumru Township may require the dedication of land sufficient to widen the existing street, or correct the improper grade or alignment. 

(8) 	
Proposed streets shall be logically adjusted to the topographic conditions of the site so as to produce reasonable grades, proper drainage, sufficient erosion control and suitable building sites. 

(9) 	
Proposed streets shall be laid out to avoid environmentally sensitive areas such as floodplains, wetlands, riparian buffers, wellhead protection zones, sinkholes and steep slopes. 

(10) 	
Whenever a subdivision or land development encroaches upon the legal right-of-way of a state highway, a Highway Occupancy Permit shall be required from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for the encroachment and related site improvements. 

(11) 	
Whenever a tract to be subdivided or developed abuts or contains an arterial or a major collector street, the Cumru Township Planning Commission may require restriction of access to the street by one or more of the following methods: 

(a) 	
Provision of reverse frontage lots; 

(b) 	
Provision of service streets along the rear of the abutting lots, together with prohibition of private driveways intersecting the arterial or major collector streets; 

(c) 	
Provision of marginal access streets, provided that the reverse strips establishing such marginal access streets shall be placed within the jurisdiction of Cumru Township; 

(d) 	
Provision of an internal street system on which the proposed lots would have proper frontage and access; or 

(e) 	
The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand turns onto or off of the arterial or major collector street. 



(12) 	
Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) are prohibited, unless they meet the design standards of these regulations and are constructed to the specifications of Cumru Township. 

(13)	
 Dead-end streets are prohibited, unless designed and constructed as cul-de-sac streets. 

(14) 	
New half or partial streets shall be prohibited. 

(15) 	
Whenever a tract to be subdivided or developed borders on an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be platted within such tract. 

(16) 	
Service streets (alleys) are prohibited in developments containing single family dwelling units, except where required to avoid direct access onto an arterial street. 

(17) 	
Service streets (alleys) may be permitted in developments containing multi-family dwelling units (townhouses and apartments) and non-residential land uses, provided that the service street is not the primary access point to the development.  Where permitted, the service street shall have a minimum paved width of sixteen (16) feet. 

(18) 	
The developer of any residential land development or subdivision involving fifteen (15) or more dwelling units shall contact the Governor Mifflin School District prior to municipal approval to establish an acceptable safe and convenient location for a school bus stop. 

(19) 	
A matrix chart summarizing the design standards and specifications for proposed streets servicing a subdivision or land development has been included within Appendix C of this Ordinance.  The provisions specified within this matrix chart shall be subject to the interpretation of Cumru Township. 



(B) 	
Street Widths: Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the width or profile view of all proposed streets shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Minimum streets right-of-way and cartway widths shall conform to all transportation plans, or such parts thereof, as may have been adopted by Cumru Township, Berks County or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  If not shown on such plans, the required right-of-way and cartway widths shall be as follows: 

(2) 	
Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by Cumru Township for the purpose of promoting the public safety and convenience, or to provide on-street parking for certain developments. 

(3) 	
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width and/or cartway width, additional right-of-way width and/or cartway width shall be dedicated and/or constructed to conform with the standards of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate horizontal and/or vertical alignment, Cumru Township may require additional right-of-way width or cartway width in order to improve public safety. 



(C) 	
Centerline Road Grades: Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the centerline road grades shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
With the exception of approaches at or through any street intersection, the minimum and maximum centerline road grade shall comply with the following design requirements: 

(2) 	
All approaches to a controlled intersection shall have a leveling area not exceeding five (5) percent in grade for a distance of one hundred (100) feet, as measured from the centerline of the intersecting street. The approaches to an uncontrolled intersection shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
A crown or cross-slope shall be maintained with a minimum slope of 2.08 percent or ¼ inch per foot, as designed from the centerline to the curb or edge of the cartway.  



(D) 	
Horizontal and Vertical Curves: Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all horizontal and vertical street curves shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of two (2) degrees, the connection of such street lines shall be made by horizontal curve. 

(2) 	
Whenever the algebraic difference of the centerline street grade exceeds one (1) percent, a vertical curve shall be designed to provide sufficient sight distance. 

(3) 
All proposed horizontal and vertical street curves shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 

(4) 	
A tangent of no less than one hundred (100) feet, as measured along the street centerline, shall be provided between all horizontal street curves. 

(5) 	
To the greatest extent possible, combinations of the minimum horizontal and vertical street curves shall be avoided. 

(6) 	
Where in the best interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the community, Cumru Township may require greater horizontal or vertical curve lengths in order to overcome obstacles such as, but not limited to, centerline street grades, street alignments, functional speed limits, existing land uses and proposed land development activities. 



(E) 	
Street Intersections and Curb Radii: Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed street intersections shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 

(1) 	
The centerlines of streets shall intersect at right angles unless existing conditions dictate otherwise. No street shall intersect another street at an angle of less than 70 degrees or more than 120 degrees. 

(2) 	
Street intersections should be designed in a manner so the intersecting roads are directly opposite from each other.  No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at the same point. 

(3) 	
The minimum separation distance between street intersections shall be based upon the functional classification of the road to which the proposed street intersection is planned.  The following design requirements shall apply to the minimum separation distance between the centerlines of all proposed street intersections and the minimum curb radii at all proposed street intersections. 

(4) 	
All proposed street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (concentric with) curb arcs at intersections. 

(5) 	
Where in the best interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the community, Cumru Township may require greater isolation distances and curb radii in order to overcome obstacles such as, but not limited to, centerline street grades, street alignments, functional speed limits, existing land uses and proposed land development activities. 



(F) 	
Street Intersection Capacity: In order to provide safe and efficient modes of transportation, all subdivision and land development plans shall be designed in accordance with the following design criteria: 

(1) 	
Developments containing (20) residential units or less in complete build-out of all phases shall be designed to provide at least one (1) point of vehicular ingress and egress along an existing public road in order to accommodate the anticipated traffic volumes.  If required by Cumru Township, a boulevard entrance or emergency access lane shall be designed for the development. 

(2) 	
Developments containing between twenty-one (21) residential units and forty (40) residential units in complete build-out of all phases shall be designed to provide at least two (2) points of vehicular ingress and egress along an existing public road in order to accommodate the anticipated traffic volumes.  The points of ingress and egress shall be separated by at least five hundred (500) linear feet of road frontage. 

(3) 	
Developments containing between forty-one (41) residential units and one hundred (100) residential units in complete build-out of all phases shall be designed to provide at least two (2) points of vehicular ingress and egress along an existing public road in order to accommodate the anticipated traffic volumes.  The points of ingress and egress shall be separated by at least five hundred (500) linear feet of road frontage and shall be capable of serving all of the residential units within the development.  At least one (1) point of ingress and egress shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet a collector or arterial road, which shall be capable of providing safe and convenient vehicular access to the collector or arterial road. 

(4) 	
Developments containing more than one hundred (100) residential units in complete build-out of all phases shall be designed to provide at least three (3) points of vehicular ingress and egress along an existing public road in order to accommodate the anticipated traffic volumes.  The points of ingress and egress shall be separated by at least five hundred (500) linear feet of road frontage and shall be capable of serving all of the residential units within the development.  At least one (1) point of ingress and egress shall be safely designed to provide direct access onto a collector or arterial road. 

(5) 	
If required by Cumru Township, the use of a boulevard entrance or emergency access lane shall be designed for the development.  The boulevard entrance or emergency access lane shall not be used to replace the design requirements specified by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(6) 	
The intersection capacity for non-residential developments shall be based upon volume of traffic and level of service, which shall be accounted for in the Traffic Impact Study. 



(G) 	
Clear Sight Triangles: Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections in order to improve and maintain sight distance and visibility at the intersection. Within such triangles, nothing, except permitted street signs, traffic lights or signs, utility poles and mail boxes, which impedes vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow.  Such triangles shall be established as follows: 

(1) 	
For intersections involving a minor street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(2) 	
For intersections involving a collector street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred (100) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 

(3) 	
For intersections involving an arterial street, the dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the intersecting streets cross. 



(H) 	
Sight Distance:  All proposed intersections shall have sufficient horizontal and vertical sight distance in order to provide a safe and convenient point of ingress and egress.  The following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
Sight distance measurements shall be made in each direction from a point 10 feet from the edge of the cartway and 3.5 feet above the road surface to a point 3.5 feet above the centerline of the road. 

(2) 	
The minimum sight distance requirements shall be based on the functional classification, speed limit and grade of the intersecting street, utilizing the latest standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(3) 	
A summary chart of the minimum sight distance requirements has been included within Appendix C of this Ordinance.  Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may require additional sight distance than those referenced on the summary chart by considering the functional classification of the road, traffic volumes, vehicular speed, pedestrian movements, land use and other relevant site conditions. 



(I) 	
Cul-De-Sac Streets: The following provisions shall apply to the design of cul-de-sac streets: 

(1) 	
Cul-de-Sac streets may be permitted if the physical development conditions and/or the tract configuration of the site limit the design options for a "through street" or a "loop street". 

(2) 	
Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties. 

(3) 	
Any street dead-ended for access to an adjoining property or because of authorized stage development shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather turnaround, within the subdivision, and the use of such turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is extended. 

(4) 	
Cul-de-Sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length and shall not furnish access to more than twenty (20) dwelling units. 

(5) 	
Cul-de-Sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall have a minimum length of two hundred and fifty 

(250) feet measured from the edge of the cartway of an intersecting street to the center of the bulb of the cul-de-sac. 

(6) 	
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width. Alternative designs may be considered by Cumru Township, provided that such design does not limit accessibility to other parcels of land 

(7) 	
The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed ten (10) percent, and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed five (5) percent. 

(8) 	
All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed as such, shall be provided at the closed end with a fully paved turnaround, having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet. The right-of-way shall have a minimum radius of sixty (60) feet. 

(9) 	
Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open end.  If drainage is toward the closed end, water shall be conducted away in an underground storm sewer or other means acceptable to Cumru Township. 




Street Width Requirements  
Functional Street Classification  Right-Of-Way  Cartway  Parking Lane  Shoulder  
Minor/ Local Access Street (1)  54 feet  18 feet  8 feet per side  0 feet  
54 feet  24 feet  No Parking  8 feet per side  
Cul-De-Sac Street (1)  54 feet  18 feet  8 feet per side  0 feet  
54 feet  24 feet  No Parking  8 feet per side  
Collector Street (2)  60 feet  24 feet  No Parking  8 feet per side  
Arterial Street (2)  100 feet  12 feet per lane  No Parking  10 feet per side  
Marginal Access Street (2)  33 feet  24 feet  No Parking  0 feet  
(1) Denotes that the design criteria shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. (2) Denotes that the design criteria shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.  

Centerline Road Grade Requirements  
Functional Street Classification  Minimum Requirement  Maximum Requirement  
Minor or Local Access Street  1 percent  12 percent  
Cul-De-Sac Street  1 percent  10 percent  
Collector Street  1 percent  8 percent  
Arterial Street  1 percent  8 percent  
Marginal Access or Service Street  1 percent  10 percent  

Horizontal and Vertical Street Curve Requirements  
Design Speed (Miles/Hour)  Minimum Sight Distance  Minimum centerline radii for horizontal curves  Minimum sight distance for vertical curves  
20 MPH  125 feet  100 feet  125 feet  
25 MPH  150 feet  125 feet  160 feet  
30 MPH  200 feet  230 feet  200 feet  
35 MPH  250 feet  310 feet  250 feet  
40 MPH  325 feet  430 feet  325 feet  
45 MPH  400 feet  500 feet  400 feet  
50 MPH  475 feet  700 feet  475 feet  
55 MPH  550 feet  850 feet  550 feet  

Street Intersection and Curb Radius Requirements  
Functional Street Classification  Minimum separation distance between street intersections  Minimum tangential arc for each curb radius  
Minor or Local Access Street  200 feet  20 feet  
Cul-De-Sac Street  200 feet  20 feet  
Collector Street  500 feet  30 feet  
Arterial Street  1,000 feet  40 feet  
Marginal Access or Service Street  100 feet  15 feet  


Section 503:   Street Construction and  Improvement Specifications 
(A) 	
All proposed streets shall be graded, improved and surfaced to the grades and dimensions on the approved plans, profiles and cross-sections. 

(B) 	
All proposed streets shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by Cumru Township. 

(C) 	
Additional right-of-way and cartway widths, beyond what is required within this Ordinance , may be required by Cumru Township in order to control traffic patterns, to lesson traffic congestion, to facilitate the adequate provision for future community or transportation improvements, and/or when clearly in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 

(D) 	
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate horizontal and/or vertical alignment, Cumru Township may require adjustments in order to improve public safety. 

(E) 	
All storm drainage facilities located within the ultimate right-of-way shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 



Section 504:   Street Names and  Addresses  
(A) 	
All proposed street names shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township, the Berks County Emergency Management Coordinator and the Postmaster having jurisdiction. 

(B) 	
Proposed streets, which are obvious extensions of existing streets shall bear the same name as the existing street. 

(C) 	
In no case shall the name of a street duplicate an existing street name in Cumru Township and/or in the same postal district(s), irrespective of the use of the suffix street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place, court or lane. 

(D) 	
Prior to municipal approval, street addresses should be assigned to all proposed lots and/or uses identified on the subdivision plan or land development plan. 



Section 505:   Street Signs and  Lighting 
(A) 	
All street signs, including but not limited to traffic control signs, street signs, and directional signs, shall be acquired and installed by the applicant. All such street signs shall meet the minimum requirements of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as well as the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

(B) 	
Where traffic control signs are required, the applicant shall prepare and submit all studies, engineering reports, and documentation for procuring approval by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. 

(C) 	
Streetlights shall be required for all proposed developments where public or private roads are to be constructed.  The following chart depicts the lighting intensity requirements: 

(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, streetlights shall be provided at all street intersections and along road segments to comply with the streetlight intensity requirements specified by Section 505(C) of this Ordinance. 

(E) 	
Cumru Township may require additional streetlights in order to provide safe and convenient vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed streetlights within the development and the provision for adequate measures to mitigate nuisance from light pollution and disabling glare, both on the use or development site and on adjacent properties. 

(G) 	
The type, quantity, positioning and illumination of the selected streetlight shall be subject to the review of the Cumru Township Planning Commission. 

(H) 	
Electrical installations for all streetlights shall be in accord with prevailing regulations and specifications by the local utility company providing service.  It shall be the responsibility of the contractor or his agent to have final construction by an electrical inspection agency and a written report attesting this fact shall be submitted to Cumru Township and the local utility company providing service. 


Streetlight Intensity Requirements by Type of Development and Zoning District  
Type of Development  Zoning District  Lighting Intensity Measurement in Footcandles  
Minimum  Average  Maximum  
Residential Developments (1)  AG, RC and LR  0.2  0.4  2.4  
Residential Developments  MR, HR and LC  0.2  0.4  2.4  
Non-Residential Developments  LC, HC, OC and GI  0.2  0.9  5.4  
(1) Denotes that the provision may be waived if the residential density for the development is less than or equal to one (1) dwelling unit per acre and/or if the site conditions do not warrant street lighting throughout the development.  


Section 506: Blocks, Lots and Parcels 
(A) 
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to zoning requirements, topographic conditions, environmentally sensitive lands, and requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
Blocks shall have a maximum length of two thousand six hundred (2,000) feet and a minimum length of five hundred (500) feet. 

(2) 	
In the design of blocks longer than one thousand (1,000) feet special consideration shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection and pedestrian accessibility. 

(3) 	
Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required along a major collector or arterial street, or where prevented by physical site conditions. 

(4) 	
Blocks in non-residential areas may vary from the design criteria indicated above if the applicant demonstrates that the alternative design is essential to the proposed development. In all cases, however, adequate provisions shall be made for off-street parking, loading areas and traffic circulation. 



(B) 	
The size, shape and orientation of proposed lots shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
Lots shall conform to the applicable minimum lot sizes, lot widths and setback requirements as set forth in the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street line tangents or radial to street line curves. 

(3) 	
The depth to width ratio of a residential lot shall not be less than 1 to 1 or greater than 3 to 1. Lot width shall be measured at the minimum building setback line and lot depth shall be the mean depth of irregularly shaped lots.  Lots with an area more than three (3) times greater than the minimum lot area, as designated in the Township of Cumru Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the lot is located, may exceed the 3 to 1 depth to width requirement. 

(4) 	
The depth to width ratio of lots designated for non-residential land development shall be adequate for the land use proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and unloading, setbacks, buffer yards and landscaping. 

(5) 	
Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems. 

(6) 	
Where feasible, lots shall be orientated and sited to take advantage of solar energy. 

(7) 	
Double or reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except as needed to avoid direct vehicular access onto an arterial or major collector street by individual driveways, or to overcome physical site conditions. All permitted residential reverse frontage lots shall have frontage onto a minor or minor collector street. The rear yard setback shall be established seventy-five (75) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of the arterial or major collector street. Between the rear yard setback and the ultimate right-of-way line, a ten 

(10) foot wide planting screen easement shall be established in order to prohibit vehicular access onto the arterial or major collector street. The easement shall contain evergreen plantings meeting the standards of Section 914 of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(8) 	
The minimum lot width and front yard setback requirements shall be applied to each street on which the lot has frontage. 

(9) 	
In cases in which a pre-existing lot of record is changed or converted into a corner lot, as the result of an adjacent subdivision or land development, the front yard of the pre-existing lot shall be established along the public street to which it originally had frontage as well as along the proposed or new road to which it will have frontage.  The new road shall not create a non-conforming front yard on the existing lot of record.  All other setback requirements shall conform with the appropriate side and rear yard setback requirements for the zoning district to which the pre-existing lot is located. 





Section 507:   Curbs, Sidewalks, Trails and Greenways 
(A) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, vertical concrete curbs shall be required for all subdivision and land development plans in accordance with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Vertical concrete curbs shall be installed along both sides of all proposed streets. 

(2) 	
Where in the interest to control drainage or traffic patterns, curbs shall be installed along an existing or exterior street on which a subdivision or land development abuts. 

(3) 	
Vertical curbs shall be installed within common parking areas for developments containing multi-family uses or non-residential uses. 

(4) 	
Vertical curbs shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by Cumru Township.  The Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant may prescribe additional or alternative design requirements. 



(B) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, sidewalks shall be required for all subdivision and land development plans in accordance with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of the cartway for all residential subdivisions and land developments when the gross residential density is greater than two (2) dwelling units per acre or when zoning district regulations permit the gross residential density to exceed two (2) dwelling units per acre. 

(2) 	
Sidewalks shall be installed along one side of the cartway in all residential subdivisions and land developments when the gross residential density is greater than one (1) dwelling unit per acre but less than two (2) dwelling units per acre or when zoning district regulations permit the gross residential density to exceed one (1) dwelling unit per acre. 

(3) 	
At the discretion of the Cumru Township, a concrete or macadam pedestrian trail shall be installed along one side of the cartway in all subdivisions (except where the lot width exceeds 200 feet) and land developments when the gross residential density is less than one (1) dwelling unit per acre or when 

zoning district regulations do not permit the gross residential density to exceed one (1) dwelling unit per acre.  The pedestrian trail or pathway shall be at least four (4) feet in width. 

(4) 	
A greenway or natural trail shall be required for all subdivisions and land development that are not required to provide sidewalks or impervious trails.  The greenway or natural trail should be designed along the cartway or within areas designated as common open space.  The location, width, composition and design specifications for all proposed greenways and natural trails shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, sidewalks shall be integrated as part of the design for all non-residential subdivision and land developments.  If required, the sidewalks shall be located as follows: along the street to which the subdivision or land development has access; within the off-street parking areas; and to the main entrance(s) of the principal building(s). 

(6) 	
Where in the interest of public safety, sidewalks or a pedestrian pathway shall be installed along an existing or exterior street on which a residential subdivision or land development abuts. 

(7) 	
Sidewalks, trails and greenways shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by Cumru Township.  The Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant may prescribe additional or alternative design requirements to the established provisions. 



(C) 	
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, handicapped ramps shall be provided at all street intersection and crosswalks.  All such handicapped ramps shall comply with the standards specified by Cumru Township as well as the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 

(D) 	
Crosswalks shall be required whenever necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation and to provide access to community facilities.  All such crosswalks shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, which shall include a delineated pedestrian lane with a minimum  width of four (4) feet. 


Section 508:   Monuments and Markers 
(A) 
Monuments, as defined under Article II of this Ordinance, shall be accurately placed at the following locations within a development: 

(1) 	
At all external property corners forming the perimeter of the development; 

(2) 	
At the front corners of each lot at the required or ultimate right-of-way line. 

(3) 	
At each proposed street intersection; 

(4) 	
At the beginning and end of all horizontal street curves; 

(5) 	
At such places where topographical or other site conditions make impossible to establish a line of sight between two (2) otherwise required monuments; and 

(6) 	
At locations deemed necessary by the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 



(B) 	
Property markers, as defined under Article II of this Ordinance, shall be accurately set at the following locations within a development: 

(1) 	
At all property corners and at all changes in course direction along a deed line; 

(2) 	
At all changes in course direction along the legal or ultimate right-of-way of an existing street; and. 

(3) 	
At locations deemed necessary by the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant 



(C) 	
All required monuments and markers shall be accurately set by a professional engineer or land surveyor, who shall be registered within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(D) 	
Tract monuments existing prior to subdivision or land development shall not be removed or replaced unless damaged. 


Section 509:  Driveways and Access Lanes 
(A) 	
All proposed driveways and access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable standards specified by Cumru Township.  Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, the following specific provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
All driveways and access lanes serving a residential use in the AG, RC, LR, MR, HR, LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts shall be paved a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from the edge of the cartway of the public road to which the driveway or access land has access. 

(2) 	
All driveways, access lanes, parking areas and loading areas serving a non-residential use within the LC, HC, OC and GI Zoning Districts shall be paved. 

(3) 	
All driveways and access lanes serving agricultural or conservation uses within the AG and RC Zoning Districts shall be maintained in a mud-free condition. 

(4) 	
The maximum centerline grade of any residential driveway or access lane shall not exceed twelve (12) percent. 

(5) 	
All driveways and access lanes shall be designed and constructed with a leveling area not to exceed a centerline grade of five (5) percent, as measured twenty (20) feet from the edge of the cartway of the public road to which the driveway or access land has access. 

(6) 	
Where a lot within an approved subdivision or land development plan fronts on either the arc of the curve of a public road or on a cul-de-sac bulb, the required driveway or part thereof, including any turnaround area, shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from a property boundary line. 

(7) 	
Driveways serving residential uses shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet and a maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet. 

(8) 	
Driveways serving non-residential uses shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a maximum width of thirty-six (36) feet. 

(9) 	
Driveways or access lanes entrances shall not intersect the existing or proposed streets to which they intersect at angles of less than 60 degrees nor more than 120 degrees. 

(10) 	
In order to provide a safe and convenient point of ingress and egress, driveway entrances should be rounded with a minimum radius of five (5) feet. 



(B) 	
All proposed driveways and related improvements shall be located, designed and constructed in order to control stormwater run-off, prevent sedimentation of public roads, maintain the structural stability of public roads, maintain the existing drainage patterns of the area and prevent undue traffic hazards. 

(C) 	
Where required by the Cumru Township Engineer, a driveway pipe shall be installed under the driveway or access lane.  The following minimum requirements shall apply: 

(1) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for the design, permitting, purchase and installation of the pipe. 

(2) 	
The design shall be submitted to the Cumru Township review and consideration. Where required, permits should be issued as part of the subdivision or land development plan. 

(3) 	
If required, the design shall be submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the Berks County Conservation District for their review and approval. 

(4) 	
The pipe material should be either reinforced concrete or smooth bore polyethylene meeting pipe, which shall be installed in accordance with the manufactures specifications.  Unless otherwise permitted by the Cumru Township Engineer, the minimum diameter of the pipe should be fifteen (15) inches or an equivalent capacity and shall be installed with a minimum grade of one-half (0.5) percent. 



(E) 	
No residential use shall have more than one (1) vehicular access point to a public road.  In order to reduce the number of curb cuts along a given road, Cumru Township may permit adjoining or common driveways. 

(F) 	
A common or shared driveway may provide access to not more than three (3) residential lots within the AG, RC and LR Zoning Districts.  If permitted, the following provisions shall apply:  

(1) 	
The common driveway shall only be established if the property has frontage along a public road. 

(2) 	
The common driveway shall be located within a fifty-four (54) foot wide access easement or right-of-way 

(3) 	
The common driveway shall be paved at least sixteen (16) feet in width for the entire length that it is serves more than (1) residential use 

(4) 	
The common driveway shall terminate in a turnaround area with a paved radius of not less than forty (40) feet, which shall be located wholly within the required access easement or right-of-way, which shall be designed with a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet. 

(5) 	
A common off-street parking area shall be established within one hundred (100) feet of the public road and adjacent to the driveway to which the residential lots have access.  The common off-street parking area shall be designed to accommodate one (1) vehicle per lot, which may be utilized by the lot owners. 

(6) 	
An ownership and maintenance agreement shall be prepared and recorded as a condition of municipal approval for the subdivision plan.  The agreement shall be referenced on the proposed deeds for each residential lot.  The contents of the ownership and maintenance agreement shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township. 

(7) 	
A release of responsibility holding Cumru Township harmless for the provision of all municipal services shall be included on the subdivision plan and referenced on the proposed deeds for each residential lot. The notes on the plan and the references contained within the deed shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township. 

(8) 	
A fourth dwelling with access to a common driveway shall not be created unless the driveway is reconstructed (if necessary) to comply with the standards and specifications of a public street.. 

(9) 	
Common driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of Cumru Township. 



(G) 	
All driveways and access lanes shall be located, designed and constructed as to provide optimum sight distance and visibility at the intersection with the existing or proposed street.  The following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
Sight distance measurements shall be made in each direction from a point 10 feet from the edge of the cartway and 3.5 feet above the road surface to a point 3.5 feet above the centerline of the road. 

(2) 
The minimum sight distance and safe stopping distance requirements specified by Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shall be utilized to determine the optimum location for all driveways and access lanes.  A summary chart of the minimum sight distance requirements has been included within Appendix C of this Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may require additional sight distance than those referenced on the summary chart by considering the functional classification of the road, traffic volumes, vehicular speed, pedestrian movements, land use and other relevant site conditions. 

(4) 	
The sight distance triangles shall be depicted on the Plan and sight distance easements provided whenever the triangle crosses a portion of a lot or property outside of the street right-of-way lines.  The easement shall prohibit the grading, re-grading, landscaping, construction of buildings or structures that would reduce the required sight distance. 



(H) 	
Clear sight triangles shall be provided for all driveways and access lanes at all street intersections.  Within such triangles, nothing, except permitted street signs, traffic control signs, traffic lights, street lights, mail boxes or utility poles, which impedes vision between a height of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow.  The dimension of the clear sight triangle shall be established for a distance of fifty (50) feet, as measured from the middle of the intersection or where the centerlines of the driveways or access roads intersect with the intersecting street. 

(I) 	
If required by Cumru Township, the developer shall prepare a typical cross-section for each driveway located within the subdivision or land development.  The profiles should demonstrate how problems associated with slope and drainage will be overcome. 

(J) 	
A Driveway Occupancy Permit, issued by Cumru Township shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a road, which is currently either owned by or to be dedicated to Cumru Township. 

(K) 	
A Highway Occupancy Permit, issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, shall be required for all proposed driveways entering onto a state road. 

(L) 	
Fire lanes and/or fire apparatus access roads shall be located, designed and constructed as per the specifications provided by Cumru Township.  


Section 510:   Off-Street Parking and Loading 
(A) 	
All proposed off-street loading areas and access drives shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
All proposed off-street parking areas and access drives shall be located, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 


Section 511:   Easements and Rights-Of-Way 
(A) 	
Where easements or rights-of-way are required to accommodate utility installations, such easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.  New utility easements and rights-of-way shall be located only upon consultation with the appropriate utility company. 

(B) 	
Where feasible, easements and rights-of-way shall be centered or adjacent to rear or side lot lines. No structures, materials and/or trees shall be placed within such easements and rights-of-way. 

(C) 	
Where a proposed subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve the natural drainage channel and provide sufficient width for maintenance. Stormwater management and drainage way easements shall be no less than twenty (20) feet in width, or as directed by Cumru Township, the County of Berks and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Stream and watercourse easements shall be no less than fifty (50) feet in width, or as specifically directed by Cumru Township, the County of Berks and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 

(D) 	
Right-of-way standards and installation procedures for natural gas and petroleum product transmission lines shall conform to all applicable federal and state regulations, including regulations governing the width of the right-of-way, location of pipeline within the right-of-way, the proposed depth of the pipeline, and the pipe wall thickness.  There shall be a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet, measured in the shortest distance, between any proposed or existing dwelling and any petroleum products or natural gas transmission line. 

(E) 	
Where feasible, sanitary sewer collection lines and water supply lines shall be located and installed within the right­of-way of a public street.  

(F) 	
All easements or rights-of-way shall be properly described by bearings and distances. The area occupied by any required easement or right-of-way shall not be calculated as part of the net lot area. 

(G) 	
No easement or right-of-way shall be created, recited and/or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(H) 	
Any deed conveying a lot from an approved plan shall make reference to the approved plan including all easements and encumbrances referenced on the approved plan.   Where required by Cumru Township, a representative description expressing the references by which easements and encumbrances will appear on all affected deeds shall be presented to the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant and Solicitor for their review prior to action on the final plan. 



Section 512:   Stormwater  Management 
(A) 	As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the applicant shall prepare and submit a stormwater management plan considering the following criteria: 
(1) 	
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared considering all pertinent provisions relating to drainage, runoff, infiltration, erosion and discharge, as adopted by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to comply with the Schuylkill River and Conestoga River Stormwater Management Ordinance, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners via Ordinance Number 663 on March 21, 2006, as may be amended from time to time. 

(3) 	
The stormwater management plan shall comply with the standards and specifications adopted by Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to consider the recommendations pertaining to natural resources, floodplains, wetlands, stormwater management and hydrological resource planning, as contained within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(5) 	
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Permitting Regulations. 

(6) 	
The stormwater management plan shall consider the implementation of “best management practices”, as endorsed within the Cumru Township Comprehensive Plan and/or as recommended by the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 

(7) 	
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to consider all pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements. 


(B) 
Unless otherwise required by Cumru Township, the stormwater management plan shall contain the following: 

(1) 	
Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed subdivision or land development is located. 

(2) 	
A study shall be performed of the watershed in which the subdivision or land development is located to assess the impact the proposal will have on downstream conditions.  The stormwater management plan shall address all identified impacts to the satisfaction of Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Computations of the stormwater runoff for all points of runoff concentration before and after development, including all supporting data. 

(4) 	
Complete drainage systems for the subdivision or land development.  All existing drainage features, which are to be incorporated as part of the design shall be identified with a detailed explanation of the operations of the facilities. 

(5) 	
Plans showing all existing and proposed drainage facilities affecting the subject property, including plan views, profile views and/or detail sheets. 

(6) 	
Computations for all existing and proposed drainage structures that are associated with the development. 

(7) 	
Plans showing proposed grading; including typical structure footprint(s) with first floor elevation(s). 

(8) 	
Construction details for all proposed facilities. 

(9) 	
If, in the course of preparing or reviewing the stormwater management plan the Cumru Township Engineer determines that off-site improvements are necessary to satisfactorily control the stormwater from the proposed development, the applicant or developer shall be responsible for the design, permitting and construction of the off-site improvements, which may also include obtaining any required easements or rights-of-way. 

(10) 	
A detailed plan of all required off-site drainage improvements. 

(11) 	
All other documentation that may be required to satisfy and address the compliance criteria specified under Section 512(A) of this Ordinance. 



(C) 	
All stormwater management basins, ponds, pipes, structures and related site improvements shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with all requirements specified by Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
All permits that are required to satisfy the provisions of this Ordinance shall be obtained prior to municipal approval of the subdivision or land development plan. 

(E) 	
Where certain stormwater management improvements are inadvertently omitted from the approved plan or if any inconsistencies arise between the approved plan and the adopted requirements specified by Cumru Township, the applicant shall be responsible for the design, construction and installation of those site improvements, as directed by the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 

(F) 	
The Cumru Township Engineer or Planning Consultant may advise the applicant to include special notes or design criteria that should be added to the plan. 

(G) 	
All stormwater management improvements shall be inspected and approved by the authorized representative of Cumru Township prior to the release of funds held in escrow and/or the issuance of permits 


Section 513:  Riparian  Buffers 
(A) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be a conservation overlay to the underlying zoning districts of Cumru Township.  The purpose and objective of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District is further outlined under Section 506 of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(B) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall apply to all perennial stream corridors within Cumru Township.  The following provisions shall apply: 

(1) 	
The limits of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be recognized as a conservation overlay as part of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance.  The design standards and specifications for the Riparian Buffer Overlay District are referenced under this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Properties located along or adjacent to a perennial stream corridor, which are not subject to subdivision and land development activity shall be subject to an education and volunteer effort, whereas, the landowner may implement the design standards contained within this Ordinance.  All such efforts may be coordinated with local, county, state or federal agencies, provided that such efforts enhances, restores, stabilizes and/or maintains the integrity woodland and vegetation within the Riparian Buffer Overlay. 

(3) 	
Properties located along or adjacent to a perennial stream corridor, which are subject to subdivision and land development activity shall be subject to a mandatory  effort, whereas, the landowner or developer 

shall be required to implement the design standards contained within this Ordinance. All such efforts may be coordinated with other agencies, provided that such efforts enhances, restores, stabilizes and/or maintains the integrity woodland and vegetation within the Riparian Buffer Overlay. 

(4) 	
All land uses and site improvements should be located, design and conducted in a manner that meets the design standards contained within this Ordinance. Where appropriate, Cumru Township may consider design waivers or modifications in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Volunteer and mandatory efforts should be reviewed by the Berks County Conservation District to determine if the selected landscape materials will implement the overall purpose and objective of the Riparian Buffer Overlay District. 



(C) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be delineated in accordance with the following zones: 

(1) 	
Zone 1 shall include the landward area located between the stream bank edge under typical flow conditions, as measured twenty (20) feet upland or perpendicular to the stream bank.  

(2) 	
Zone 2 shall include the area beginning at the inland edge of Zone 1, extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet inland from Zone 1, which shall include the 100-year floodplain and all areas delineated as wetlands. 

(3) 	
Zone 3 shall include the area beginning at the inland edge of Zone 2, extending a minimum of twenty (20) feet inland from Zone 2. 



(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the following uses and activities shall be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Overlay District: 

(1) 	
Accessory uses and accessory buildings to a permitted land use provided that they are not located within Zone 1 or Zone 2. 

(2) 	
General agricultural uses provided that they are not located within Zone 1.  Corridor crossings for farm vehicles and livestock and livestock watering facilities , all of which are approved by the Berks County Conservation District and have been completed considering best management practices. 

(3) 	
Conservation uses provided that they are not located within Zone 1. 

(4) 	
Municipal site improvements, including streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewer facilities, water supply facilities, stormwater management facilities, public utilities, and other similar improvement, provided they are located in a manner to minimize impacts on Zones 1, 2 and 3, and provided that they are designed and constructed in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(5) 	
Stormwater detention or retention facilities, provided they are not located within Zone 1 or Zone 2. 

(6) 	
Passive recreation uses, provided they are not located within Zone 1 or Zone 2. 

(7) 	
Municipal uses. 



(E) 	
The Riparian Buffer Overlay District shall be designed to include native vegetation that may exist prior to any earth disturbance activities.  The following plantings for each zone are recommended and should be utilized as a guide to establish the desired riparian buffer: 

(1) 	
Zone 1 should include mature canopy trees and a ground cover of native grasses.  New tree plantings shall be selected, arranged and managed to accelerate canopy growth, and offer native species habitat and food supply.  New grass plantings shall be selected and managed to filter out pollutants and offer habitat. All vegetation selected for Zone 1 should thrive in wet conditions. 

(2) 	
Zone 2 should include mature canopy trees and natural undercover.  New tree plantings shall be selected, arranged and managed to accelerate canopy growth, and offer native species habitat and food supply.  The 

undercover plants shall be allowed to “evolve” with the canopy of Zone 2.  All vegetation selected for planting within the 100 year floodplain should thrive in wet conditions. 

(3) 	
Zone 3 should be planted with natural ground cover that could mature naturally without maintenance, mowing or harvesting activities.  The selected species shall accommodate overland stormwater flows and act as an upland filter to Zone 2. 



(F) 	
Riparian buffers shall be maintained in a natural condition with minimal disturbance.  Mature trees and native grasses and ground cover have the capacities to absorb more nutrients.  As a result, best management practices are established, erosion is limited, hydrological resources are balanced, and biodiversity corridors are preserved.  Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, the following maintenance activities and disturbance limitations shall apply to the Riparian Buffer Overlay District: 

(1) 	
Zone 1 should require minimal maintenance.  As trees mature, die and decay, the natural debris should be allowed to decompose within the stream.  This will provide important food sources and habitats for beneficial microorganisms, fish and amphibious animals. However, any debris that may cause a rise in the floodplain due to obstruction or displacement shall be removed.  Streamside grasses shall be allowed to seasonally flourish and recede. 

(2) 	
Zone 2 should receive significant attention since the objective is to develop a stable and broad canopy of tree cover.  The trees within Zone 2 should be pruned and trimmed on an as-needed basis, but should not jeopardize the overhead canopy of shade.  The natural undercover should be undisturbed. 

(3) 	
Zone 3 requires minimal maintenance.  Native grasses and ground cover should flourish and recede with the seasons. Grazing and haying are permitted provided that the residual grass length is sufficient to disperse overland stormwater flows. 

(4) 	
Trees that have been damaged, contracted with disease, or create an unsafe situation may be removed within the Riparian Buffer Overlay Zone, provided that the tree is replaced with another tree that could survive and flourish within the Riparian Buffer Overlay District. 

(5) 	
Replacement trees shall be deciduous, noninvasive and native to Cumru Township, which are nursery stock grown within a locale with similar climatic conditions as Cumru Township.  The replacement trees shall be balled and burlapped and not less than two (2) inches in diameter, as measured at breast height. The trees shall be at least ten (10) feet tall after planting and trimming.  Branching shall start not less than six (6) feet from the top of the root ball.   

(6) 	
Replacement trees should not be used as credits to meet other planting requirements relative to street tree plantings, landscape buffers, unless the original trees would have satisfied such requirements.  

(7) 	
Replacement trees shall be planted within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the existing tree being removed from the Riparian Buffer Overlay District. 




Section 514: Erosion and Sedimentation  Control 
(A) 	
No changes shall be made to the contour of the land, and no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced, until such time as a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed and reviewed by the appropriate local, county, state and/or federal agencies. 

(B) 	
All permits required to implement the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be obtained from the appropriate agencies prior to municipal approval of the subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(C) 	
The approval of a subdivision plan or land development plan does not relieve the developer's obligation to execute the erosion and sediment control measures, as specified on the approved plans or as otherwise required by local, state and federal laws. 

(D) 	
When erosion and sedimentation control measures are required, the improvements shall be either: incorporated within the municipal improvements agreement; completed by the applicant prior to plan approval; or deferred to the building permit phase.  All such options shall be subject to the approval of Cumru Township, the Berks County Conservation District and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(E) 	
During the development phase, the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall be provided with the opportunity to inspect the site improvements and enforce compliance with the approved subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(F) 	
Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall conduct a site inspection to determine compliance with the approved subdivision plan or land development plan.  The occupancy permit shall not be issued until all site improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 


Section 515: Sanitary Sewage Disposal 
(A) 	
As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the applicant shall develop a plan for the collection, conveyance and treatment of wastewater considering the following criteria: 

(1) 	
The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with the most recent Cumru Township Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended). 

(2) 	
The plan for sewage disposal shall consider the recommendations pertaining to land use, sewage disposal and water supply, as contained within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(3) 	
The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all provisions specified and adopted by Cumru Township and the Cumru Township Municipal Authority. 

(4) 	
The plan for sewage disposal shall be consistent with all pertinent design requirements specified by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The plan for sewage disposal shall be prepared to consider all pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements. 



(B) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed land uses that are located within a designated sewer service district or planned growth area shall be required to connect to the municipal sanitary sewage disposal system subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Cumru Township shall review all such subdivision or land development plan applications, which shall review the adequacy of the proposed sanitary sewer improvements.  Cumru Township shall not approve a proposed subdivision or land development plan until the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant have issued a favorable recommendation for the sanitary sewer improvements. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise permitted or required by Cumru Township, all proposed sanitary sewer improvements shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the sanitary sewer design standards and specifications that have been adopted by Cumru Township.  Where certain standards and specifications do not exist, the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall provide a designated requirement or alternative for the proposed sanitary sewer improvements.  

(3) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site sanitary sewage disposal improvements that may be necessary to accommodate the wastewater flow from the development.  All such off-site improvements shall be coordinated with Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
Where required, the appropriate planning modules or exemption requests shall be submitted to Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for review and consideration. 

(5) 	
All proposed uses connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the provisions of the Cumru Township Sanitary Sewer Use Ordinance. 



(C) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated sanitary sewer service district or planned growth area shall be required to utilize on-lot sewage disposal technology, as the method for sewage disposal.  All such on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The Cumru Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall review all subdivision or land development plans in which the proposed uses will utilize on-lot sewage disposal systems.  All field testing procedures and applications requirements shall be subject to the approval of the Sewage Enforcement Officer.  The Board of Commissioners shall not approve a proposed subdivision or land development plan until the Sewage Enforcement Officer has received a favorable recommendation for the on-lot sewage disposal system. 

(2) 	
All proposed on-lot sewage disposal facilities shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Where required, the appropriate planning modules or exemption requests shall be submitted to Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for review and consideration. 

(4) 	
All proposed uses connected to an on-lot sewage disposal system shall be subject to all use and maintenance provisions adopted by Cumru Township.. 

(5) 	
All proposed uses connected to a holding tank shall be subject to the provisions of the Cumru Township Holding Tank Ordinance. 



(D) 	
If municipal sewage disposal service is not accessible to an approved subdivision or land development, but is planned to be accessible within five (5) years of final approval, the applicant shall install approved capped collection system within the limits of the subdivision or land development, in addition to the approved on-lot sewage facilities. The collection and conveyance system shall be capped at the limits of the subdivision or land development and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-of-way. 

(E) 	
The appropriate Sewage Facilities Planning Modules shall be approved by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection prior to final plan approval 


Section 516:   Water Supply 
(A) 	
As part of all subdivision and land development plan applications, the applicant shall develop a plan for water supply considering the following criteria: 

(1) 	
The plan for water supply shall be consistent with the most recent Sewage Facilities Plan, as adopted by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (PA Act 537, as amended). 

(2) 	
The plan for water supply shall consider the recommendations pertaining to land use, sewage disposal and water supply, as contained within the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(3) 	
The plan for water supply shall be consistent with the provisions specified and adopted by Cumru Township and the Cumru Township Municipal Authority. 

(4) 	
The plan for water supply shall be consistent with all pertinent design requirements specified by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(5) 	
The plan for water supply shall be prepared to consider all pertinent local, regional, state and federal permitting requirements. 

(6) 	
If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or land development, the developer shall present evidence to the Township Board of Supervisors at preliminary plan stage that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility.  A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be submitted. 

(7) 	
Cumru Township has adopted the International Fire Code.  The developer or his consultant is required to submit evidence to the Cumru Township Fire Code Official that the water service will be capable of supplying the required fire flow for the fire protection for the proposed develop.  Such evidence may include current pressure and flow data for existing fire hydrant(s) in the water main(s) that will service the project together with calculated pressures and flows within the development at the proposed fire hydrant(s) location(s).  The required flow and pressures will be determined by the Cumru Township Fire Code Official based on the requirements as found in the International Fire Code and its Appendices. 

(8) 	
The Cumru Township Fire Code Official and public water supplier shall be consulted prior to testing of any existing fire hydrants for their approval of the test location and method and to permit the Fire Code Official to witness the test if he so desires. 



(B) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed land uses that are located within a designated water supply service district or planned growth area shall be required to connect to the municipal water supply system subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Cumru Township shall review all such subdivision or land development plan applications, which shall review the adequacy of the proposed water supply improvements.  Cumru Township shall not approve a proposed subdivision or land development plan until the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant have issued a favorable recommendation for the water supply improvements. 

(2) 	
All proposed water supply facilities shall be located, designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of Cumru Township.  Where certain standards and specifications do not exist, the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall provide a designated requirement or alternative for the proposed water supply improvements. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for any required off-site municipal water supply improvements that may be necessary to provide a reliable supply of water to the development.  All such off-site improvements shall be coordinated with Cumru Township. 



(C) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated water supply service district or planned growth area shall be required to utilize on-lot water supply facilities through individual well(s). All such individual water supply wells shall be subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All proposed individual on-lot wells shall be located, designed, drilled, constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(2) 	
Each lot to be served by individual on-lot water supply shall be of a size and shape to permit the safe location for each well.  All proposed wells shall be located, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
A hydrogeological study shall be required for subdivision plans involving twenty (20) or more lots or for land development plans in which the estimated water usage shall exceed 5,000 gallons per day.  The hydrogeological study shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, who shall provide documentation to conclude that the proposed individual well(s) will be capable of supplying each lot or use(s) with a dependable supply of safe potable water and that the proposed well(s) will not adversely affect the groundwater table or existing wells near the project site. 



(D) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed land uses that are located outside of a designated water supply service district or planned growth area may utilize a community water supply system through individual well(s).   All such community water supply systems shall be subject to the following provisions: 

(1) 	
All proposed community water supply wells shall be located, designed, drilled, constructed and installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
All proposed community water supply wells shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any sewage disposal system, one hundred (100) feet from any external property line, and one hundred (100) feet from any watercourse or surface waters. 

(3) 	
A detailed hydrogeological study shall be prepared by a professional hydrogeologist, who shall provide documentation to conclude that the following: 

(a) 	
That the proposed community water supply well(s) will be capable of supplying each lot or use(s) with a dependable supply of water. At a minimum, the water source should be capable of supplying one hundred-fifty (150) percent of the average daily demand based on one hundred 

(100) gallons per day per person and/or four hundred (400) gallons per day per dwelling unit, for the design population of the development or the service area. 

(b) 	
That the water supply shall be drawn from an adequate and reliable source, which can supply the proposed storage facilities plus the water demands of the proposed service area at all times, including the fire flow demand during the average or peak daily consumption. A dynamic recovery rate and draw-down test shall be conducted prior to preliminary plan approval to demonstrate the capacity and safe daily yield of the community well sources. 

(c) 	
That the proposed community water supply well(s) will not adversely affect the groundwater table or exiting wells near the project site. 

(d) 	
That the quality of the source shall conform to the minimum water quality requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. 

(e) 	
That a minimum static pressure shall exceed twenty (20) pounds per square inch at any point within the community water supply system during the average or peak daily consumption. 



(4) 	
All community water supply facilities shall be designed with a minimum of two (2) well sources. 

(5) 	
The community water supply wells shall be located within an open space water protection zone with a minimum area of one (1) acre in size.  No structures other than community water facilities and accessory components shall be located within the protected zone. 



(E) 	
Unless otherwise permitted by Cumru Township, all proposed subdivisions and land developments that are to be served by a public or community water supply system shall provide fire hydrants.  The proposed fire hydrants shall comply with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
Fire hydrants shall be located no further than one thousand (1,000) feet apart, as measured along the centerline of each road. All residential dwelling units and non-residential principal buildings shall be located no farther than six hundred (600) feet from an active fire hydrant. 

(2) 	
Fire hydrants shall be located in a manner to provide complete accessibility and so that possibility of damage from vehicles or injury to pedestrians will be minimized.  Unless otherwise directed by Cumru Township, the barrel of the fire hydrant shall be set so that no portion of the pumper or hose nozzle cap will be less than eighteen (18) inches from the curb line. 

(3) 	
The type and location of all required fire hydrants are subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township and the local fire departments. 




Section 517: Well  Head Protection 
(A) 	
Cumru Township and the Cumru Township Municipal Authority has the authority to establish well head protection zones in accordance with the provisions established under Article I, Section 27 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as well as the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
All subdivision and land development applications shall be consistent with any well head protection plans that have been adopted by Cumru Township and/or the Cumru Township Municipal Authority. 


Section 518: Utilities 
(A) 	
All basic utility service lines for electric, natural gas, cable television, and telephone shall be placed underground. 

(B) 	
The installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance with the engineering standards and specifications of the public utility company. 

(C) 	
Where such underground utilities are located under the proposed cartway, they shall be put in place, connected, and approved before the streets are constructed and before any person is permitted to occupy any building to be served by such utilities. 

(D) 	
Prior to municipal approval, the applicant shall be responsible for contacting all utility companies to determine the locations and depths of all underground utilities within the tract of land being subdivided or development. 

(E) 	
A complete list of the applicable utility companies and their phone numbers shall appear on the approved subdivision plan or land development plan. 


Section 519: Exterior Lighting 
(A) 	
This section sets forth minimum criteria for the installation, use and maintenance of exterior lighting, the purposes of which are to require lighting in outdoor public places where safety and security are concerns; protect drivers and pedestrians on nearby streets from glare from non-vehicular light sources that shine directly into their eyes and thereby impair safe travel; shield neighboring properties from glare resulting from excessive light sources and from nonexistent or improperly directed or shielded light sources; limit the height of light standards to preclude or lessen light pollution; and promote efficient design and operation with regard to energy conservation. 

(B) 	
Lighting facilities shall be required for all off-street parking areas and off-street loading areas and for all driveways providing ingress and egress thereto and for all subdivisions and/or land developments for business, commercial, retail, personal service, industrial, multi-family, recreational, institutional and public uses, and for all construction or reconstruction or improvement of any such use for which land development approval is not required. In the approval of any subdivision or land development plan, Cumru Township shall have the authority to require lighting to be incorporated for other uses or locations where in their reasonable discretion such lighting is warranted. In addition, the provisions of this section shall apply to signs, architectural lighting, and landscape lighting. 

(C) 	
Where required by Cumru Township to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, a lighting plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the following criteria:  

(1) 	
A lighting plan shall be submitted for review and approval for all applications and uses, which require exterior lighting. 

(2) 	
The lighting plan shall include a schematic layout of all proposed exterior fixture locations, footcandle data, and a plat demonstrating intensities and uniformities within the limitations established within this Ordinance, as well as the manufacturer's description of the equipment (catalog cuts), glare control devices, lamps, mounting heights and means, proposed hours of operation of the lighting, and maintenance schedule. Illumination intensities shall be plotted on a ten-foot-by-ten-foot grid. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall submit a visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan and the provision for adequate measures to 




mitigate nuisance from light pollution and disabling glare, both on the use or development site and on adjacent properties.   
(D) 	
The following design standards and illumination specifications: 

(1) 	
Lighting facilities located within off-street parking areas and loading areas for all uses and developments requiring exterior lighting, or in connection with signs and recreational and institutional activities, shall provide an illumination level utilizing the current recommended standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) except as otherwise required by the provisions of this Ordinance. 

(2) 	
For all applications, Cumru Township may impose a more stringent lighting standard requiring less illumination as a condition of any such approval when it determines the same to be necessary to protect adjoining properties or streets from light pollution and/or glare. 

(3) 	
Where exterior illumination is required to comply with this Ordinance, the most current intensities and uniformity ratios, as established in the Lighting Handbook of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) shall apply.  As part of any application, Cumru Township may consider alternative design methods and specifications, provided that such alternative meet the purpose statement and community development objectives of this Ordinance. 

(4) 	
In no case shall illumination exceed 0.5 footcandle measured at the property lines, except at driveway entrances, provided the illumination at the cartway center line of the contiguous street shall not exceed 

1.0 footcandle, unless a more stringent standard is ordered by Cumru Township.. 

(5) 	
The lighting standards within off-street parking areas shall be located no more than 100 feet apart.  The applicant shall consider the spacing and height of the lighting standards as well as the intensity of the illumination to disperse the desired lighting in a uniform manner within the off-street parking area.  



(E) 	
The following general design standards, illumination specifications, installation provisions and maintenance requirements shall apply for exterior lighting for residential and/or nonresidential uses: 

(1) 	
Lamp types and colors shall be in harmony within the adjacent community, any special circumstances existing on the site, and with surrounding lighting facilities. Lamp types and colors shall be consistent and shall not create a mix of colors. 

(2) 	
Canopy lighting shall be located on the undersurface (ceiling) of the canopy and shall be limited to flush-lens fixtures mounted on the canopy ceiling. Drop-lens fixtures shall be prohibited.  In no event shall any other lighting fixtures be located on or otherwise attached to or used to light a canopy or any area of the property adjacent to the canopy. Outdoor canopies include, but are not limited to, the following applications:  fuel island canopies associated with service stations and convenience stores; exterior canopies above storefronts, mini-malls, shopping centers and shopping malls; exterior canopies above driveways and building entrances; soffits; pavilions; and gazebos. 

(3) 	
With the exception of security lighting, all exterior lighting for any commercial, industrial, institutional and recreational use shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Security lighting shall only be considered to illuminate specified areas between building and off-street parking area, as considered necessary and appropriate by Cumru Township.  

(4) 	
All lighting fixtures shall meet IESNA full cutoff criteria. No lighting shall be permitted which shines directly into residential units, or results in glare beyond an angle of thirty (30) degrees from a vertical plane, measured from the light source. 

(5) 	
Light fixtures, including mounting base, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height above finished grade. The applicant shall consider the spacing and height of the lighting standards as well as the intensity of the illumination to disperse the desired lighting in a uniform manner within the off-street parking area.   

(6) 	
All lighting sources shall be effectively shielded and shall be installed and/or aimed so as to shield nearby public or private streets and neighboring properties from direct-glare light radiation, or light pollution which may create a safety hazard or a nuisance. 

(7) 	
Illuminated signs shall have an indirect lighting source or shielded source. 

(8) 	
The use of vegetation, fences and similar screening methods shall be utilized to supplement glare or cutoff control devices. 

(9) 	
Fixtures used for architectural lighting, such as facade, feature and landscape lighting, shall be directed so as to preclude light projection beyond the immediate objects, which are intended to be illuminated as an architectural feature. 

(10) 	
Within the LR, MR and HR Zoning Districts, the use of floodlighting, spotlighting, or other high-intensity lighting over one hundred (100) watts shall be located, directed and aimed in a manner so that it does not produce light trespass in excess of 0.2 footcandle at the lot line of any adjacent property line. All such lighting fixtures shall be installed, directed and aimed so that they do not project their output into windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, skyward or public street.  All such lighting shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 

(11) 	
With the exception of all-night operations, lighting for commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational and institutional uses shall be controlled by automatic switching devices, such as time clocks or combination motion detectors and photocells, to permit the reduction of exterior lighting by fifty (50) percent between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in order to mitigate nuisance glare and sky lighting consequences. 

(12) 	
Electrical feeds to all lighting standards shall be installed underground, not overhead. 

(13) 	
The lighting support structures and poles utilized to illuminate an off-street parking area or loading area shall be placed a minimum of five (5) feet from the curb stops or curb line, or placed on a concrete pedestal at least thirty (30) inches above the surface of the pavement. 

(14) 	
The applicant or landowner shall be responsible for the replacement of any damaged or non-functional lighting standards, bulbs, light shields or cutoff fixtures, lens, timing devices, electrical components and/or other lighting feature. 

(15) 	
The applicant or property owner shall install all required lighting fixtures and facilities at his expense. Light fixtures and poles shall be in accordance with a lighting plan approved by the Cumru Township, as part of the application for subdivision, land development conditional use, special exception and/or building permit. 

(16) 	
The applicant or property owner shall be responsible for all costs involved in the maintenance, upkeep and operation of all required lighting facilities. 



(F) 	
Cumru Township reserves the right to conduct a post installation nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.  If it is determined that any lighting source or installation creates a safety or personal security hazard due to insufficient illumination levels or produces unacceptable levels of nuisance glare, light pollution, or skyward light, the property owner shall be so notified and required to take timely remedial action at his expense to resolve the problem.  If the appropriate remedial or corrective action has not been completed within thirty 

(30) days of notification, the property owner shall be issued an enforcement notice and shall be subject to the penalty provisions specified by Cumru Township. 

(G) 	
Cumru Township may consider optional design and site development alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate based upon the existing site conditions.  If approved, the optional design and site requirements shall be considered as part of the zoning permit, subdivision or land development plan. 


Section 520: Landscaping 
(A) 	
Pursuant to the provisions of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance, certain subdivision and/or land development applications may require specific landscaping criteria to be incorporated as part of the subdivision plan and/or land development plan.  The following chart provides a summary of these requirements: 

(B) 
Where zoning district or development regulations require trees, buffer yards, screening and/or planting strips, the applicant shall prepare and submit a landscaping plan to comply with the following provisions: 

(1) 	
The landscaping plan shall show the following information: the location and arrangement of each buffer yard; the species, placement and size of all plant material selected; the type, placement and size of all fences to be placed in such buffer yards; and the type and density of planting, which shall adequately provide the screening effect required. 

(2) 	
The plant materials utilized shall be selected from the approved list, as contained under Section 520.C of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Unless otherwise specified or permitted by Cumru Township, all plant materials shall be permanently maintained and any plant material, which does not survive, shall be replaced within six (6) months. 

(4) 	
Any portion of a site which is not utilized for buildings, accessory structures, loading or parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and shall be landscaped according to an overall plan. 

(5) 	
Unless otherwise specified, a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard shall be established between residential and non-residential uses.  The landscaping screen contained within the buffer yard shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township as part of the subdivision plan and/or land development plan. The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) should be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(6) 	
Unless other wise specified, a twenty (20) foot wide buffer yard shall be established between residential and non-residential uses.  The landscaping screen contained within the buffer yard shall be subject to the review and approval of Cumru Township as part of the subdivision plan and/or land development plan. The use of existing healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) should be utilized as part of the required buffer yard. 

(7) 	
All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass. 

(8) 	
If permitted by Cumru Township, natural berms may be provided as a buffer yard.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the soil type, hydrology, topography and selected landscaping material are appropriate for the area in which the buffer yard is to be located.  All such natural berms shall be properly graded to a maximum side slope ratio of 4:1.  The natural berms shall be properly stabilized by the developer in accordance with the standards specified by Cumru Township and the Berks County Conservation District. 

(9) 	
Buffer yard or screening requirements between commercial and industrial uses shall be subject to the review of Cumru Township as part of the subdivision plan or land development plan. 

(10) 	
As part of the application phase for a subdivision plan or land development plan, Cumru Township shall have the right to modify or consider alternatives to any of the above specifications if the applicant can demonstrate that the existing conditions of the site exceeds all applicable requirements listed under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(11) 	
All selected trees shall be planted a minimum of ten (10) feet outside of the legal right-of-way of all existing and proposed streets. 

(12) 	
All selected plant or tree materials shall be located so as not to interfere with the installation and maintenance of sidewalks, drainage facilities and/or utilities. 

(13) 	
The strategic placement of trees throughout the development to serve as a buffer against the wind and sun is encouraged for energy conservation purposes. 

(14) 	
All plant materials shall be located so as not to create a potential traffic hazard. 

(15) 	
All selected trees and/or all other plant materials exceeding two (2) feet in height above average ground elevation at maturity shall not be located within the limits of the clear sight triangle, as further defined and regulated under Section 908 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(16) 	
As part of the application for a subdivision plan or land development plan, Cumru Township shall have the right to modify or consider alternatives to any of the above specifications if the applicant can 

demonstrate that the existing conditions of the site exceeds all applicable requirements listed under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

(17) 	
Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect or qualified professional with landscaping experience. 



(C) 	
The following chart contains an approved list of selected trees, hedges and/or shrubs, which may be utilized to meet the standards and specifications for buffer yards and landscaping.  Species selection shall be based upon the existing physical and natural conditions of the site: 

(1) 	
Street trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter.  The following is an approved list of street trees: 

Acer rubrum -  Red Maple Acer saccharum - Sugar Maple Crataegus crusgalli - Cockspur Hawthorne Fraxinus Americana - White Ash Fraxinus pennsylanica - Green Ash Juniperous virginiana - Eastern Red Cedar Liquidambar styraciflua - American Sweetgum Nyssa silvatica - Blackgum Ostrya virginiana - American Hophornbeam Oxydendrum arboreaum - Sourwood, Sorrel Tree Quercus alba - White Oak  Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Quercus palustris - Pin Pak  Sassafras albidum - Common Sassafras 

(2) 	
Canopy trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter.  The following is an approved list of canopy trees: 

Acer rubrum - red maple Acer saccharum - sugar maple Betula alba - European white birch Betula lenta – Black Birch Betula nigra – River Birch Carya ovata – Shagbark Hickory Fagus grandifolia - American beech Fagus sylvatica - European beech Fraxinus americana - white ash Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata - gen ash Ginkgo Biloba -Ginkgo (male only) Gleditsia triacanthos inermis - thornless honey locust Liquidambar styraciflua - sweet gum Liriodendron tulipifera - tulip tree Nyssa sylvatica – Black Gum, Sourgum Ostra virginana – American Hophornbeam Phellondendron amurense - Amur cork tree Platanus acerifolia - London plane tree Quercus alba - White Oak Quercus borealis - Red Oak Quercus coccinea - Scarlet Oak Quercus palustris - Pin Oak Quercus phellos - Willow Oak Robina psuedoacaia inermis - thornless black locust Sassafras albidum - Sassafras Sophora japonica - Japanese zelkova 

(3) 	
Flowering trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of ten (10) feet in height.  The following is an approved list of flowering trees: 

Amelanchier canadensis - shadblow serviceberry 
Cercis cacadensis – Eastern Redbud 
Chionanthus virgincus - Fringetree 
Cornus florida - flowering dogwood 
Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood 
Cornus mas - Cornelian cherry 
Crataegus Phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn 
Koelreuteria paniculata - golden rain tree 
Laburnum vossi - goldenchain 
Magnolia soulangeana - saucer magnolia 
Malus baccata - Siberian crab 
Malus floribunda - Japanese flowering crab 
Malus hopa - Hopa red-flowering shrub 
Prunus calleryana - Kwanzan cherry 
Prunus yedoensis -Yoshino cherry 
Pyrus cultivars - Hybrid Ornamental Pear 
Viburnum prunifolium - Blackhaw Viburnum 


(4) 	
Evergreen trees are permitted provided they are a minimum of six (6) feet in height.  The following is an approved list of evergreen trees: 

Ilex opaca - American holly 
Juniperus virginiana – Eastern Red Cedar 
Picea abies - Norway spruce 
Picea omorika - Serbian spruce 
Picea pungens - Colorado spruce 
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine 
Pinus strobus - Eastern white pine 
Pinus sylvestris - Scotch pine 
Pinus thunbergii - Japanese black pine 
Pseudotsuga menziesli -Douglas fir 
Tbuja occidentlis - arborvitae 
Tsuga caroliniana - Carolina hemlock 
Tsuga canadensis - Canada hemlock 


(5) 	
Hedges or hedgerows are permitted for buffer and screening purposes provided they are a minimum of four (4) feet in height.  The following is an approved list: 

Crataegus crus-galli - cockspur thorn 
Crataegus intricata - thicket hawthorn 
Crataegus phaenopyrum - Washington hawthorn 
Juniperus virginiana - Eastern Red Cedar 
Forsythia intermedia - border forsythia 
Rhododendron maxima – Great Rhododendron 
Syringa chinensis - Chinese lilac 
Syringa vulgaris - common lilac 
Tbuja occidentlis - arborvitae 
Viburnum alatus - viburnum 
Viburnum sieboldii - Siebold viburnum 
Viburnum tomentosum - doublefile viburnum 


(6) 	
Shrubs are permitted for buffer and screening purposes provided they are a minimum of three (3) feet in height.  The following is an approved list of shrubs: 




Landscaping  Requirements for  Subdivision and  Land  Development  Activity  
Type of Development  Minimum Landscaping Requirements  Buffer Yard  Landscape Plan  
Conventional single-family residential developments containing less than 10 dwelling units  1 tree per residential lot or unit plus 1 tree per acre to a maximum of 3 trees per residential lot or unit  No  Yes  
Conventional single-family residential developments containing 10 or more dwelling units  1 tree per residential lot or unit plus 1 tree per acre to a maximum of 3 trees per residential lot or unit  No  Yes  
Multi-family townhouse developments containing  less than 10 acres of land  1 tree per townhouse unit  No  Yes  
Multi-family townhouse developments containing more than ten 10 acres of land  2 tree per townhouse unit  Yes  Yes  
Multi-family apartment developments  2 trees per apartment unit  Yes  Yes  
Cluster Design for the AG , RC, MR and HR Districts  3 trees per residential lot or unit  Yes  Yes  
Age-qualified retirement communities  1 tree per residential lot or unit  Yes  Yes  
Personal care, assisted living care facilities, convalescent homes and nursing homes  1 tree per residential unit  Yes  Yes  
Non-residential uses and developments with less than 5,000 cumulative square feet of gross floor area  2 trees per acre  Optional  Yes  
Non-residential uses and developments with 5,000 cumulative square feet of gross floor area or more  2 trees per acre  Optional   Yes  
General notes concerning this chart: Note 1:  The provisions specified on this chart are intended to be the basic landscaping requirements.  Additional provisions for landscaping, buffer yards and other general requirements may apply. Note 2:  Cumru Township may consider alternative design requirements as part of the subdivision plan application or land development plan application Note 3:  The landscaping materials and trees shall be selected from the approved list of  landscaping material, as referenced under Section 520. C of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Note 4: All subdivision and land development applications shall be subject to the provisions of woodland extraction and replacement, as specified under Section 521 of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Note 5:  All subdivision and land development applications shall be subject to the provisions of tree protection and replacement, as specified under Section 522 of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.  

Hamamelis vernalis - vernal witch hazel Hamamelis virginiana - common witch hazel Ilex glaabra – Inkberry Ilex verticillata – winterberry Juniper virginiana - upright juniper Kalmia latifolia – Mountain Laurel Myrica pennsylvanica - Bayberry Juniper virginiana - upright juniper Taxus capitata - upright yew Taxus hicksi - Hicks yew Viburnum dentatum - arrowwood viburnum Viburnum lantana - Wayfaring tree viburnum Viburnum trilobum – Highbrush Cranberry 
(D) 	
As part of the application phase for a subdivision plan or land development plan, Cumru Township may permit alternative trees, hedges and/or shrubs from those specified under Section 520.C provided the applicant or developer provides sufficient evidence from a landscape architect to demonstrate that the alternative tree, hedge and/or shrub will be more effective to meet the standards and specifications for buffer yards and landscaping.  Species selection shall be based upon the existing physical and natural conditions of the site. 

(E) 	
Where compliance with the landscaping provisions of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance cannot be achieved, Cumru Township may permit the required trees or landscaping materials to be planted at an off-site location designated and approved by Cumru Township.  As an alternative to this provision, Cumru Township may accept a contribution in lieu of the landscaping requirements, which shall be established by resolution 

(F) 	
Any tree, plant, shrub, flower, vine or grass species, which has been classified as invasive, noxious or destructive by any local, county, state or federal agency, including the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, shall be specifically prohibited for use in landscaping and ground cover. 

(G) 	
The following provisions shall be considered as a guarantee concerning the survival of all buffer yards and landscaping, which are required as part of the subdivision and/or land development plan application: 

(1) 	
Any tree or shrub, which does not survive within twelve (12) months of planting shall be replaced within a six (6) month time period. 

(2) 	
Substitutions for certain species may be permitted only when approved by Cumru Township. 

(3) 	
Where appropriate, a landscape architect or other competent landscaping professional may provide a recommendation for the substitutions of species that may not survive or thrive. 




Section 521: Woodland Extraction for Subdivision and Land Development 
(A) 	
Woodland extraction shall be permitted within all underlying zoning districts, provided it is conducted in a manner to facilitate all necessary site improvements, as identified on an approved subdivision plan, land development plan, erosion and sedimentation control plan, and/or building permit.  For the purposes of this Ordinance, “woodland extraction” is hereby defined as the clear cutting or removal of healthy mature trees (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height), to provide sufficient area for site  improvements on an individual lot or parcel of land, as the mature trees exist in pre-development conditions. 

(B) 	
Unless otherwise specified by Cumru Township, all proposed subdivision and land development activity shall comply with the following criteria for woodland extraction: 

(1) 	
Woodland extraction may be permitted in order to facilitate municipal site improvements including: areas within the street right-of-way; areas for stormwater management facilities; areas for public utilities; areas for active park and recreation uses; and other areas that may be required to complete the municipal site improvements in accordance with the approved subdivision or land development plan. 

(2) 	
Woodland extraction shall be limited to 125 percent of the total area designated as the building envelope, which shall be identified on the approved subdivision or land development plan in order to facilitate internal lot improvements including: the area of the building(s); the area for the driveway; the area for the sanitary sewage facilities, water supply facilities and other public utilities; areas for stormwater management facilities; and other areas considered necessary by the landowner, provided that the total cumulative area does not exceed 125 percent of the designated building envelope. 

(3) 	
If additional trees (other than those designated on the approved subdivision or land development plan) are removed or extracted for the purposes of grading or municipal improvements during the construction sequence, the applicant shall replace all such trees at a ratio of three (3) replacement trees (3 inches or more in diameter) for each healthy mature tree (12 inches or more in diameter at breast height) that has been incidentally timbered and/or cleared.  The type and location of all such replacement trees shall be subject to the approval of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 



(C) 	
The approved subdivision and land development plan shall be utilized to regulate and control woodland extraction during the following phases: the initial construction activities required for the municipal site improvements; the building permit; and all other future site improvements that may be initiated by the prospective landowner.   If a violation of the woodland extraction requirements should occur during any phase, the developer and/or landowner may be subject to fines, penalties and/or other enforcement remedies. 

(D) 	
Compliance with the provisions for woodland extraction does not relieve the applicant representing a subdivision or land development plan of the requirements specified for landscaping and tree replacement, which are specified under Section 505.3 and 914 of the Zoning Ordinance as well as Sections 520 of this Ordinance. 


Section 522:   Tree Protection  and Replacement 
(A) 	
The Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District has been designated as a conservation overlay district as part of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance.  The Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District shall include the following planning and zoning initiatives: 

(1) 	
Forestry, timber harvesting, tree harvesting and logging regulations, which apply to all operations involved with the cutting down of trees and removal of logs from woodlands or forests for the primary purpose of sale and commercial processing into wood products shall be subject to subject to Section 

505.1 of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance. 

(2) 	
Woodland extraction and tree replacement provisions, which apply to all subdivision and land development activities shall be subject to Section 505.2 of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance and Section 521 of the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 

(3) 	
Tree protection and replacement regulations, which apply to all earth disturbance activities including subdivision and land development activities, shall be subject to Section 505.3 of the Cumru Township Zoning Ordinance and to Section 522 of the Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 



(B) 	
The provisions for tree protection and replacement are intended to complement and not replace the provisions established by Woodland Protection and Management Overlay District. 

(C) 	
Where tree protection and replacement requirements apply to a subdivision or land development plan, the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan to Cumru Township for review and consideration. The landscaping plan shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions established by Cumru Township. 

(D) 	
Cumru Township may consider optional tree protection and replacement alternatives if the standard requirements are determined to be unwarranted or inappropriate. 


Section 523: Community  Facilities 
(A) 	
During the review phase of any subdivision or land development plan, the Cumru Township Planning Commission shall consider the adequacy of existing or proposed community facilities to serve the proposed development.  The Planning Commission shall utilize the applicable components of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan to provide background support and guidance. 

(B) 	
The applicant shall give earnest consideration to the desirability of providing or reserving areas for community facilities normally required in residential neighborhoods, including educational facilities, utility services, emergency management facilities and recreational facilities. 

(C) 	
Land or water areas provided or reserved for community facilities should provide sufficient area to accommodate any proposed buildings, structures and off-street parking areas.  All such areas should be located in an area of the development, which is accessible to the general public. 


Section 524:   Parks, Recreation and Open Space 
(A) 	
Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Cumru Township shall require land and/or water areas be designated as parks, recreation and open space in order to accommodate the community needs for a subdivision plan and/or land development plan.  The following general guidelines shall apply: 

(1) 	
The provisions and requirements for parks, recreation and open space referenced should be consistent with the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan as well as other .any other relevant plans or studies that have been adopted by Cumru Township. 

(2) 	
During the review phase of a subdivision or land development plan, Cumru Township shall determine if the parks, recreation and open space areas to be designated as common open space areas are sufficient to serve the proposed development and benefit the community. 

(3) 	
Cumru Township shall determine if land within the proposed development should be devoted for recreation and open space or if a fee in lieu of recreation land shall be required from the applicant, as permitted under the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and Cumru Township. 

(4) 	
The guidelines, standards and formulas for land dedication and/or fees in lieu of land dedication shall be established by Cumru Township, which may be amended from time to time. 

(5) 	
If land or water areas are to be dedicated as parks, recreation areas and/or open space, the applicant shall make arrangements for the perpetual ownership and maintenance of such land. 



(B) 	
The National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA) have developed specific standards for improved park and recreation areas to serve the basic needs of a community.  The following table provides a summary of the park, recreation and open pace standards endorsed by the NRPA. 

(C) 	
The NRPA does recommend that a twenty (20) percent contingency should be applied to these standards in order to plan for projected recreational demands over a given time period.  For the purposes of this Ordinance, a minimum of ten (10) acres of land shall be devoted as improved municipal parks and recreational areas for every 1,000 persons served by that facility. 

(D) 	
As part of the subdivision plan or land development plan, Cumru Township and the applicant shall consider the needs of the development and regional impacts.  A minimum of ten (10) acres of land and/or water areas within the development shall be designated as “common open space” for every 1,000 persons served by that facility considering the following design criteria: 

(1) 	
The permitted uses contained within the areas designated as parks, recreation and open space shall be limited to those uses specified under Section 913(C) of the Zoning Ordinance.  As part of the subdivision or land development plan application, Cumru Township may permit other accessory uses to the principal use provided that such use is not calculated as part of the required common open space area. 

(2) 	
At least seventy-five (75) percent of the common open space shall be improved to accommodate active and passive recreation uses. 

(3) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall be located on lands that are located within the 100-year floodplain, areas delineated as wetlands and/or areas designated as Category 3 Slope. 

(4) 	
No more than fifty (50) percent of the common open space shall include land areas that are burdened by or are proposed to contain utilities easements and/or stormwater management facilities, as further described and identified by Cumru Township. 

(5) 	
The common open space shall be planned and located as a contiguous accessible area within the development.  Existing and/or proposed roads may bisect the areas designated as common open space, provided a cross walk at grade is safely designed to link the common open space areas.  Planned linkages to other common open space areas, preserved lands, recreation areas and/or natural features shall be encouraged and considered as part of any subdivision or land development application. 

(6) 	
Significant natural features shall be incorporated into the overall schematic of the design as common open space areas whenever possible. 

(7) 	
A system for pedestrian circulation throughout the development shall be provided by utilizing sidewalks and trails. 

(8) 	
The total land area designated to comply with the minimum open space requirements shall be comprised of areas not less than fifty (50) feet in width and shall not contain less than one (1) contiguous acre of land.  In addition, there shall be at least one (1) designated common area that is contiguous within the development containing no less than twenty-five (25) percent of the required common open space. 



(E) 	
The following provisions shall apply to the ownership and maintenance of areas designated as common open space: 

(1) 	
Satisfactory written agreements approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be executed as a declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for the preservation of the common open spaces, and shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds. 

(2) 	
The applicant or developer shall make arrangements, provisions and/or agreements to insure that the common open space shall continue to be adequately managed and maintained.  The applicant or developer shall have the following options for ownership, management and maintenance of the common open space: 

(a) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a homeowners association which is comprised of all the residents of the development; 

(b) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to Cumru Township, who shall have the option to accept or refuse the land offered for dedication; 

(c) 	
Dedicate the land encompassing the common open space to a conservation organization, as determined appropriate by the Board of Commissioners; or 

(d) 	
Retain the ownership, management and maintenance responsibilities 



(3) 	
The selected options for the ownership, management and maintenance of the land and water areas, which are designated as common open space, shall be subject to the review by the Cumru Township Solicitor and subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners. 



(F) 	
In lieu of provisions for designating land and/or water areas as common open space, Cumru Township may require a recreation impact fee as part of the subdivision or land development plan application. The required impact fee or the fee in lieu of mandatory land dedication for parks and recreation facilities shall be specified on the fee schedule adopted by Board of Commissioners, which may be amended from time to time by resolution.  The fees shall be utilized to implement the park, recreation and open space plans that have been adopted by Cumru Township in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(G) 	
The provisions specified for common open space, as may be required to satisfy specific design criteria for the development shall not relieve the applicant of other requirements for open space and recreation as well as all requirements for recreation impact fees associated with the proposed development. 


NRPA  Park,  Recreation and Open Space Standards  
Type of Facility  Acres Per 1,000 People  Total Population Served  Service Area  
Minimum  Maximum  Minimum  Maximum  
Mini-Park  0.25 acres  0.50 acres  500  1,000  0.25 miles  
Neighborhood Park  1.00 acres  2.00 acres  500  5,000  0.50 miles  
Community Park  5.00 acres  8.00 acres  500  10,000  2.00 miles  

Section 525:  Solid Waste Management 
(A) 	
Provision shall be made in developments containing apartments and townhouses and in nonresidential developments to adequately store within containers all solid waste generated between collections. 

(B) 	
All storage containers shall be located to permit efficient depositing of wastes in the containers and efficient collection from the containers. 

(C) 	
Debris, rubbish, or other waste material resulting from grading or construction activities on the lot shall be removed from the lot prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the lot. 

(D) 	
All solid waste management and disposal methods shall comply with the provisions adopted by Cumru Township. 



Article 6: Contracts, Fees and Contributions 
Section 601:  Statement  of Intent 
(A) 	
Article 6 of this Ordinance provides the procedural requirements and general provisions for contracts, municipal improvement agreements, dedication of municipal improvements and maintenance guarantees, as well as all other contributions or fees that may be required as a result of a subdivision or land development application within Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions established under Article 6 shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.   In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant, Zoning Officer and Solicitor. 

(C) 	
Where the provisions of this Ordinance conflict with the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be complied with unless otherwise directed by the Board of Commissioners. 



Section 602:   Improvement Guarantees and Contracts 
(A) 	
No subdivision or land development plan shall be granted final approval unless the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, walkways, streetlights, water mains, sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, shade trees, buffer or screen plantings, recreational facilities, open space improvements and other infrastructure improvements required to satisfy this Ordinance, have been designed, permitted, completed, installed and inspected in accordance with this Ordinance. 

(B) 	
In lieu of the completion of any improvements, which may be required as a condition for the final approval of the subdivision or land development plan, including improvements and fees required by this Ordinance, the applicant shall deposit with Cumru Township an amount as hereinafter calculated to cover the costs of such required improvements or common amenity including, but not limited to, streets, curbs, gutters, walkways, streetlights, water mains, sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, shade trees, buffer or screen plantings, recreational facilities, open space improvements and other required improvements. 

(C) 	
When requested by the applicant to facilitate financing, the Board of Commissioners shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon the applicant obtaining satisfactory financial security and executing a development agreement. 

(D) 	
The final plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial security is tendered and a development agreement is executed.  The resolution or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security is not tendered and the development agreement is not executed within ninety (90) days of the date of the resolution or contingent approval.  The Board of Commissioners may, at its discretion, grant a written extension, which shall be placed in writing at the request of the applicant. 

(E) 	
In addition to cash deposits and escrow accounts, state or federal chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of credit extending for a term of one (1) year beyond completion of all improvements and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institution shall be deemed acceptable financial security for the purposes of securing the completion of the required improvements.  Such financial security shall be posted with Cumru Township by a bonding company or state or federal chartered lending institution chosen by the applicant, provided such bonding company or lending institution is authorized to conduct business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  Such bond, or other security, shall provide for, and secure to the public the completion of any improvements, which may be required on or before the date, fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the required improvements. 

(F) 	
The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the required improvements shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completion estimated as of ninety (90) days following the date scheduled for completion by the applicant, and all administrative and engineering inspections, fees, costs and expenses. 

(G) 	
Cumru Township may adjust the amount of the financial security on an annual basis, by comparing the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the ninetieth (90th) day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, Cumru Township shall require the applicant to post additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals the one hundred ten (110) percent and administrative and engineering costs as specified above.  If required by Cumru Township, additional security shall be posted by the applicant. 

(H) 	
The amount of required financial security shall be based upon the estimated cost of completion and inspection of the required improvements, submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of all such costs. 

(I) 	
Cumru Township, upon the recommendation of Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant, may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown.  If the applicant and Cumru Township are not able to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and certified by another professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and chosen mutually by Cumru Township and the applicant.  The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable. 

(J) 	
If the applicant requires more than one (1) year from the date of posting the financial security to complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security shall be increased by an additional ten (10) percent for each one (1) year period or portion thereof beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completion and inspection of the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the procedure described above. 

(K) 	
In the case where development is projected over a period of years, Cumru Township may at its discretion authorize approval of final plans by section, stages, or phases of development with the understanding that no sale of lots and no work within the areas reserved from development may commence until the required contracts are signed and the financial security posted with respect to those areas reserved from development. Cumru Township shall also have the right to impose additional requirements and conditions in connection with the phases as they are approved so as to assure that each section or phase will not be dependent for access or other improvement or common amenity upon completion of improvements in the subsequent phase or stage. 

(L) 	
As part of the municipal improvements agreement, the escrow shall contain a five (5) percent fee added to the total cost of the improvements and contingencies for administration, inspection and management of the escrow account. 

(M) 	
As part of the municipal improvements agreement, the escrow shall contain a two (2) percent fee added to the total cost of the improvements and contingencies for the preparation and review of the required As-Built Plans. 

(N) 	
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request the Board of Commissioners to release or authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the financial security. Any such request shall be in writing addressed to Cumru Township and the Board of Commissioners shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of such request within which Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall certify, in writing, to Cumru Township whether such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved plan and applicable specifications. 

(O) 	
Upon certification of completion, Cumru Township shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant fairly representing the value of the improvements completed or, if Cumru Township fails to act within said forty five (45) day period, Cumru Township shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. 

(P) 	
Cumru Township shall, prior to release at the time of completion and certification by Cumru Township Engineer, require retention of fifteen (15) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements. 



Section 603:  Acceptance of Streets and Other Improvements 
(A) 	
The Board of Commissioners shall at its discretion accept a part or all of the required improvements if satisfied that the applicant has complied with the approved plan and all specifications and ordinances of Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The applicant shall furnish Cumru Township with legal descriptions for all roads and easements.  In addition, the applicant shall provide two (2) complete sets of prints of the completed required improvements including streets, curbs, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, sanitary sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, street signs, street lights, profiles, utilities and other municipal site improvements.  In addition, the applicant shall pay all costs for the recordation of the final plan, as-built plans and deeds of dedication with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds, as required by the Board of Commissioners for its acceptance of the required improvements and any deed of dedication for the same. 

(C) 	
Unless permitted by Cumru Township, no roads or other subsequent improvements will be accepted by Cumru Township during the months of November, December, January, February and March of each calendar year. 



Section 604: Maintenance Guarantee 
(A) 	
Where Cumru Township accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements following completion, Cumru Township shall require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design standards and specifications as shown on the Final Plan. 

(B) 	
The maintenance period shall be eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The financial security shall be of the same type as described previously in this Ordinance.  The amount of financial security for maintenance shall be fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of the installation of said improvements. 


Section 605: Public Utilities and PADOT Improvements 
(A) 	
If basic public utilities (electric, natural gas, cable television, and telephone) are to be installed under the jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility and distinct from Cumru Township, financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility providing service and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise required by Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
If transportation improvements are required by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT), a separate escrow with sufficient financial security shall be established between the applicant and the PADOT to provide assurances that the required transportation improvements are completed in accordance with the Highway Occupancy Permit for the project.  If the PADOT does not require an escrow for the required improvements within the state right-of-way, Cumru Township may require that the cost of such improvements are included within the municipal improvements agreement between the applicant and Cumru Township. 


Section 606:   Final Release from the Improvement Bond and Agreement 
(A) 
When the applicant has completed all of the necessary and appropriate improvements, the applicant shall notify Cumru Township, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the required improvements and shall send a copy thereof to Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant.  Pursuant to the provisions of Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall inspect all of the required improvements. 

(B) 	
Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant shall file a report in writing via certified mail or first class mail to Cumru Township and the applicant of the final review of the site improvements.  The report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of the improvements.  If the improvements are not approved or shall be rejected by Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant, the report shall contain a statement of reasons for such non-approval or rejection. 

(C) 	
Cumru Township shall notify the applicant within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the report from the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant, in writing by certified and first class mail, of the action of Cumru Township has taken concerning the recommendations of the Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant. 

(D) 	
If Cumru Township or Cumru Township Engineer and Planning Consultant fail to comply with the time limitation provisions contained within this Ordinance, all improvements will be deemed to have been approved and the applicant shall be released from liability for installation, pursuant to its performance guarantee bond, or other security agreement, but shall be liable for and shall provide a maintenance guarantee as otherwise provided for herein. 

(E) 	
If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by Cumru Township, the applicant shall proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as outlined within this Ordinance, shall be followed. 

(F) 	
The applicant shall reimburse Cumru Township for the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred for the inspection of improvements.  Such fees shall be based on a normal fees approved by the Board of Commissioners for engineering, planning and administrative services. 

(G) 	
In the event that any required improvements have not been installed as provided for in these regulations, or in accordance with the approved final plan, Cumru Township shall have the power to enforce any corporate bond, or other security, by appropriate legal and equitable remedies.  If the proceeds of such bond, or other security, are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, Cumru Township may, at its option, install part of or all such improvements in the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. 

(H) 	
In addition to the posting of security, the applicant shall be required to enter into a contract with Cumru Township, in a form acceptable to the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant and Solicitor, covering the completion of the required improvements. The contract shall also provide for engineering inspections, insurance, and reimbursement of expenses to Cumru Township, procedure upon default, and other subjects, deemed necessary by the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant and Solicitor to ensure proper and reasonable development of the land. 


Section 607:   Other Contributions and Fees 
(A) 
The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners have established by municipal resolution or ordinance, a fee schedule for the submission and processing of all applications pertaining to this Ordinance.  The proposed application shall not be considered by Cumru Township until all pertinent fees are paid in full.  All such fees shall be utilized to pay for all administrative costs as well as all review fees for any professional consultants designated by Cumru Township, as authorized by law. 

(B) 	
The Board of Commissioners may be alter or change the schedule of the fees by resolution in accordance the appropriate provisions established within the Cumru Township Code and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(C) 	
Where design and improvement waivers are to be considered, the applicant or developer may offer a contribution or a fee in lieu of the requirement.  All such contributions or fees shall be negotiated between Cumru Township and the applicant or developer.  

(D) 	
All other fees and contributions that may be required for transportation improvements, recreation facilities, community facilities and/or other infrastructure improvements shall be paid by the applicant prior to final approval of the subdivision or land development plan. 




Article 7: Administration and Enforcement 
Section 701:  Statement  of Intent 
(A) 	
Article 7 of this Ordinance provides the procedural requirements and general provisions for amendments, records, preventive remedies and enforcement powers that may be utilized by Cumru Township. 

(B) 	
The provisions established under Article 7 shall be subject to the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant and Solicitor.  Should a dispute arise concerning the interpretation of these regulations, the person aggrieved by the interpretation may file an appeal with the Board of Commissioners.  In all cases, the burden of proof and submission of technical evidence shall be the responsibility of the applicant or person appealing the interpretation of the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer, Planning Consultant and Solicitor. 

(C) 	
Where the provisions of this Ordinance conflict with the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the specific provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall be complied with unless otherwise directed by the Board of Commissioners. 


Section 702:   Amendments 
(A) 
Before voting on the enactment of a proposed amendment to this Ordinance, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing pursuant to public notice.  The amendment or a summary setting forth the principal provision of the amendment shall be published once each week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Cumru Township.  Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than thirty (30) and the second publication shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date of the hearing.  The notice shall include a reference to the place within Cumru Township where copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or examined. 

(B) 	
In case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Cumru Township Planning Commission, the Board of Commissioners shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendation at least thirty 

(30) days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment. 

(C) 	
The recommendation of the Cumru Township Planning Commission shall be made in writing to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days. The recommendation shall include a specific statement as to whether or not the proposed amendment is in accordance with the objectives of the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan. 

(D) 	
At least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing on the proposed amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall submit the proposed amendment to the Berks County Planning Commission.  The recommendation of the Berks County Planning Commission shall be made to the Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days and the proposed action shall not be taken until such recommendation is made.  If, however, the Berks County Planning Commission fails to act within thirty (30) days, the Board of Commissioners shall proceed without its recommendation. 

(E) 	
Before voting on the enactment of a proposed amendment to this Ordinance, the Board of Commissioners shall publish the proposed amendment once in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in Cumru Township not more than sixty (60) days nor less than seven (7) days prior to passage.  Publication of the proposed amendment shall include either the full text or the title and a brief summary, prepared by Cumru Township Solicitor or Secretary, setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. 

(F) 	
In the event substantial amendments are made to the proposed amendment before voting on enactment, the Board of Commissioners shall, at least ten (10) days prior to enactment, advertise in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in Cumru Township, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the amendments. 



Section 703:   Records 
(A) 	
The Cumru Township Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners shall keep a record of their findings, decisions, and recommendations relative to all subdivision and land development plans filed for review and action. 

(B) 	
Upon written request to the Cumru Township Engineer, Planning Consultant, Solicitor and/or Secretary, such records shall be made available to the public for review at the Cumru Township Municipal Building. 


Section 704:  Preventive Remedies 
(A) 
In addition to other remedies, Cumru Township may institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies provided. 

(B) 	
Cumru Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of this Ordinance. 



Section 705:   Appeals 
(A) 
All appeals concerning the review, application, interpretation and decisions authorized by this Ordinance shall be in accordance with in accordance with the appropriate provisions that are established by Cumru Township and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
All appeals concerning an alleged error in the processing or enactment of any components of this Ordinance shall raised by appeal taken directly from the action of the Board of Commissioners to the appropriate court, which shall not be filed later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Ordinance.  



Section 706:   Enforcement 
(A) 
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon being found liable in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by Cumru Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a municipality as a result thereof.  No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice.  If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, Cumru Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the district justice determines otherwise as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. 

(B) 	
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment. 

(C) 	
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than Cumru Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this Ordinance. 


Article 8: Municipal  Enactment 
Section 801: Municipal Adoption by the Board of Commissioners  
The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 was initially adopted on December 30, 2008, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 687, which was an implementation effort relating to the Governor Mifflin Region Comprehensive Plan.  The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 is hereby amended, restated and enacted on June 16, 2009, as part of Cumru Township Ordinance Number 690. 

The Cumru Township Board of Commissioners 
President 
Vice-President 
Member 
Member 
ATTEST: 

Member Cumru Township Secretary 
Section 802:   Effective Date 
The Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2009 shall become effective upon municipal adoption by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners. 
Appendix C: Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance  
Summary Chart of Street Design Standards and Specifications  
Design Standards and Specifications (1)  Minor or Local Access Street  Cul-De-Sac Street  Minor or Major Collector (2)  Arterial  (2)  Service Street or Access Drive  
Design Speed  25 MPH  25 MPH  35 MPH  55 MPH  15 MPH  
Right-of-Way Width  54 feet  54 feet  60 feet  100 feet  33 feet  
Cartway Width  18 - 24 feet  18 - 24 feet  24 feet  12 feet per travel lane  24 feet  
Minimum Centerline Grade  1 percent  1 percent  1 percent  1 percent  1 percent  
Maximum Centerline Grade  10 percent  10 percent  8 percent  8 percent  10 percent  
Maximum Grade within 100 feet of an Intersection  5 percent  5 percent  5 percent  5 percent  5 percent  
Crown of Road or Cross Slope from Centerline  2.083 percent  2.083 percent  2.083 percent  2.083 percent  2.083 percent  
Maximum Horizontal Curve  Refer to Section 503.D of this Ordinance  
Maximum Vertical Curve  Refer to Section 503D of this Ordinance  
Separation Distance between Intersections  200 feet  200 feet  500 feet  1,000 feet  100 feet  
Minimum Curb Radius  20 feet  20 feet  30 feet  40 feet  15 feet  
Clear Sight Triangle  75 feet  75 feet  100 feet  150 feet  50 feet  
Minimum Sight Distance  Refer to Article 5 of this Ordinance for the minimum requirements for sight distance.  Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may require additional sight distance than those referenced in Appendix C by considering the functional classification of the road, traffic volumes, vehicular speed, pedestrian movements, land use and other relevant site conditions.   
Street Construction and Improvement Specifications  Standards and specifications for street construction are contained within this Ordinance as well as other Ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  
Street Names, Street Signs and Street Lights  Standards and specifications for street construction are contained within this Ordinance as well as other Ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  
Curb and Sidewalk Improvement Specifications  Standards and specifications for street construction are contained within this Ordinance as well as other Ordinances adopted by Cumru Township.  
Other Requirements  In addition to the general requirements specified within this summary chart, the Cumru Township Engineer or Planning Consultant may identify other requirements for subdivision and land development, which have been adopted or referenced within this Ordinance.  
General Notes and References: (1) The design standards and specifications referenced on this summary chart are intended to consider the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be applied as such by the Cumru Township Board of Commissioners, Planning Commission, Engineer and Planning Consultant in reviewing all subdivision and land development plans. (2) Where collector or arterial roads are to be owned and maintained as state roads, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may apply optional design standards and specifications for the design and construction of streets.  

Cumru Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance  
Minimum Sight Distance Requirements at Street Intersections (measured in feet)  
Average Centerline Road Grade  Speed Limit of Intersecting Street (Miles Per Hour or MPH)  
25 MPH  30 MPH  35 MPH  40 MPH  45 MPH  50 MPH  55 MPH  
Positive Road Grade to Intersection  + 10 %  135  177  221  274  330  392  454  
+ 9 %  136  178  224  277  334  397  461  
+ 8 %  137  180  226  280  339  403  468  
+ 7 %  138  182  228  284  343  409  475  
+ 6 %  139  183  231  287  348  415  482  
+ 5 %  140  185  233  291  353  422  490  
+ 4 %  142  187  236  295  358  429  499  
+ 3 %  143  189  239  299  364  436  508  
+ 2 %  144  191  242  304  370  444  517  
+ 1%  145  194  245  309  376  453  527  
Flat Grade:  0 %  147  196  249  314  383  462  538  
Negative Road Grade to Intersection  - 1 %  148  199  252  319  390  471  550  
- 2 %  150  201  256  325  396  481  562  
- 3 %  151  204  260  331  406  492  576  
- 4 %  153  207  265  338  415  504  590  
- 5 %  155  210  269  345  425  517  606  
- 6 %  157  214  275  352  435  531  622  
- 7 %  159  217  280  360  447  546  641  
- 8 %  161  221  286  369  459  563  661  
- 9 %  164  226  292  379  472  581  682  
- 10 %  166  230  299  389  487  600  706  
Note 1:  The positive or negative road grade approach to the intersection shall be the average centerline grade within 300 feet of the centerline of the intersecting street.   
Note 2: Sight distance measurements shall be made in each direction from a point 10 feet from the edge of the cartway and 3.5 feet above the road surface to a point 3.5 feet above the centerline of the road.  
Note 3: Where the provisions established within this chart are less than the sight distance requirements and/or safe stopping distance requirements established by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.  
Note 4:  Cumru Township and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation may require additional sight distance than those referenced on this chart by considering the functional classification of the road, traffic volumes, vehicular speed, pedestrian movements, land use and other relevant site conditions.  

ORDINANCE NO. 573
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU REQUIRING LANDLORDS TO FILE
REPORTS LISTING ALL RENTAL OR RENTABLE UNITS, TENANTS OR OCCUPIERS
THEREOF, AND ANY SUBSEQUENT CHANGE THEREIN; ESTABLISHING THE DUTIES
OF THE TOWNSHIP MANAGER; PROVIDING FOR DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATIONS
·AND THE PURPOSES HEREOF; AND PRESCRJBING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
CUMRU IN LAWFUL SESSION DULY ASSEMBLED, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. Purposes. This ordinance is enacted to provide for the uniform and equitable
distribution of the tax levies in the Township and upon the inhabitants thereof and to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township.
Section 2. Definitions and Interpretation. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicted, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS UNIT - a parcel of real estate, with or without improvements located thereon
utilized by any person or persons for any commercial activity or purpose.
DWELLING UNIT - one or more rooms used for living and sleeping purposes arranged
for occupancy by one family or by one or more persons.
LANDLORD - a lessor, or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of any parcel of real
estate located in the Township, or a lessor, or person who acts as agent for the lessor, of
any improvements on real estate or any building located in the Township.
PERSON~ any individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation.
TENANT - a person who has the use, either by himself or with others, of a dwelling unit
or a business unit owned by a person other than himself, for a period exceeding thirty
(30) days.
Section 3. Reports by Landlords. Within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this
ordinance, each landlord shall submit to the Township Manager, a report form supplied by the
Tovvnship Manager, which includes the following information:
1. List of the dwelling units and business units owned by the landlord, located within the
Township limits, whether occupied or not occupied;
2. Address of each dwelling unit and business unit;
H:\Concord\LOTUS\WORK\WORDPRO\Dmr\'vla..\CUMRU\LndlrdOrd
(
3. Brief description of each dwelling unit or business unit;
4. Whether or not said dwelling unit or business unit is inhabited or utilized by tenants;
5. Names of the tenant or tenants utilizing the aforementioned dwelling unit or business
unit, if any.
Section 4. Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Landlords. After the effective date of this
ordinance, any person who becomes a landlord of any parcel of real estate or any improvement
on real estate or building located in the Township by agreement of sale, by deed, or by any other
means, shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, report to the Township Manager the information
and data set forth in Section 3 above, and on forms to be provided by the Township Manager.
Section 5. Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy. After the effective date of this
. ordinance, each and every landlord of property within the Township shall report to the Township
Manager on a report form to be supplied by the Township Manager, any change in the use or
occupancy of any dwelling unit or business unit owned by such landlord. The reported change
shall include the name or names of new tenants of such dwelling unit or business unit, the date
when such change was effected, and the forwarding address of the old tenant or tenants if known.
A landlord of a hotel, inn or boarding house shall not be required to report a person as a "tenant"
until that person has resided in such landlord's establishment for a period exceeding thirty (30)
days. In the event that a dwelling unit or business unit was used or utilized by a tenant and then
becomes vacant, this change shall also be reported to the Township Manager. All reports
required by this section shall be made within ten (10) days after a landlord has knowledge that
such a unit has had a change in occupancy or has become vacant.
Section 6. Duties of the Township Manager. The Township Manager under the authority 6f
this ordinance, shall;
1. Maintain on file at the Township office, the names of the landlords owning dwelling
units and business units in the Township, said list to include the names of the current
tenants of said dwelling units and business units;
2. Maintain a supply of forms for landlords to use in making reports to the Township
Manager as required in Sections 3, 4 and 5 of this ordinance;
3. Notify the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Township of the address and
description of any dwelling unit or business unit that is vacant, unoccupied and not in use.
H:\Concord\LOTUS\WORKIWORDPRO\Drn<li\fas\ClJMRUILndlrdOrd
Section 7. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.00),
and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (3 O) days.
Section 8. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed. The following ordinances or parts thereof are specifically repealed:
Section 9. Severability. In any sentence, clause, section, or part of this ordinance is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Commissioners that
this ordinance would have been adopted had such llllconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
Section 10. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective on the earliest date permitted
bylaw.
DULY ENACTED THIS 20th DAY OF APRIL, 1999.
TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU
H:\Concord\LOTUS\WORY..\WORDPRO\Dmr\Mas\CUMRUILndlrdOrd
PHONE (610) 777-1343
TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU
BERKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
1775 WELSH ROAD
MOHNTON, PA. 19540
WWW.CUMRUTOWNSHIP.COM
REPORT BY LANDLORD
As required by Ordinance No. 573 adopted 4120199.
Part 1- Unit Information
ADDRESS OF LEASED UNIT:
Is this unit a Business Unit? Yes ----
a Dwelling Unit? Yes ___ _
Is this unit occupied? Yes ---
Not occupied? Yes ---
No ----
No ----
No ---
No ---
Brief description of unit (for example, 3 bedrooms, 2 story, etc.):
Part 2 - Landlord Information
FAX (610) 796-0850
REVISED 02/06/2015
LANDLORD(S) NAME(S): print _________________ _
ADDRESS:
CITY/ TOWNSHIP/BOROUGH STATE ZIP CODE ---------- -----
PHONE, INCLUDING AREA CODE: (H) _______ (C) _____ _
SIGNATURE:- -------------------DATE:- --------
Part 3 - Tenant Information
NAME(S) OF TENANT(S):
AGE ---
AGE ---
AGE ---
AGE ---
AGE ---
AGE ---
MALE
MALE
MALE
MALE
MALE
MALE
Reports by Persons Upon Becoming Landlords - report the data set forth above within 30 days.
FEMALE
FEMALE
FEMALE
FEMALE
FEMALE
FEMALE
Reports of Changes in Use or Occupancy - report the data set forth above within 10 days after having knowledge
of vacancy or a change in occupancy. A landlord of a hotel, inn, or boarding house shall not be required to report a
person as a "tenant" until that person has resided in such landlord's establishment for a period exceeding thirty (30)
days.
N:CODESl/FORMSl/LANDLORD TENANT FORM
RESOLUTION NO. 660
A RESOLUTION ON FEES FOR SUBDIVISION AND
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION
WHEREAS, Ordinance no. 690, as amended, known as the "Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance" (SALDO) of the Township of Cumru, provides for the
establishement by resolution of a collection procedure and a schedule of fees to be paid
by the applicant at the time of filing for review of a plan.
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Cumru has
determined that it is in the best interest of the Township to amend the fees hereinabove
set forth in order to be consistent with the Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of
1968, as amended in 2004 (section 503.).
BE IT RESOLVED AND IT HEREBY IS RESOLVED, as follows:
1. The fee schedule set forth below is adopted for Subdivision and Land
Development plan submission:
plan type
Residential $500, plus $25 per lot
Commercial/Industrial $750, plus $25 per acre
Revision to a plan of Record $500
2. The fee shall be assessed at the time of initial submission of a plan. All fees
in excess of the applicable filing fee, incurred for review of plans and report( s)
by the Township's engineer or other professional consultant will be billed in
accordance with the ordinary and customary charges of the Township's
engineer or other professional consultant to the Township. No plan shall be
released for recording unless all fees have been paid in full.
Attest:
Resolution - plan revie\v fees
Adopted July 21, 2009
Page 1 ofl
TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU, BERKS COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
ORDINANCE NO. 7 lf O
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU, BERKS
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS FOR
THE INSTALLATION, INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ONLOT
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (OLDS); ESTABLISHING
APPLICATION AND PERMITTING PROCESSES; ESTABLISHING
FINANCIAL AND/OR PERFORMANCE ASSURANCES FOR
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
(IRSIS); ADOPTING REGULATIONS GOVERNING MUNICIPAL
MANAGEMENT OF ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
(OLDS); PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES AND
IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; PROVIDING A
METHOD OF APPEALS FOR HARDSHIP SITUATIONS; AND
REPEALING THE CUMRU TOWNSHIP SEWAGE ORDINANCE NO.
104, 4/13/1964 AND RESOLUTION 64-10, 5/11/1964 REVISED 3/5/1991.
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the COMMISSIONERS of the Township of
CUMRU, Berks County, Pennsylvania, and it' is hereby ENACTED and ORDAINED by
authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Short Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The CUMRU Township Sewage
Ordinance."
SECTION 2. Source of Authority
As mandated by the municipal codes, The Clean Stream Law 35 P.S. Sect. 691.1 to
691.1001, and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, P.L.
1535 as amended, 35 P.S. Sect. 750.1 et. Seq. known as Act 537), municipalities have
the power and the duty to provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the
protection of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for the Township of CUMRU
indicates that it is necessary to formulate and implement a sewage management
program to effectively prevent and abate water pollution and hazards to the public
health caused by improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
SECTION 3. Purpose-The Purposes of this Ordinance Include:
A. The regulation of soil testing for permitting, installation, inspection, operation,
rehabilitation, replacement, and timely ongoing maintenance of on-lot sewage
disposal systems (OLDS) within the Township; and,
B. The establishment of provisions and safeguards for the Township which enable
the issuance of permits for bonded systems and individual residential spray
irrigation systems (IRSIS) by and through the Sewage Enforcement Officer
(SEO); and,
C. To permit the Township to intervene in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and,
D. To establish penalties for violations and appeal procedures necessary for the
proper administration of a sewage management program; and,
E. Establishment of standards for the periodic pumping of treatment and pump tanks
which are components of OLDS within the Township; and
F. Establishment of standards for the proper abandonment of OLDS.
SECTION 4. Terms and Definitions - The following words and terms when used in the
Ordinance shall have the following meanings:
Absorption Area: A component of an individual or community OLDS where liquid
from a treatment tank seeps into the soil; it consists of an area containing piping, either
with or without aggregate, for the distribution of liquid and the soil or sand/soil
combination located beneath the piping and/or aggregate.
Absorption Area Easement: A portion of a lot tract or parcel that encompasses the
primary and replacement area and which shall be delineated and preserved. The
primary and replacement areas need not be contiguous.
Act: The Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. (1965)
1535, No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. Section 750.l et seq.
Act 537: See "Act".
Authorized Agent: A Certified Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO), professional
engineer, or sanitarian, plumbing inspector, soil scientist, water quality specialist, or
any other person who is designated to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance as the
agent of the Board of COMMISSIONERS of CUMRU Township.
Board: Shall mean the Board of COMMISSIONERS, CUMRU Township, Berks
County, Pennsylvania.
Board of Review: The panel to hear, review, and issue decisions on appeal from
determinations of a municipal representative under this Ordinance.
Bonded Disposal System: An individual sewage system located on a single lot serving
a single family residence, where soil mottling is within 20 inches of the mineral soil
surface, and the installation, operation, and replacement of which is guaranteed by the
property owner.
Chisel Plow: A farm or tractor implement used to "rough up" or scarify the soil surface,
break down surface vegetation, and increase the soil surface area.
Community Sewage System: Any system, whether publicly or privately owned, for the
collection of sewage from two or more lots or structures and the treatment and/or
disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or any other site.
Construction Observation: Site visits by the Township's appointed SEO at specific
intervals during the construction of the OLDS as specified by this Ordinance (see
inspection).
DEP/the Department: The Depaiiment of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Developer: Any person, palinership, or corporation which erects or contracts to erect a
building on prope1iy owned by it, with the intent to sell the building to some other paliy
upon its full or paliial completion, or upon the conveyance of propeliy on which the
building is to be built.
Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU): For the purpose of determining the number oflots in
a subdivision or land development, that pali of a multiple-family dwelling, commercial,
industrial, or institutional establishment with sewage flows equal to four hundred ( 400)
gallons per day.
Individual Residential Spray Irrigation System (IRSIS): An individual sewage system
that serves a single family dwelling and that treats and disposes of sewage using a
system of piping, treatment tanks, and soil renovation through spray irrigation.
Individual On-Lot Sewage System: An individual sewage system that uses a system of
piping, tanks, or other facilities for the collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage
into a soil absorption area or retaining tank.
Industrial Waste: A liquid, gaseous, radioactive, solid, or other substance, which is not
sewage, resulting from manufacturing or industry or other plant or works and mine
drainage, silt, coal mine solids, rock, debris, dili, and clay from coal mines, coal
collieries, breakers, or other coal processing operations. The term includes substances
whether or not generally characterized as waste.
Inspection: An onsite review of an existing OLDS by the Township's authorized agent
for the purposes specified by this Ordinance. This term may or may not include
construction observations (see construction observation).
Malfunction: The condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage disposal system
discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into ground waters of this
Commonwealth, into surface waters of this Commonwealth, backs up into a building
connected to the system or otherwise causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health
or pollution of ground or surface water or contamination of public or private drinking
water wells. Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the conditions
noted above occur for any length of time during any period of the year.
Marginal Conditions: A property shall be deemed to exhibit marginal conditions if it
displays any of the following characteristics: gross lot size of less than 1.5 acre;
wetlands; floodplain; limiting zones ofless than 60" to evidence of seasonal high water
table or rock and slopes in excess of 12%; slopes in excess of25%; isolation limitations
that would limit available space for OLDS or reduce the net lot size to less than 1.5
acre.
Official Sewage Facilities Plan: A comprehensive plan for the provision of adequate
sewage disposal systems, adopted by the Township and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, as described in and required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
On-Lot Sewage Disposal System (OLDS): Any system for disposal of domestic sewage
and subsequent disposal of the clarified sewage into the soil for final treatment and
disposal or retaining tank; this term includes both individual sewage systems and
community sewage systems.
On-Lot System Pumping and Inspection Report: A form provided by the Township to
be completed by the SEO which provides certification to the Township of septic system
pumping, cleaning and certain repairs.
Owner: Any person, corporation, partnership, etc. holding deed or title to lands within
the Township.
OLDS: Individual or community On-Lot sewage Disposal System.
Person: Any individual, association, public or private corporation for profit or not for
profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board, bureau or agency of the
Commonwealth, political subdivision, township, district, authority, or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, the
term person shall include the members of an association, partnership or firm and the
officers of any local agency or municipal, or public or private corporation for profit or
not for profit.
Planning Module for Land Development: A revision to, or exception to the revision of,
the Official Plan, submitted in accordance with DEP regulations, and in connection
with the request for approval of a subdivision or land development plan.
Primary Area: An area on a lot, tract, or parcel of land that has been tested by the SEO
and found suitable, based upon the then current DEP site requirements, for the
installation of an on-lot sewage disposal system, and which will be preserved and
protected from alteration for installation of the initial on-lot sewage disposal system for
the sewage generated on that lot, tract, or parcel (see replacement area).
Pumper/Hauler: Any person, company, partnership or corporation which engages in
cleaning community or individual sewage systems and transports the septage cleaned
from these systems.
Rehabilitation: The work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or replace an existing
on-lot sewage disposal system.
Replacement Area: An area on a lot, tract, or parcel of land, separate from the primary
area, that has been tested by the SEO and found suitable, based upon the then current
DEP site requirements, for the installation of an on-lot system, and which will be
preserved and protected from alteration for potential future use if the primary area on
the same lot, tract, or parcel shall fail for any reason (see primary area).
Retaining Tanlc A watertight receptacle, which receives and retains sewage and is
designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
The term includes, but is not limited to the following:
1. Chemical Toilet: A permanent or portable non-flushing toilet using chemical
treatment in the retaining tank for odor control.
11. Holding Tank: A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to which sewage is
conveyed by a water carrying system.
iii. Priyy: A tank designed to receive sewage where water under pressure is not
available.
1v. Incinerating Toilet: A device capable of reducing waste material to ashes.
v. Composting Toilet: A device for holding and processing human and organic kitchen
waste, employing the process of biological degradation through the action of
microorganisms to produce a stable, humus-like material.
VI. Recycling Toilet: A device in which the flushing medium is restored to a condition
suitable for re-use in flushing.
Septage: The residual scum, sludge, and other materials pumped from septic or aerobic
treatment tanks and the systems they serve.
Septage Hauler: See Pumper/Hauler above.
Sewage: Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other
discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals, any noxious or deleterious
substances being haimful or inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life,
or to the use of water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937, (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as The Clean
Streams Law, as amended.
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO): The official of the Township who issues and
reviews permit applications and conducts such investigations and inspections as are
necessary to implement Act 53 7 and the rules and regulations promulgated there under.
Sewage Management District: Any area or areas of a Township for which a sewage
management program is recommended by the Township's adopted Act 537 Official
Sewage Facilities Plan.
Sewage Management Program: A comprehensive set of legal and administrative
requirements encompassing the requirements of this Ordinance and other
administrative requirements adopted by the Township to effectively enforce and
administer the Ordinance.
Slope: The grade measured across the extremities of an absorption area, parallel to the
direction of slope and perpendicular to contour, expressed as a percentage, or elevation
change in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
Soil Scientist: A practicing Pennsylvania ARCP AC or P APSS certified soils
professional qualified for on-lot sewage evaluations.
Subdivision: The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in
existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by
the court for distribution to heirs or devices, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development.
Township: The Township of CUMRU, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Treatment Tank: A watertight tank designed to retain sewage long enough for
satisfactory bacterial decomposition of the solids to take place. The term includes the
following:
1. Septic Tank: A treatment tank that provides for anaerobic decomposition of sewage
prior to its discharge to an absorption area.
11. Aerobic Sewage Treatment Tank: A mechanically aerated treatment tank that
provides aerobic biochemical stabilization of sewage prior to its discharge to an
absorption area.
Waters of Commonwealth: Rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches,
water courses, stmm sewers, lakes, dammed water, ponds, springs, and other bodies or
charmels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
Zoning Officer: An individual employed by the Township to administer and enforce
the Township's Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 5. Applicability
A. From the effective date of this ordinance, its provisions shall apply throughout
the Township of Cumru. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all
persons owning or occupying any property serviced by an on-lot sewage
disposal system.
B. If the owner does not reside on the property in question or within a building on
said property, she/he remains responsible for compliance with this Ordinance.
Responsibility for compliance may be transfened to the lessee or resident of the
building by an agreement between the owner and the lessee or resident, subject
to the written approval of the Township. The Township will not recognize said
agreement until notified in writing. If the lessee or resident shall move out of
the building, responsibility shall revert back to the owner, even though a valid
agreement with the lessee or resident continues to exist.
C. Upon transfer of responsibility for compliance, the owner shall provide the
lessee or resident with a copy of all information concerning prior installation,
operation, and maintenance of the system.
D. Upon transfer of responsibility for compliance, in accordance with the above
requirements, all references to "owner" in this Ordinance shall hereinafter refer
to the lessee or resident of the building or property.
E. The owner of any building serviced by an OLDS within the Township shall
become subject to all of the requirements contained herein, upon the occurrence
of one of the following:
1. Receipt of a sewage permit from the SEO for the installation or
rehabilitation of an OLDS;
2. Transfer of ownership of the building;
3. Malfunctioning of the OLDS; and,
4. In the case of an existing building or system, upon the passing of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 6. Required Permit
A. No person shall install, rehabilitate, construct, or request bid proposals for
constrnction or alteration of an individual sewage system or community sewage
system, or constrnct or request bid proposals for construction or installation or
occupancy of any building or structure for which an individual sewage system
or community sewage system is to be installed without first obtaining a permit
indicating that the site and the plans and specifications of such systems are in
compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams Law and of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and the standards adopted pursuant to those
Acts.
B. No system or strncture designed to provide individual or community sewage
disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the same has been
given by the Sewage Enforcement Officer (see Section 12 - Construction
· Observation). ·
C. The Township requires applicants for sewage permits to notify the Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the schedule of inspections for construction of the
permitted on-lot sewage disposal system. This includes the final inspection
required by Act 537, which may be scheduled and performed by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
D. No building, zoning, or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township or
its Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer for a new building which will
contain sewage generating facilities until a valid sewage permit has been
obtained from the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. No building, zoning, or occupancy permit shall be issued, and no work shall
begin on any addition, alteration, or conversion of an existing building, if the
work will result in the increase or potential increase of sewage flow from the
structure or the proposed addition will conflict with any component of an
existing septic system, until the Township's Zoning Officer and the structure's
owner receive from the Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer either a
permit for alteration, rehabilitation or replacement of the existing sewage
disposal system or written notification that such a permit will not be required.
The Township's Sewage Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the
proposed addition, alteration or conversion of the structure will result in
increased sewage flows or conflict with any component of an existing septic
system. Should the location of the system be unknown and therefore unknown
if the addition will conflict with any component of the system, the SEO shall
conduct or require an inspection at the owner's expense to locate the system
and determine if the addition will conflict with any component thereof.
F. No occupancy permit shall be issued by the Township, its Zoning Officer or
Code Enforcement Officer for the occupancy of any new building, addition,
alteration or the change of use of any building, addition or alteration until the
Sewage Enforcement Officer has info1med the Township or said official that
the existing sewage system or newly constructed sewage system is complete,
operating and has had final inspection or that no such certification is necessaiy.
G. Sewage permits must be issued by the Township's Sewage Enforcement
Officer. The Township shall retain final authority for the conditions and
issuance of OLDS permits.
H. No contractor may proceed to install, construct, rehabilitate, or alter a system
without verifying that the property owner has complied with this section of the
ordinance.
I. All sewage system components including absorption areas must be located on
the same lot, tract, or parcel as the structure they will serve. Systems or
components cannot be located on a separately deeded parcel, regardless of the
parcel's ownership, except through means of an easement.
J. All planning modules proposing individual or community sewage systems
which require a DEP permit shall include a provision granting the Township
and its agents the right to enter the premises to inspect the construction and/or
operation of the DEP permitted system, and ifthe system is not being
constructed or operated according to the permitted design, issue a stop work
order or revoke the occupancy permit until construction or operation is
brought into compliance with the permit.
K. No part or component of any OLDS shall be altered, extended, augmented,
modified, or repaired without the issuance of a repair pe1mit by the SEO.
L. No OLDS shall be used or loaded in a manner that is inconsistent with the
permit that was issued to authorize the system's installation.
M. Permit applications for on-lot systems that include electronically,
mechanically, hydraulically, or pneumatically operated or controlled devices
shall be accompanied by the respective manufacturer's recommended
maintenance schedule and product specifications.
N. Permit applications for which the provisions of Section 9 or Section 11 apply
shall include a fully executed maintenance contract indicating the person or
company responsible to carry out the required maintenance, the maintenance
schedule, and a provision that if the contract is terminated that the Township
be so notified.
SECTION 7. Replacement Areas
A. Soil probe and percolation testing and/or soil morphological evaluations by a
soil scientist to provide a replacement area shall be required on all proposed lots
which are intended to be served by a soil absorption area, with the exception of
Drip Irrigation and IRSIS systems.
OR
Soil probe and percolation testing and/or soil morphological evaluations by a
soil scientist to provide a replacement area shall be required on all proposed
lots, which exhibit marginal conditions as defined in Section 4.
B. A replacement area shall be required for all unimproved lots existing prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, which are intended to be serviced by a soil
absorption system and contain marginal conditions, but for which a permit to
install an on-lot system has not been issued.
C. Allowance of open land for the replacement area, without perfo1mance of
appropriate soil testing to verify suitability of the land for a replacement area,
shall not constitute compliance with this section.
D. The location of the primary and replacement areas shall be delineated and
identified as an absorption area easement on the plot plans, and maps or
diagrams submitted as part of the permit application and subdivision or land
development plan.
E. The description, including metes and bounds, of every absorption area easement
shall be recorded as part of the deed for each lot created as part of a subdivision
or land development, and shall contain language reflecting the following:
1. No improvements, whether permanent or.temporary, shall be constrncted
upon or within the absorption area easement.
2. No permanent or temporary alterations, grading, excavation, stockpiling of
any soil or any other material shall take place on or in the absorption area
easement.
3. During any construction or other activities, the absorption area easement
shall be so marked to prevent equipment with greater wheel loadings than a
common garden tractor/riding mower from traveling over or operating on
the surface of the absorption area easement.
4. The final cover or improvement to every absorption area easement shall be
limited to shallow rooted vegetation. The exception shall be where Drip
Irrigation or IRSIS systems are proposed, trees will be allowed to remain.
5. No trees shall be planted or remain which are located within ten (10) feet of
the proposed sewage absorption area. The exception shall be where Drip
Inigation or IRSIS systems are proposed, trees will be allowed to remain.
F. A landowner wishing to alter the use of the absorption area easement must first
document, through a site evaluation by the SEO that an additional area suitable
for the installation of an on-lot system exists, and upon such a finding shall:
1. Prepare and submit to the SEO for approval a Declaration of Easement
which shall:
a. Meet the identification, non-use, and preservation requirements of this
section; and
b. Describe, by metes and bounds, the easement area to be abandoned.
2. Within 15 days of the approval by the Township, record the Declaration of
Easement at the Berks County Recorder of Deeds Office.
3. File a copy of the recorded easement with the Township.
G. Should the permitted system be installed on an existing lot that exhibits marginal
conditions (rather than a new lot created through a subdivision) for which the
recording of a new deed is not required, the landowner shall enter into an
agreement with the Township entitled Declaration of Easement stating the
requirements set forth in E above in substantially the same form as attached hereto
as Appendix A that shall be recorded with the Berks County Recorder of Deeds
addressing the requirements of sections E and F herein.
H. If no replacement area meeting the requirements of this Section can be located on
an unimproved lot existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the SEO
shall permit the primary system without a replacement area. Provided, however,
that at the time the permit for the primary system is issued, the SEO shall inform
the applicant in writing of the risks associated with the absence of an identified
replacement area.
SECTION 8. On-Site Probe and Percolation Testing
A. All sites shall have a minimum of two soil probes excavated and observed by
the SEO.
B. Commercial or community sites shall have a minimum of one probe every 50
feet on conventional ground based systems and one probe every 100 feet for
drip and spray sites. Probes shall be staggered in order that the lower probe is
in the middle of the upper two.
C. All sites shall have a minimum of six percolation test holes conducted
uniformly within the proposed sewage absorption area.
D. Commercial and community sites shall require the following number of
percolation test holes as follows:
Proposed Absorption Area Square Feet
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
Number of Percolation Test Holes
9
12
15
18
21
24
E. No sewage system modification may be completed involving the installation of
a new sewage absorption area or a modification to an existing sewage
absorption area without completing percolation and soil probe testing as per
Section 8.A through D.
F. All percolation and soil probe testing shall be observed by the Township SEO
to be valid.
G. All percolation and probe excavations shall be located on a referenced scaled
plan drawing by the Applicant or Developer within 60 days after completion.
H. The Applicant or Land Owner shall be responsible to protect the safety, health
and welfare of all individuals relative to conducting onsite probe and
percolation testing. The excavations shall be protected during testing and closed
within 72 hours thereafter.
SECTION 9. Maintenance Agreements Required
A. All applications for on-lot systems that propose to use an Individual Residential
Spray Irrigation System (IRSIS) as the treatment method shall be accompanied
by a maintenance agreement between the owner and the Township providing
for an annual inspection by the SEO, at the owner's expense, in accordance with
the currently adopted Township fee schedule, for the purpose of monitoring the
satisfactory operation of the system. The inspection shall include analyses of
effluent at a PA DEP certified laboratory for compliance with PA DEP
standards. Said testing may be conducted based upon samples taken by the
owner, who must send a copy to the Township.
B. A maintenance agreement, as described in Section 9.A shall also be required
for on-lot sewage disposal systems permitted by PA DEP such as stream or
swale discharge and all holding tanks, whether residential, commercial or
temporary.
C. Application for IRSIS and holding tanks shall be accompanied by a financial
guarantee in the form of a bond, letter of credit or cash escrow to be held by the
Township.
D. Planning Module submissions for DEP permitted on-lot sewage disposal
systems shall be accompanied by a financial guarantee as that required in
Section 9.C.
E. The financial guarantee required by Sections 9.C and 9.D shall assure that the
Township has access to sufficient funds to operate, maintain, repair, or replace
any component of the IRS IS, DEP permitted system or holding tank in the event
the owner:
1. Fails to maintain the system or any of the system's components according
to the manufacturer's specifications; or,
2. Fails to service, clean, inspect, and/or pump the treatment tank(s) according
to the other applicable standards of this Ordinance; or,
3. Fails to conduct testing and monitoring at least annually, or more frequently
ifrequired by DEP regulation, and report the analysis to the Township.
F. From the date the permit application or planning module is submitted to the
SEO or Township and continuing for a period ending two (2) years after the
date the system's installation is approved or verified by the SEO, the financial
assurance shall be in an amount not less than fifty percent (50%) of contract
price for the installation of the system and all related system components unless
a lesser amount is authorized by the Township Commissioners and SEO.
G. Beginning two (2) years after the date the system's installation is approved or
verified by the SEO and continuing as long as the system is in use, the financial
assurance shall be reduced to an amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the
actual construction cost for the installation of the system and other related
system components.
H. The financial guarantee shall be forfeited by the owner and the Township shall
apply the funds to the repair, operation, and maintenance of the system and out
of pocket expenses of the Township for SEO enforcement when:
1. The system is not maintained according to the standards of this Ordinance,
applicable DEP regulations, or the manufacturer's specifications; or,
2. The treatment tank(s) are not serviced, cleaned, inspected, and/or pumped
according to the applicable standards of this Ordinance; or
3. The testing and monitoring are not conducted according to the standards of
this Ordinance, applicable DEP regulations, or the manufacturer's
specifications.
I. Should at any time the financial guarantee be reduced below the required
amount, the owner shall immediately provide the Township with sufficient
funds to replenish the amount being held by the Township to the amount
required by this Section.
J. Any maintenance agreement required by this Section shall be updated upon
change of ownership of property. The Township may waive requirement for an
updated agreement upon change of ownership if it determines that the current
agreement meets current standards.
SECTION 10. Installation of OLDS
A. All systems shall provide at a minimum the following, in addition to the
standard items required by PA DEP regulations:
1. Cleanouts at the end of laterals with a removable plug for all pressurized
systems.
2. All piping from the treatment tanks to the absorption area shall have a
minimum thickness of Schedule 40 PVC.
3. Where a distribution box is used, a cleanout shall be provided at the inlet of
the "d-box" to identify location, installed with watertight cap above final
grade. Where a lift pump is used, the cleanout shall be vented.
4. Where a manifold is used for gravity distribution, at least one cieanout must
be provided in seepage bed piping, to identify location, and check for
ponding. The cleanout shall be installed with watertight cap above final
grade.
SECTION 11. Community Sewage Systems
A. Privately owned community sewage systems are subject to the same
requirements of this Ordinance as individual OLDS. In addition, the following
shall be applicable to community sewage systems:
1. A list of the names and addresses of all participants in the community
system shall be provided to the Township.
2. Participants shall be equally liable for expenses incurred by the Township
or its authorized agent on the shared component of the system unless they
have decided among themselves to assume unequal burdens of
responsibility for the system, in which case the Township shall assess
expenses incurred accordingly.
3. Expenses incurred on the individual property of participants by the
Township or its authorized agent shall be assessed against the individual
participant.
B. Participants in a community sewage system shall be assessed directly for
expenses incurred by the Township or its authorized agent unless an
organization exists that manages the system, in which case the Township may
deal solely with that organization.
SECTION 12. Construction Observation
A. All OLDS shall have construction observations by the Township's appointed
SEO during performance of the various tasks as follows:
1. Elevated sand mound systems:
a. Chisel plow/scarification of soil surface.
b. Sand placement.
c. Stone and pipe placement, including pressure test.
d. Final grade and seeding.
2. Alternate at-grade bed systems:
a. Chisel plow/scarification of soil surface.
b. Stone and pipe placement, including pressure test.
c. Final grade and seeding.
3. In-ground systems:
a. Excavation of bed or trenches including scarification of same.
b. Stone and pipe placement, including pressure test, if applicable.
c. Final grade and seeding.
4. Drip-inigation systems (will include, but not be limited to):
a. Pre-construction meeting with contractor to review lateral layout and
system components.
b. Laterals, upon installation and system components prior to cover.
c. Activation of system.
d. Final grade and seeding.
B. The PA DEP Alternate Sewage Disposal Systems Guidance lists several
systems that require a continuing service agreement with a qualified
maintenance provider. These systems include, but are not limited to:
AdvanTex Treatment System; Ecoflo Biofilter; Puraflo Peat Biofilter;
Singulair-Hydro-Kinetic Combo; Sundrive Biovaporator. Final approval for
these systems will not be granted without evidence of an executed service and
maintenance contract.
C. Certain onlot sewage disposal systems require the use of components such as
aerobic treatment units, UV disinfection, etc. In some cases these systems may
be maintained by the property owner while in others, it may be necessary to
obtain a service contract with a qualified maintenance provider. The need for
a service contract will be evaluated on a case by case basis by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer, and where necessary, required to be in place prior to final
approval.
D. All specified OLDS construction observations shall permit visual review of all
sewer system components prior to placing soil cover.
E. Any OLDS component covered without review and observations by the SEO
will be required to be opened for examination prior to approval.
F. No structure may be occupied nor any land placed in use where an OLDS is
utilized without the sewage system being approved by the Township SEO.
G. Construction observation requests should be received by the SEO two working
days prior to requiring same. All OLDS shall require inspection regardless of
time of inspection request.
H. The Code Enforcement Officer or authorized person of the Township shall not
issue a demolition permit for any building that is served by an OLDS without
first receiving written notice from the SEO that the OLDS has been properly
abandoned.
I. Landowners wishing to abandon an existing OLDS must first contact the SEO
for instructions and/or standards for the proper abandonment of said system.
The owner shall be responsible to pay the necessary fees incuned for a
minimum of one compliance inspection in accordance with the current
municipal fee schedule. Exact requirements for safe abandonment of OLDS
may vary according to the individual system characteristics and design.
Requests will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
J. CUMRU Township's plumbing code requires the Township to inspect the
building sewer. Property owner/excavator shall contact the Township prior to
installation for requirements.
SECTION 13. Isolation Distances
A. The following minimum horizontal distances shall be maintained between the
named feature and the sewage absorption area pump tank, septic tanks, and/or
holding tank as follows:
Distance to Named HT, In-Ground, Drip IRS IS
Feature ST, Sand Mound Irrigation Spray Field
PT,TP or At-Grade Absorption
Absorption Area
Area
Water Supply Well 50 ft. 100 ft. 102 ft. 100 ft.
Driveway 10 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft.
Pools lOft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 100 ft.
Occupied Building 10 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 100 ft.
Cistern 25 ft. 25 ft. 27 ft. 25 ft.
Water Suction Line 50 ft. 100 ft. 102 ft. 100 ft.
Water Supply Line lOft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 10 ft.
Under Pressure
Storm Water 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 0 ft.
Infiltration System
Drainage Swale lOft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft.
Storm Water Pond 25 ft. 50 ft. 52 ft. 50 ft.
Stream or Lake 25 ft. 50 ft. 52 ft. 50 ft.
Grading or Disturbed 0 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 10 ft.
Area
Closed Depression or 50 ft. 100 ft. 102 ft. 100 ft.
Mine Hole
Slopes Above 25 % 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Property Lines 10 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft.
Unoccupied 10 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft.
Buildings
Rock Out Crop 10 ft. 10 ft. 12 ft. 25 ft.
HT= Holding Tank, ST = Sewage Tank, PT= Pump Tank, TP =Treatment Plant
SECTION 14. Inspections
A. As of the effective date of this Ordinance, any on-lot sewage disposal system
may be inspected by the Township's authorized agent at any reasonable time of
day in emergency situations or when the agent has a reasonable belief that
system conditions pose an immediate danger to human health and safety. For
purposes of routine inspections, written notice of such inspection shall be
mailed to the property owner and/or any known non-owner resident seventytwo
(72) hours in advance of such inspection.
B. The inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking of
samples from surface water, wells, other ground water sources, the sampling of
the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the introduction of a
traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the structure served to
ascertain the path and ultimate destination of wastewater generated in the
structure.
C. The municipality's authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land for
the purposes of the inspection described herein, in accordance with the
procedures and notice required herein.
D. An inspection may be conducted by the Township's SEO after the effective date
of this Ordinance for the purpose of determining the type and functional status
of each sewage disposal system in the Sewage Management District. A written
report shall be furnished to the owner of each property inspected and a copy of
said report shall be maintained in the municipal records.
E. A schedule of routine inspections may be established by the Township to assure
the proper function of any one or all of the systems in the Sewage Management
District. The Inspections shall occur every three (3) years pursuant to a
schedule and Sewage Management Districts established by the Township.
F. The Township's authorized agent shall inspect systems known to be, or alleged
to be, malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the system is indeed
malfunctioning; the Township and its authorized agent shall take action to
require the correction of the malfunction. Action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
G. There may arise geographic areas within the Township where numerous on-lot
sewage disposal systems are malfunctioning. A resolution of these area-wide
problems may necessitate detailed planning and municipally sponsored revision
to that area's Act 537 Official Sewage Facilities Plan. When the Department of
Environmental Protection authorizes the Township, mandatory repair or
replacement of individual malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the
study area may be delayed, at the discretion of the Township, pending outcome
of the plan revision process. However, the Township may compel immediate
corrective action whenever a malfunction, as determined by municipal officials
represents a serious public health or environmental threat.
SECTION 15. Operation
A. Only normal, domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
1. Industrial waste.
2. Automobile oil and other non-domestic oil.
3. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not limited to,
pesticides, disinfectants, acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline
and other solvents.
4. Wallpaper pastes and adhesives.
5. Photo processing chemicals.
6. Clean surface or groundwater, including water from roof or cellar drains,
springs, basement sump pumps and French drains.
B. The Township's authorized agent may require installation of water
conservation devices and other methods to improve system operations.
C. The Township may require the on-site pretreatment of effluents prior to their
discharge to any sewage facilities owned and operated by the Township or any
other entity, to assure that the effluent's chemical or biological constituents are
compatible with the renovative methods employed by the receiving facilities.
D. The owner of a property upon which an OLDS is constructed shall at all times
operate and maintain the OLDS in such condition as will permit it to function
in the manner in which it was designed and to prevent the unlawful discharge
of sewage.
E. The owner of a property upon which an OLDS is constructed shall maintain the
area around such system so as to provide convenient access for inspection,
maintenance, and pumping, and divert surface water and downspouts away
from the absorption area and system components.
SECTION 16. Maintenance
A. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal system
which contains a septic tank shall have the septic tank pumped by a licensed
pumper/hauler. The initial pump out intervals shall not begin later than one (1)
year from the effective date of this Ordinance. A revolving pump out schedule
shall be initiated for a period of three (3) years from the effective Ordinance
date pursuant to a schedule and map developed by the Township to be referred
to as the Sewage Management District Map as attached hereto as Appendix B.
If for any reason, other than the Township's delay of the Initial pumping as set
forth in this Section, a property owner feels it warranted to ask for an exception,
the property owner must complete and submit to the Township the form
attached hereto as Appendix C entitled Septic Tank Pumping Exception
Request. In addition, the SEO shall perform an inspection of scum and sludge
level. If the scum or sludge level is found to be greater than one third (1/3) of
the liquid depth of the septic tank, the exception request will be denied. A
property owner may not be exempt for more than one consecutive pumping
cycle.
B. Following the initial pump-out, every property owner shall have the septic tank
pumped as directed by the Township, on at least a three year rotational basis.
An On-Lot System Pumping Inspection Report, Appendix D to this Ordinance,
shall be completed by the SEO during each pump-out.
C. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of the
Township's authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids or scum
buildup in the tank is in excess of one-third of the liquid depth of the tank, if
the hydraulic load on the system increases significantly above average, if a
garbage grinder is used in the building, if the system malfunctions, or if other
good cause is shown.
D. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal system
which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the operation and
maintenance recommendations of the equipment manufacturer. In no case may
the pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks be less frequent then those
required for septic tanks. Such person shall maintain the aerobic system as
required by the manufacturer's operation manual. Required pumping periods
shall be consistent with Section 16.A of this Ordinance.
E. When an on-lot system's treatment tank is pumped out, all dosing tanks, lift
tanks, and other tanks associated with the system shall also be pumped out.
F. Holding tanks shall be pumped out at such intervals as will prevent overflow,
leakage, backup, other malfunction, or a public health hazard or nuisance, but
no less frequently than one time per year in accordance with this Ordinance.
G. Any person owning a building served by a cesspool or dry well shall have that
system pumped according to the schedule prescribed for septic tanks.
H. Any system pumping shall include an inspection of the side walls of the
cesspool or dry well. If the sides are in need of cleaning, the property owner is
responsible to ensure completion and documentation of cleaning.
I. The Township's authorized agent may require additional maintenance activity,
as needed, including, but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and unclogging of
piping, servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and line, removal of obstructing roots or trees, the
diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, etc.
J. The Township may issue a written Notice of Violation to any person who is the
owner of property in the Township and the Township has not received an OnLot
System Pumping Inspection Report form proving that they have had their
septic tank, cesspool, or dry well pumped within the time limits as specified in
this Section.
K. Within thirty (30) days of notification by the Township that a septic tank,
cesspool, or dry well has not been pumped within the time limits set by this
Section, the owner shall have said septic tank, cesspool, or dry well pumped
and shall contact the SEO to inspect the system and prepare an On-Lot System
Pumping Inspection Report showing that it has been pumped. If the property
owner fails to have the septic system pumped within thirty (3 0) days of a second
notice from the Township of the requirements to have the system pumped and
inspected, the property owner shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to
Section 22 of this ordinance.
SECTION 17. System Rehabilitation
A. No person shall operate and maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system in such
a matter that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including kitchen and laundry
wastes and water softener backwash, shall be discharged to an on-lot septic
system. No sewage system shall discharge untreated or partially treated sewage
to the surface of the ground or into the waters of the Commonwealth unless a
pe1mit to discharge has been obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. In the event a property owner detects conditions that indicate or could
reasonably be interpreted to indicate a malfunction, the landowner shall contact
the SEO and, if repair or replacement is necessary, apply for a permit to repair
or replace the malfunctioning system.
1. Landowners who disclose to the SEO the presence of a malfunction upon
their lands shall not be penalized for the disclosure.
2. If a landowner who has disclosed the presence of a malfunction fails to
make voluntary repairs, the Township may seek injunctive or other relief to
compel the repair of the malfunction or cause the repair to effectuated.
3. The owner of a malfunctioning system may not undertake any independent
repair, modification, or replacement of the system, or components thereof,
without prior notice to and approval of the Township SEO.
C. The Township shall issue a written notice of violation to any person who is the
owner of a property in the Township which is found to be served by a
malfunctioning on-lot sewage disposal system, or which is discharging raw or
partially treated sewage without a permit.
D. Within thirty (30) days of notification by the Township that a malfunction has
been identified, the property owner shall make application to the Sewage
Enforcement Officer for a permit to repair or replace the malfunctioning
system. Within sixty (60) days of initial notification by the Township, the
construction shall be completed, unless extended due to unfavorable weather,
upon the approval of the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer.
E. The Township's appointed SEO shall have the authority to order the repair or
replacement of any existing sewage disposal system with an up-to-date method
of sewage disposal. This authority shall include the replacement of any
component of the system, the addition of components to the system, and the
replacement of an existing septic system with a completely different system, as
deteimined by site evaluation and soil testing as deemed appropriate by the
SEO.
F. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in subsection D
above, the Township's authorized agent may require the installation of water
conservation equipment, and the institution of water conservation practices.
Wastewater generation in the structure may also be reduced by requiring
changes in water usage pattems in the structures served. The use of laundry
facilities may be limited to one load per day or discontinued altogether, etc.
G. Should none of the remedies described above prove totally effective in
eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage disposal system, the
property owner is not absolved of responsibility for that malfunction. The
Township may require the property owner to install a holding tank and provide
evidence of a suitable maintenance agreement therefore or require connection
to a public system.
H. In areas that have been designated by the Township for future service by
sanitary sewer lines, the Township's authorized agent may design a program of
interim remedial actions to be implemented until a sanitary sewer is available
to the affected prope1ty.
SECTION 18. Liens
The Township, upon written notice from the Township's authorized agent that an
imminent health hazard exists, due to the failure of a property owner to maintain, repair
or replace an on-lot sewage disposal system, as provided under the terms of this
Ordinance, shall have the authority to perform or contract to have performed, the work
required by the Township's authorized agent. The owner shall be charged for the work
performed and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefore in accordance with the
law.
SECTION 19. Disposal of Septage
A. All septage originating within the municipal sewage management district shali
be disposed at sites or facilities approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. Approved sites or facilities shall include the
following: septage treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants,
composting sites, and approved fa1m lands.
B. Septage pumper/haulers operating within the municipal sewage management
district shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. subsections
6018.101-6018.1003.
SECTION 20. Administration
A. All permits, records, reports, files and other written material related to the
installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot sewage
disposal systems in Cumru Township shall become the property of the
Township. Existing and future records shall be available for public inspection.
All records pertaining to sewage permits, building permits, occupancy permits
and all other aspects of the Township's sewage management programs shall be
made available, upon request, for inspection by representatives of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. All fees imposed shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
Board of Commissioners and in effect at that time. The Township shall
subsequently collect fees by any appropriate method, including the use of
municipal liens to cover the cost to the Township of administering this program.
SECTION 21. Administrative Appeals
A. Appeals from the determination of the Township or its authorized agents, under
this Ordinance, shall be made to the Board of Commissioners. Such appeals
shall be in writing, using the Township's Sewage Appeal Form, attached hereto
as Appendix E, addressed to the Board of Commissioners at the business office
and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination in
question. Appeals from revocation of a permit shall be filed within ten (10) days
of receipt of notice of revocation of the pe1mit. The appealing party shall pay
a fee for the appeal hearing in such amount as shall be established from time to
time by the Board of Commissioners.
B. Hearings.
1. Appeal hearings shall be conducted by the Board of Commissioners in
accordance with the act of December 2, 1968 (P.L. 1133, No. 353), known
as the "Local Agency Law," and shall be conducted at the next regularly
scheduled meeting if made at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting.
If made within fourteen (14) days of the next meeting, the appeal shall be
heard at a special meeting. The Board shall thereafter reverse, modify, or
affirm the aforesaid action. The hearing may be postponed for good cause
shown by the appellant or the Township, or upon written agreement of the
appellant to such extension of time.
2. The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be made in writing within
thirty (30) days of the termination of the hearing and shall be communicated
by First Class Mail to the appellant and other parties who have appeared to
the addresses set forth by them. If a decision is not rendered within thirty
(30) days, the relief sought by the appellant shall be deemed granted.
3. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be
afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and argument and
cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence may be precluded.
4. The Township shall not be required to keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings; however, any party desiring to keep a stenographic record will
be allowed to do so at their expense. Said stenographic record shall be
compiled by a properly recognized stenographer. Any parties ordering
stenographic records shall pay their own costs.
C. Any subsequent appeal shall be to the Court of Common Pleas of Berks County.
The Attorney General shall be notified in writing by the appellant of any appeal
challenging the constitutionality of any provision of the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.l et seq., or the validity of any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder, including this Ordinance.
SECTION 22. Enforcement
A. Enforcement Notice: If it appears to the Township that a violation of this
Ordinance has occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings
by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record for the parcel on
which the violation has occurred and to any person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices. Notices regarding the subject parcel
may be forwarded to any person as requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
1. The name of the owner of record or any other person against whom the
Township intends to take action.
2. The location of the property violation.
3. The specific violation with the description of the requirements which have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the
Ordinance.
4. The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and
the date before which the steps must be completed.
5. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Board of
Commissioners within a prescribed period of time in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
6. That failure to comply within the time specified, unless extended by appeal
to the Board of Commissioners, constitutes a violation with possible
sanctions clearly described.
D. Jurisdiction: District Magistrates shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings
brought under this Ordinance.
E. Enforcement Remedies:
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon being
found guilty thereof in a summary criminal proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a fine of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and
not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) per violation, plus all
court costs. For each day or portion thereof in which a violation is found to
exist or for each section of the Ordinance which is found to have been
violated, said violation shall be treated as a separate offense subject to a
separate fine. Enforcement of an action brought pursuant to this section
shall be brought before a District Justice in the same manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Collection of all fines shall be pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. All fines, costs and reasonable
attorney's fees collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid
over to the Township Treasurer.
2. The Court of Common Pleas, upon Petition, may grant an Order of Stay
when just cause is shown, withholding the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant
any person or entity other than the Township the right to commence an
action for enforcement pursuant this section.
F. Upon written notice from the SEO that an imminent health hazard exists due to
failure of a property owner to properly operate, maintain, repair, or replace an
OLDS as provided under the terms of this Ordinance, the Board shall have the
authority to perform, or contract to have performed, any repairs as may be directed
· by the SEO to abate the health hazard.
G. The costs for the actual repair, repair permit, and site investigations in support of
the permit shall be borne by the property owner.
H. The Township may take whatever action necessary to recover those costs m
accordance with the law, including entering a lien against the property.
I. The Township may seek injunctive relief to prevent continued use of a
malfunctioning system.
J. A violation will be assessed against both parties when the property is under joint
ownership and/or against a contractor if construction occuITed without compliance
with this Ordinance.
K. Any septage waste hauler who violates any of the provision of this Ordinance, or
regulations of the Township, and conditions of its state permit, or of any state or
local law governing its actions, shall, upon conviction thereof, be suspended from
operating within this Township for a period of not less than six ( 6) months nor more
than two (2) years for each violation, to be determined by the Township.
SECTION 23. Fees
A. The Board may, by resolution, establish a fee schedule and collect fees to cover the
Township's actual costs of administering this Ordinance.
SECTION 24. Appendices.
A. The following appendices attached hereto are incorporated herewith and may be
changed by resolution of the Board of Commissioners from time to time.
1. Appendix A - Declaration of Easement
2. Appendix B - Sewage Management District Map
3. Appendix C - Septic Tank Pumping Exception Request
4. Appendix D - On-Lot System Pumping Inspection Report
5. Appendix E- Sewage Appeal Application
SECTION 25. Repealer
A. All Ordinances or part of any Ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby replaced to the extent of such inconsistency.
B. Any and all Township Ordinances and Resolutions, or parts thereof, to the
extent inconsistent therewith, hereby are repealed.
SECTION 26. Severability
If any section or clause of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions which shall be deemed
severable there from.
SECTION 27. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be effective immediately.
DULY ENACTED AND ORDAINED the .dli__~ay of De.(',e.IJ4...V-, 20 I h
by a majority vote of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Cumru, Berks
County, Pennsylvania, in lawful session duly assembled.
ATTEST:
By: __________ _
Member
CERTIFICATION
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and accurate copy of Ordinance No.
']L/ 0 , adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Cumru Township, Berks
County, Pennsylvania at a regular meeting held on December 20, 2016, pursuant to
notice as required by law.
Dated: December 20, 2016
APPENDIX A
DEED OF EASEIVIENT
Prepared by:
Return to:
Parcel ID#:
DEED OF EASEMENT
THIS INDENTURE, made this ___ day of ________ , 20 _ ,
BY AND BETWEEN , of
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinafter called the "Grantor(s)", and CUMRU
TOWNSHIP, of 1775 Welsh Road, Mohnton, Pennsylvania,19540, Cumru Township,
County of Berks and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinafter called the "Grantee",
WITNESSETH:
That for and in consideration of the promises contained herein and other good and
sufficient consideration, and intending to be legally bound hereby, the Grantor(s) do( es)
hereby grant, convey, bargain and sell unto Grantee, its successors and assigns, a
perpetual right-of-way and easement over the hereinafter described primary and
replacement on-lot sewage disposal systems with access to and from same for the specific
purposes hereinafter provided, being portions of that premises belonging to Gran tor( s)
received by deed recorded in the Berks County Office of the Recorder of Deeds at
Document l.D. # , (Tax Parcel l.D. No. )
in Cumru Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania, as more fully set forth on the legal
description attached hereto and made a part hereof, marked as Exhibit "A", and as
indicated on the plan attached hereto and marked as Exhibit "B".
Together with free ingress, egress and regress to and for the said Grantee, its
successors, assigns, and their agents or employees, on, over and through the tract of land
described as aforesaid, at all times and seasons forever hereafter, in order to accomplish
the specific purposes set forth hereinafter.
Grantor(s) agree(s) that until released by the Township, they shall not, within the
easement areas:
a. install, construct, or permit any improvements, whether permanent or
temporary, other than for the intended purposes;
b. perform or permit any permanent or temporary alterations, grading,
excavations, stockpiling of any soil or any other material, other than for the intended
purposes;
c. allow any construction or other such activities on the property unless the
absorption area easements shall be marked and protected by temporary construction
fencing and shall not permit equipment with greater wheel loadings than a common
garden tractor/riding mower to travel over or operate on the surface of the absorption area
easements;
d. allow or place other than shallow-rooted vegetation over the absorption
area easements, except where a Drip Irrigation or IRSIS system is installed;
e. plant or permit any trees on or within ten (10) feet of the absorption area
easements;
f. construct any improvements or plantings that would totally block
reasonable access to perform permitted activities at or on the primary and alternate sites
referenced herein.
Further, Grantor(s) hereby grant a right of entry to Township, it agents,
employees successors and assigns, for the purposes, at any time, of inspecting,
maintaining, sampling, testing evaluating, excavating or repairing the on-lot sewage
disposal systems described in the sewer application and pe1mit. Such rights shall include,
but not be limited to, the right to excavate any part of the property or to sample soil,
water or suspected septage subject only to the requirement that of the Township or its
agents shall return the land to as close to its f01mer condition as is reasonably possible
under the circumstances as soon as reasonably possible.
This Agreement, together with other provisions of this grant, shall constitute a
covenant running with the land for the benefit of the Grantee, its successors, and assigns.
TO HA VE AND TO HOLD all and singular the privileges, right-of-way and
appurtenances above mentioned to it, the said Grantee, its successors and assign, to the
only proper use and behoof of them, the said Grantee, its successors and assigns forever.
AND THE SAID Grantor(s) do( es) hereby SPECIALLY warrant the premises
hereby conveyed.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, these presents have been executed by the Grantor(s)
and Grantee herein under seal the day and year first above written, intending to be legally
bound thereby.
Gran tor
Gran tor
CUMRU TOWNSHIP
Attest
Secretary President
ACKNOWLEDGMENTOFGRANTORS
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF BERKS
)
)
)
SS:
ON THIS, the day of , 20_,
before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
________________ , lmown to me (or satisfactorily proven) to
be the persons whose names are subscribed to the within instrument, and acknowledged
that they executed the same for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and notarial seal.
Notary Public
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF GRANTEE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF BERKS
)
)
)
SS:
ON THIS, the day of , 20_,
before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
____________ , Chairman of the Cumru Township Board of
Supervisors, known to me (or satisfactorily proven) to be the person whose name is
subscribed to the within instrument, and acknowledged that he executed the same as such
Chairman on behalf of Cumru Township for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and notarial seal.
Notary Public
I CERTIFY that the address of the Grantee herein is:
177 5 Welsh Road
Mohnton, PA 19540
Agent for Grantee
APPENDIXB
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT MAP
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT MAP
APPENDIXC
REQUEST FOR WAIVER FROM THE PUMPING I INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS UNDER CUMRU TOWNSHIP'S SEWAGE
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
REQUEST FOR WAIVER FROM THE PUMPING I INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
UNDER CUMRU TOWNSHIP'S SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
DATE: -------
Name: -------------------------------
Address:
-----------------------------~
Phone Number: ----------------------------
E-Mail (OPTIONAL): ___________________ _
Parcel ID Number: --------------------------
I am hereby requesting excusal from the on-lot system pumping I inspection requirement under
the municipality's sewage management program. The reason for this request for an excusal or
a waiver is as follows: (check the most appropriate reason)
I already had my sewage system pumped and inspected within the past year. Proof of
compliance (canceled check, receipt, or report) is attached. In making this request, I
understand that I will have to comply with the next pumping I inspection cycle for my
sewage management district.
I own vacant land containing no onlot sewage system.
My property contains an abandoned structure and an on-lot sewage system that is no
longer in use. I am planning to properly abandon the system on this property within
the next year and will provide proof to the municipality once it has been completed.
Other:
By signing this request, I attest that the information I have provided is accurate and true.
Signature Date
Printed Name
APPENDIXD
ON-LOT SYSTEM PUMPING AND INSPECTION REPORT
ON-LOT SYSTEM PUMPING AND INSPECTION REPORT
NOTE: This form must be completed and returned to the municipal agent within 30 days of the pumping I inspection.
Section 1: PROPERTY INFORMATION
Date of pumping I inspection: __________ _
Owner's Name:
--------------~
Mailing Address: ______________ _
Site Address (if different): ___________ _
Telephone Number: _____________ _
Section 2: ONLOT SYSTEM & OBSERVED CONDITIONS
Type of Absorption Area: ___________ _
Treatment Tank: ( ) Septic ( ) Aerobic ( ) Other
Tank Size: 1st: ---- 2°d: ---- 3rd: ----
Observations (X =no good OR--/= ok):
( ) Condition of baffles
( ) Pump and/or alarm checked (if applicable)
( ) Sewage backing up into structure
( ) High water or solids level(s) in the tank(s)
( ) Leaking, cracked or deteriorating tank(s)
( ) Backwash of liquid from absorption area into tank(s)
( ) Wet I soft area or lush grasses near absorption area
() OTHER: _____________ _
Sewage Management District#: ______ _
Parcel ID#:
------------~
Year System Installed (if known): _____ _
Year System Repaired (if applicable): ____ _
Date of Last Pumping: _________ _
RESIDENTIAL(# ofbedrooms): _____ _
COMMERCIAL(type): _______ _
Weather Condition: -----------
Tank Construction: ( )Concrete ( )Metal ( )Plastic
Depth of Scum Layer in Tank(s): ______ in.
Depth of Solids Layer in Tank: in.
Amount of Septage Removed: gal.
SKETCH OF MAJOR COMPONENTS OF SYSTEM
RecollllllendedRepairs: ---------------------------------
Destination of Septage (name and address of facilitY): -----------------------
Signature and Company Name of Authorized Septage Hauler: ____________________ _
APPENDIXE
ON-LOT SEWAGE APPEAL APPLICATION
ON-LOT SEWAGE APPEAL APPLICATION
DATE: -------
Name:
Address:
Phone Number:
E-Mail (OPTIONAL):
Property Address (if different from place of residence):
Parcel ID Number: --------------------------
I am here by requesting an appeal hearing before the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Cumru. The purpose of the hearing is to appeal a correction order or other action
by the Township of Cumru' s duly appointed Sewage Enforcement Officer.
Following, is a brief summary of the reason for my appeal (please attach copies of any
supporting documents if applicable):
By signing this request, I attest that the information I have provided is accurate and true.
Signature . Date
Printed Name
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ORDINANCE
for the
TOWNSHIP OF CUMRU,
BERKS COUNTY
PENNSYLVANIA
ORDINANCE NO. 693
Adopted at a Public Meeting Held on
~J=an=ua~rv~l~9 _ , 2010
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev, I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................. !
Section 101. ShortTitle .................................................................................................. 1
Section 102. Statement of Findings ................................................................................ 1
Section I 03. Purpose ....................................................................................................... 2
Section 104. Statutory Authority ................................................................................... .4
Section 105. Applicability/Regulated Activities ............................................................ .4
Section 106. Repealer ..................................................................................................... 5
Section 107. Severability ................................................................................................ 5
Section 108. Compatibility With Other Ordinance Requirements ................................. 5
ARTICLE II-DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................... 6
Section 201. Interpretation .............................................................................................. 6
Section 202. Definitions .................................................................................................. 6
ARTICLE III-STORMWATER MANAGEMENT .......................................................... 20
Section 301. General Requirements .............................................................................. 20
Section 302. Permit Requirements by Other Government Entities .............................. 21
Section 303. Erosion and Sediment Control During Regulated Earth Disturbance
Activities ........................................................................................................................ 21
Section 304. Nonstructural Project Design (Sequencing to Minimize Stormwater
Impacts) .......................................................................................................................... 24
Section 305. Ground Water Recharge (Infiltration/Recharge/Bioretention) ................ 25
Section 306. Water Quality Requirements ................................................................... .31
Section 307. Streambank Erosion Requirements .......................................................... 32
Section 308. Stormwater Management Districts .......................................................... 33
Section 309. Calculation Methodology ............................................ :: ........................... 38
Section 310. Design Criteria for Stormwater Management and Conveyance BMPs .. .41
ARTICLE IV-DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 53
Section 401. General Requirements ......................... ., .................................................... 53
Section 402. Exemptions ........................................ : ..................................................... 53
Section 403. Drainage Plan Contents ............................................................................ 55
Section 404. Plan Submission ..................................................................................... : .. 61
Section 405. Drainage Plan Review .............................................................................. 62
Section 406. Modification of Plans ........................................... : .......................... : ........ 63
Section 407. Resubmission of Disapproved Drainage Plans ........................................ 64
ARTICLE V-INSPECTIONS ............................................................................................ 65
Section 501. ~chedule of Inspections ........................................................................... 65
ARTICLE VI-FEES AND EXPENSES ............................................................................ 67
Section 60L Township of Cumru Drainage Plan Review and Inspection Fee ............. 67
Section 602. Expenses Covered by Fees ...... : ................................................................ 67
Township of Cumru Stor.mwater Management Ordinance
GVC file 3022-068
lssuedJanuary4,20I0Rev.1
ARTICLE VII-MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES ............................. : ................... 69
Section 701. Performance Guarantee .................................... : ....................................... 69
Section 702. Adherence to Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations
and Maintenance Plan .................................................................................................... 69
Section 703. Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned
Storm water Controls and BMPs .................................................................................... 69
Section 704. Storrnwater Management Easements ....................................................... 70
Section 705. Recording of Approved Storrnwater Control and BMP Operations
and Maintenance Plan and Related Agreements ............................................................ 70
Section 706. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund .......................................................................................................... 70
ARTICLE VIII- PROHIBITIONS ..................................................................................... 73
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections .................................................. 73
Section 802. Roof Drains .............................................................................................. 73
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs ....................................................................... 74
ARTICLE IX- ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ...................................................... 75
Section 901. Right-of-Entry .......................................................................................... 75
Section 902. Public Nuisance ........... : ........................................................................... 75
Section 903. Enforcement Generally ............................................................................ 75
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals ........................... 76
Section 905. Penalties ................................................................................................... 76
Section 906. Notification .............................................................................................. 77
Section 907. Enforcement ............................................................................................. 77
Section 908. Appeals .................................................................................................... 78
APPENDICES
ORDINANCE APPENDIX A
·ORDINANCE APPENDIX B
ORDINANCE APPENDIX C
ORDINANCE APPENDIX D
ORDINANCE APPENDIX E
ORDINANCE APPENDIX F
ORDINANCE APPENDIX G
ORDINANCE APPENDIX H
ORDINANCE APPENDIX I
TOwnship of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
ave Rle 3022-068
STORMW ATER CONTROLS AND BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN
CRITERIA
DRAINAGE PLAN APPLICATION
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
WATERSHED MAP*
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES
WEST NILE VIRUS GUJpANCE
REFERENCES
RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES FOR
PROJECTS WHICH ARE EXEMPT UNDER
SECTION 402 OF THIS ORDINANCE
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Cumru Storm water
Management Ordinance".
Section 102. Statement of Findings
The Township of Cumru Commissioners finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from
development throughout . a watershed increases flood flows and velocities,
contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing
streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey
and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting from land
development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can also harm surface water
resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns, accelerating stream flows
(which increase scour and erosion of stream-beds and stream-banks thereby
elevating sedimentation), destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals and
pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the
protection of the people of the Township of Cumru and all the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater
development throughout a watershed poses a threat to
quality.
runoff resulting from
surface and groundwater
E. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing groundwater recharge
for water supplies and base· flow of streams, which also protects and maintains
surface water quality.
F. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project designs that
maintain the natural hydrologic regime, and sustain high water quality, groundwater
recharge, stream baseflow and aquatic ecosystems. The most cost effective and
environmentally advantageous way to manage storm water runoff is through
Township of Cumru Storrnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
1 Issued January 4, 20 IO Rev. I
nonstructural project design, minimizing impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoiding
sensitive areas (i.e. stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and designing to
topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
G. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater 1s an essential
component in successfully addressing stormwater.
H. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program
of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for
stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
I. Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can
contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth by the Township of Cumru.
Section 103. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare within the
Township of Cumru by maintaining the natural hydrologic regime by minimizing the
impacts described in Section 102 of this Ordinance through provisions designed to:
A. Promote alternative project designs and layout that minimizes impacts to surface and
ground water.
B. Promote nonstructural Best Management Practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source
by regulating activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and
management.
G. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
H. Manage storm water impacts close to the runoff source.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent
degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources,
J. Maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and watercourses, where
possible.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
2 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev .. I
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at
25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain "existing uses" and maintain the
level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and to protect and
maintain water quality in "special protection" streams.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the development
site.
M. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES permit
requirements.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to address nonstormwater
discharges into the Township ofCumru's separate storm sewer sys.tern.
0. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide stormwater
management and planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities and BMPs that are implemented in the Township of Cumru.
S. NPDES Requirements
Federal regulations approved October 1999 require operators of small municipal
separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to obtain NPDES Phase II permits from DEP
by March 2003. (NPDES II is an acronym for the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System Phase II Stormwater Permitting Regulations.) This program
affects all municipalities in "urbanized areas" of the state. This definition applies to
all Schuylkill River watershed municipalities identified in Table III-I of the
Schuylkill River Stormwater Management P)an Volume II as NPDES Phase II
municipalities. Therefore, these identified municipalities will be subject to the
NPDES Phase II requirements mandated by the Federal Clean Water Act as
administered by DEP. For more information on NPDES II requirements, contact the
DEP Regional Office.
T. Ensure adequate drainage of all streets;
U. Intercept storm water runoff along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade
of the area drained;
V. Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal facilities and buildings;
Townsh_ip of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-06&
3 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
W. Accommodate runoff so that the storm water discharge rates from the site at any point
during construction do not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the design
rainfall frequencies specified in Table 308.1. Post-construction storm water discharge
shall not exceed the rates specified in Table 308.1.
X. Ensure adequate drainage at intersections of driveways with streets.
Y. Where site conditions warrant, provide shallow swales along all side and rear lot
lines to direct surface drainage to the street or other drainage facilities.
Section 104. Statutory Authority
Primary Authority:
The Township of Cumru is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the
"Storm Water Management Act" and the (appropriate municipal code).
Secondary Authority
The Township of Cumru also is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
Section 105. Applicability/Regulated Activities
A. The following are defined as "Regulated Activities" that may affect stormwater
runoff and are subject to regulation by this Ordinance:
1. Land development.
2. Subdivision.
3. Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime,
4. Construction or reconstruction of or additional impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces such as but not limited to driveways, parking lots, patios, and roads.
5. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings. See Section
402 for exemptions.
6. Site redevelopment.
7. Construction of diversion piping or encroachment in any natural or man-made
channel.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022.-068
4 .Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
i
I
8. Implementation, modification, or construction of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management Best Management Practices (BMP's) or
appurtenances thereto.
9'. Regulated Earth Disturbance.
10. Any of the above Regulated Activities which were approved more than five
(5) years prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and resubmitted for
approval by the Township of Cumru.
Earth Disturbance activities and associated stormwater management controls are also
regulated under existing state law and implementing regulations. This Ordinance shall
operate in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements of this Ordinance
shall continue to be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes of this Ordinance than state
law.
Section 106. Repealer
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Township of Cumru inconsistent with any of
the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 107. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining
provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 108. Compatibility With Other Ordinance Requirements
Approvals issued and actions taken under this Ordinance do not relieve the Applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities by any other code, law,
regulation or ordinance.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File J022-06S
5 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
ARTICLE II-DEFINITIONS
Section 20 L Interpretation
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes
the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender
include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of government, or any other similar
entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are
permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or
arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
Section 202. Definitions
Accelerated Erosion - TI1e removal of the surface of the land through the combined action
of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate greater than would occur because of the
natural process alone.
Agricultural Activities - The work of producing crops and rmsmg livestock including
tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and installation of conservation measures. For
purposes of regulation by this Ordinance construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
Alteration - As applied. to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and
rock from one location or position to a11other; also the cha11ging of surface conditions by
causing the surface to be more or less impervious; land disturbance.
As-built drawings - Those maintained by the Contractor as he constructs the project a11d
upon which he documents the actual locations and elevations of the building and construction
components and changes to the original contract documents. These, or a copy of smne, are
turned over to the Engineer at the completion of the project
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
6 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
Applicant - A person who has filed an application for approval to engage in any Regulated
Activities as defined in Section 105 of this Ordinance.
Bankfull: - The channel at the top-of-bank or point where water begins to overflow onto a
floodplain.
Base Flow - Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the sustained discharge
that does not result from direct runoff or from water diversions, reservoir releases, piped
discharges, or other human activities:
Bioretention - A stormwater retention area which utilizes woody and herbaceous plants and
soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (Best Management Practice) - Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures
used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to protect and maintain water
quality and groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of the Municipal
Stormwater Management Ordinance, including but not limited to infiltration trenches,
seepage pits, filter strips, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, rain gardens, grassed
swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
Buffer - The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured perpendicular to
and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a stream. (See Top of Bank)
Channel - A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open
channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural pnd man-made drainage ways, swales,
streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
Channel Erosion - The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of small channels and
waterways, caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
Cistern - An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
Conservation District - The Berks County Conservati.on District.
Culvert - A structure with appurtenant works, which carries water under or through an
embankment or fill.
Dam - An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works; constructed for the purpose
of impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure
for highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semi fluid.
Department - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Designee - The agent of the Berks County Planning Commission Berks County Conservation
District and/or agent of the Township of Cumru involved with the administration, review or
Township of Cu1nru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC file ;3022-063
7 Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. I
enforcement of any prov1s10ns of this ordinance by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
Design Professional (Qualified) - Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
State or otherwise qualified by Jaw to perform the work required by the Ordinance
Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24-hours),
used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
Designated Watershed (ACT 167) - A Watershed which is listed under the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection's "Index of Designated Watersheds (Stormwater
Management)" pursuant to the Stormwater Management Act P.L. 864, No. 167, October 4,
1978, and published in the Pennsylvania Bulletin on May 31, 1980 and August 9, 1980, as
amended on November 19, 1991, April 21, 1992, June 21, 1994, April 16, 1996, April 15,
1997 and December 16, 1997).
Detention Basin - An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are
designed to drain completely shortly after any given rainfall event and are dry until the next
rainfall event.
Developer-A person that seeks to undertake any Regulated Activities at a project site in the
Township of Cumru.
Development - Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real estate, whether
public or private, including but not limited to land development, construction, installation, or
expansion of a building or other structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site
alteration such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or storage
facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in this ordinance, development
encompasses both new development and redevelopment.
Development Site - The specific tract of land where any Regulated Activities in the
Township of Cumru are planned, conducted or maintained,
Diffused Drainage Discharge - Drainage discharge not confined to a single point location
or channel, such as sheet flow or shallow concentrated flow. "
Discharge - 1. (verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin or other
point of interest 2. (noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (volume per unit of time). See also Peak
Discharge.
Discharge Point - The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
8 Issued January 4, 20 l 0 Rev. I
I I
Disturbed Areas - Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or
has occurred.
Ditch - An artificial waterway for irrigation or stormwater conveyance .
. ·
Downslope Property Line - That portion of the property line of the lot, tract, or parcels of
land being developed located such that overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed
towards it.
Drainage Conveyance Facility - A Stormwater Management Facility designed to transmit
storm water runoff and shall include channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers,
etc.
Drainage Easement - A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of
private land for stormwater management purposes.
Drainage Permit - A permit issued by the Commissioners of the Township of Cumru or
their designee after the drainage plan has been approved.
Drainage Plan - The documentation of the stormwater management system, if any, to be
used for a given development site, the contents of which are established in Section 403.
Earth Disturbance Activity - A construction or other human activity which disturbs the
surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations,
embankments, land development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting activities,
road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or
storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
Emergency Spillway - A conveyance area that is used to pass peak discharge greater than
the maximum design storm controlled by the stormwater facility.
Encroachment - A structure or activity that changes, expands or diminishes the course,
current or cross section of a watercourse, floodway or body of water.
Erosion - The process by which the surface of the land, including channels, is worn away by
water, wind, or chemical action.
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - A plan for a project site which identifies BMPs to
minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
Exceptional Value Waters - Surface waters of high quality which satisfy Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b)
(relating to anti-degradation).
Existing Conditions ("Natural Condition") - The initial condition of a project site prior to
the proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land, the land use
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
9 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower
curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
Flood - A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land areas from the
overflow of.streams, rivers, and other waters of this Commonwealth.
Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or
delineated by applicable Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance
Administration Flood Hazard Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains,
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the I 00-year frequency flood. Unless
otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood
insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the I 00-year frequency floodway, it is assumed - absent evidence to
the contrary - that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
Fluvial Geomorphology - The study of landforms associated with river channels and the
processes that form them.
Forest Management/Timber Operations - Plarming and act1v1t1es necessary for the
management of forest land with no change of land use proposed. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting
budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting and reforestation.
Free board - A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high-water and the top
of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The space is required as a safety
margin in a pond or basin.
Grade - A slope, usually of a road, charmel or natural ground specified i11 percent and shown
on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade - to finish the surface of a roadbed, top of
embankment or bottom of excavation.
Grassed Waterway - A natural or constructed waterway,.usually broad and shallow, covered
with erosion-resistant grasses, used to convey surface water.
Groundwater - Water beneath the earth's surface, often between saturated soil and rock.that
supplies wells and springs.
Groundwater Recharge - Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies
without degrading groundwater quality.
HEC-HMS - The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) -
Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This model was used to model the Schuylkill River
watershed during the ACT 167 Plan development and was the basis for the Standards and
Criteria of this Ordinance.
Township of Cun1ru S1ormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
JO lssuedJanuary4,20!0Rev.1
_j
'i
'
High Quality Waters - Surface waters having quality which exceeds levels necessary to
support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and recreation in and on the water by
satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality
Standards, § 93 .4b( a).
Hotspots - Areas where land use or act1v1t1es generate highly contaminated runoff, with
concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in storm water.
Hydrograph - A graph of discharge rate versus time for a selected point in the drainage
system.
Hydrologic Regime (natural) - The hydrologic cycle or balanc.e that sustains quality and
quantity of stormwater, baseflow, storage, and groundwater supplies under natural
conditions,
Hydrologic Soil Group, - A classification of soils by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service, into four runoff potential groups. The
groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils,
which are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
Impervious Surface - A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground.
Impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and
any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to be gravel or crushed stone shall
be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
Impoundment - A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and
release it at a controlled rate.
Infill - Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain undeveloped but are within
or very close proximity to urban areas. The development relies on existing infrastructure and
does not require an extension of water, sewer or other public utilities.
Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots,
evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolates downward to recharge groundwater.
Infiltration Structures - A structure designed to direct runoff into the underground water
(e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
Inlet - The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
Intermittent Stream - A stream that flows only part of the time. Flow generally occurs for
several weeks or months in response to seasonal precipitation, due to groundwater discharge.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
11 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
-i'
l
'
Land Development -Any of the following activities:
(i) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
a. A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
or Jots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or
b. The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means
of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
(ii) A subdivision of land;
(iii) Development in accordance with Section 503(1.l) of the PA Municipalities
Planning Code.
Limiting zone--A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata which
includes one of the following:
(i) A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined by
direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
(ii) A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of loose rock
fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids
between the fragments.
(iii) A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which 1s so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
Lot - A designate.ct parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as. a unit.
Main Stem (Main Channel), Conestoga River - An y stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Conestoga River hydro logic model.
Main Stem (Main Channel), Schuylkill River - Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Schuylkill River hydrologic model.
Manning Equation (Manning formula) -A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g.,
feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon
channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022·068
12 IssuedJanuruy4,2010Rev. l
Township Engineer - A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a municipality, planning agency or joint
planning commission.
Municipality- Township of Cumru, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Natural Condition - See Existing Conditions.
Natural Hydrologic Regime (see hydrologic regime)
Natural Recharge Area - Undisturbed surface area or depression where storrnwater
collects, and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes the underground and groundwater.
Nonpoint Source Pollution - Pollution that enters a water body from diffuse origins in the
watershed and does not result from discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
Non-stormwater Discharges - Water flowing in stormwater collection facilities, such as
pipes or swales, which is not the result ofa rainfall event or snowmelt.
Nonstructural Best Management Practice (BMPs) - Methods of controlling stormwater
runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative site planning, impervious area and grading
reduction, protection of natural depression areas, temporary ponding on site and other
techniques.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal govermnent' s system
for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is delegated to DEP in
Pennsylvania.
NRCS - Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
Outfall - "Point source'' as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point where the Township of
Cumru's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the Commonwealth.
Outlet - Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
Parent Tract - The parcel of land from which a land development or subdivision originates,
determined from the date of municipal adoption of this ordinance (for Stofmwater
Management review only).
Parking Lot Storage - Involves the use of parking areas as temporary impoundments with
controlled release rates during rainstorms.
Peak Discharge - The maximum rate (volume/time) of stormwater runoff from a specific
storm event.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GYC File 302'.'.-068
13 lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev.1
Penn State Runoff Model - The computer-based hydrologic model developed at the
Pennsylvania State University.
Pipe - A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys
stormwater:
Planning Commission - The Planning Commission of the Township of Cumru.
Point Source - any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited
to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit from which stormwater is or may be
discharged, as defined in State regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
Post Construction - Period after construction where disturbed areas are stabilized,
stormwater controls are in place and functioning and all proposed improvements in the
approved land development plan are completed.
Pretreatment - Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide storage or filtering to
trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they enter the system, but not necessarily
meet the water quality volume requirements of Section 306.
Project Site - The specific area ofland where any Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities in
the Township of Cumru are planned, conducted or maintained.
Rational Formula - A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow rate.
Recharge - The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration of rainfall, other
surface waters,-or land application of water or treated wastewater.
Reconstruction - Demolition of, and subsequent rebuilding of impervious surface.
Record Drawings - Original documents revised to suit the as-built conditions and
subsequently provided by the Engineer to the Client. The Engineer takes the Contractor's
as-builts, reviews them in detail with his/her own records for completeness, then either turns
these over to the Client or transfers the information to a set ofreproducibles, in both cases for
the Client's permanent records."
Redevelopment - The demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement
exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of the currently developed_. portion of the site on
properties or tracts where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential. Maintenance activities such as top-layer grinding and re-paving are
not considered to be redevelopment. Interior remodeling projects and tenant improvements
are also not considered to be redevelopment. Utility trenches in streets are not considered
redevelopment.
Township of Cun1ru Stornnvater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
14 lssUed January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
Regulated Activities - Any actions or proposed actions that involve the alteration or
development of land in a mal1ner that may affect stormwater runoff as specified in Section
105 of this Ordinance.
Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity - Activity involving Earth Disturbance subject to
regulation under 25 PA Code Chapters 92, Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
Release Rate - The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or
subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect
downstream areas.
Repaving - Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve reconstruction of
an existing paved (impervious) surface.
Replacement Paving - Reconstruction of and full replacement of an existing paved
(impervious) surface.
Retention Basin - A structure in which stormwater is stored and not released during the
storm event. Retention basins do not typically have an outlet to other down stream
conveyance features such as channels, storm sewer, or other surface waters. Generally, these
features empty via recharge and must infiltrate stored water in no more than 4 days. These
features may have an emergency spillway or other overflow device for large events.
Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given
magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would
be expected to recur on the average of once every twenty-five years.
Riser - A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used to control the
discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
Road Maintenance - Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross-section, such
as grading and repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or
clearing drainage ditches and other similar activities.
Roof Drains - A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from a roof and leads it
away from the structure.
Rooftop Detention - Temporary ponding and gradual release of.stormwater falling directly
onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
Runoff - Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO- The Township of Cumru Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
Sediment Basin - A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located and designed to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported by water during construction.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Managemenl Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
15 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
Sediment Pollution - The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into
--, the waters of the Commonwealth. !
Sedimentation - The process by which mineral or orgamc matter is accumulated or
deposited by the movement of water or air.
Seepage Pit/Seepage Trench - An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar
coarse material, into which surface water is directed for infiltration into the underground
water.
Separate Storm Sewer System - A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff
Shallow Concentrated Flow - Stormwater runoff flowing in shallow, defined ruts prior to
entering a defined channel or waterway.
Sheet Flow - A flow process associated with broad, shallow water movement on sloping
ground surfaces that is not channelized or concentrated.
Soil-Cover Complex Method - A method of runoff computation developed by the NRCS
that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to· a runoff parameter called Curve
Number (CN).
Source Water Protection Areas (SWPA) - The zone through which contaminants, if
present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water well or surface water intake.
Special Geologic Features - Carbonate bedrock features, including but not limited to closed
depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces, lineaments, joints, . faults, caves and
pinnacles, which may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater management
BMPs are being considered.
Special Protection Subwatersheds - Watersheds for. which the receiving waters are
exceptional value (EV) or high quality (HQ) waters.
Spillway - A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the maximum design
storm controlled by the_ stormwater facility.
State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain,
reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams
Law.
Storage Indication Method - A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the
continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the change in storage) with outflow defined
as a function of storage volume and depth.
Township of Cun1Tu Srormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
16 IssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. J
j
i
I
Storm Frequency - The number of times that a given storm "event" occurs or is exceeded on
the average in a stated period of years. See "Return Period".
Storm Sewer - A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey intercepted runoff and
stormwater from other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
Stormwater - The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
Stormwater Management District - Those subareas in which some type of detention is
required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
Stormwater Management Facility - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its
condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff
quality, rate or quantity. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not
limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
Stormwater Management Plan, Schuylkill River - The plan for managing those land use
activities that will influence stormwater runoff quality and quantity and that would impact
the Tributaries to the Schuylkill River Watershed adopted by Berks County as required by
the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), and known as the "The Tributaries to The
Schuylkill River in Berks County Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan".
Stormwater Management Site Plan - The plan prepared by the Applicant or his
representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the particular site of
interest according to this Ordinance.
Stream -A natural watercourse.
Stream Buffer - The land area adjacent to each side of a stream, essential to maintaining
water quality. (See Buffer)
Stream Enclosure - A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess of 100 feet in length
upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated water of this Commonwealth.
Subarea (Subwatershed)- The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stoirnwater
management criteria have been established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
Subdivision - The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development:
Provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than ten acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
17 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev_. 1
Surface Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all
other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
Swale - A low lying stretch ofland which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
Timber Operations - See Forest Management.
Time-of-Concentration (Tc) - The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically
most distant point of the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is
the combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
Top-of-Bank - Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross section at which a rising
water level just begins to flow out of the channel and over the floodplain.
Township - Township of Cumru, Berks County, Pennsylvania.
Township Engineer - A professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a municipality, planning agency or joint
planning commission.
TR-20 (calibrated) - The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the
appropriate watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been "calibrated" to reflect
published and observed flow values by adjusting key model input parameters.
Vernal Pond - Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by shallow water for
variable periods from winter to spring, but may be completely dry for most of the summer
and fall.
Watercourse - A channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed and banks,
whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
Waters of the Commonwealth - Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches,
watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial; within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth. ,
Watershed - Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other body of water, whether
natural or artificial.
Wellhead - 1. a structure built over a well; and 2. the source of water for a well.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-008
18 Issued Janual)' 4, 2010 Rev. I
=i I
Wellhead Protection Area -The surface and subsurface area surrounding a water supply
well, well field, spring or infiltration gallery supplying a public water system, through which
contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward and reach the water source.
Wet Basin - Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain urban runoff and
always contains water.
Wetland - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by smface or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar .areas.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
19 Issued January 4, 20 l 0 Rev. I
j
i
I
ARTICLE III-STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section 301. General Requirements
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the Township of Cumru which do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in Section 402 shall submit a drainage plan
consistent with this Ordinance to the Township of Cumru for review. These criteria
shall apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take place in
stages
B. The Applicant is required to evaluate practicable alternatives to the surface discharge
of storm water, the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of
the Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic
regime. Appendix E Low Impact Development Practices provides several
alternatives.
C. The Drainage Plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing provisions of
Section 304 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic regime and to promote
groundwater recharge and protect groundwater and surface water quality and
quantity. ·The Drainage Plan designer must proceed sequentially in accordance with
Article III of this ordinance.
D. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent property shall
not be altered in any manner which could cause property damage without permission
of the affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge
criteria specified in this Ordinance.
E. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject ·to any applicable
discharge criteria in the general direction of existing discharge, whether proposed to
be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise
provided by this ordinance. If diffused drainage discharge is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the Applicant must document
that adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding
or other impacts will result from the concentrated discharge.
F. Where a development site is traversed by existing watercourses, drainage easements
shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses. The terms of the
easement shall conform to the stream buffer requirements contained in Section
306.D of this Ordinance.
G. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this Ordinance that would be
located in or adjacent to waters of the Commonwealth or wetlands shall be subject to
Township of Cumru Storrnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 30:!2-06&
20 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
~ I
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
approval by PaDEP through the Joint Permit Application process, or, where deemed
appropriate by PaDEP, the General Permit process. When there is a question
whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility of the Applicant or his
agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise
approval to work in the area must be obtained from PaDEP.
Any alteration that affects stormwater flow directly or indirectly toward_ a PennDOT
facility shall be subject to PennDOT regulations.
Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through seepage beds,
infiltration trenches, etc. are encouraged, where soil conditions permit, to reduce the
size or eliminate the need for detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
In order to promote overland flow and infiltration/ percolation of stormwater, roof
drains shall not be connected to impervious surfaces where advantageous to do so.
When site conditions preclude infiltration/percolation, then it shall be permitted on a
case-by-case basis by the Township of Cumru.
Stormwater runoff shall be treated for water quality in accordance with Section 306
of this Ordinance.
Transference of runoff to or from an Exceptional Value/High Quality (EV/HQ)
watershed is prohibited unless otherwise authorized by PaDEP, Delaware River Basin
Commission (DRBC) or Susquehanna River Basin Commission (SRBC).
Section 302. Permit Requirements by Other Government Entities
Permits must comply with any and all applicable local, county, state and federal regulations.
Section 303. Erosion and Sediment Control During Regulated Earth Disturbance
Activities
A.
B.
C.
Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such activity must be
in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and Regulations, Part I,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection, Subpart
C, protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102,
"Erosion Control,".
No Regulated Earth Disturbance Activities within the Township of Cumru shall
commence until the Township of Cumru receives an approval from the Conservation
District of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for construction activities.
PaDEP has regulations that require an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for any
earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code
§ 102.4(b).
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
21 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
l
~
'
D.
E.
In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a PaDEP "NPDES Construction
Activities" permit is required for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities.
Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for Regulated Earth Disturbance activities from
the appropriate DEP regional office or County Conservation District must be
provided to the Township of Cumru. Prior to Final Plan Approval, the issuance of an
NPDES Construction Permit or permit coverage under the statewide General Permit
(PAG-2) satisfies the requirements subsection 303.A.
F. A copy of the Erosion and Sediment Control plan and any required permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all times.
G. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria shall be
applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed and shall include the following:
I. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation
and compaction during the construction phase to maintain maximum
infiltration capacity.
2. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until the entire
contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has achieved final
stabilization. Any sediment and erosion pollution control facilities to be
modified into infiltration BMPs shall be modified to their permanent state in
accordance with the requirements of an approved NPDES permit.
H. Sediment and erosion pollution control facilities shall be designed according to
applicable governmental standards, specifically the following:
I. PaDEP sediment and erosion control plan requirements in Chapter 102, Title
25 Pa. Code.
2. Berks County Conservation District standards, which has been delegated by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to enforce the
erosion and sediment pollution control plan.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit the application and
other necessary material to the Berks County Conservation District.
c·omments shall be received and compliance therewith accomplished prior to
final plan approval.
I. Erosion and sediment pollution control devices shall be installed concurrently with
earthmoving activities and whenever a situation is created which would contribute to
increased erosion.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File J022~068
22 lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
J.
K.
No earthmoving or stripping of vegetation will be conducted in areas of greater than
thirty-three (33) percent slope unless specific approval is obtained from the
Township.
Earthmoving and the addition of fill shall be maintained where possible and
practicable to preserve desirable natural features and the topography of the site.
Changes in grade and topography and other earthmoving shall be in accordance with
the approved Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Plan.
L. Stripping of vegetation, regarding or other development shall be done in such a way
that will minimize erosion.
M. All clearing and grading operations shall comply with the requirements for Tree
Preservation included in the Township of Cumru Zoning Ordinance.
1. Land disturbance shall be limited to the actual construction site and an access
strip. The amount of disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be
kept to a practical minimum.
2. To the maximum extent practicable, mature, healthy trees of at least six (6)
. inches trunk width measured three (3) feet above the average surrounding
ground level shall be retained and protected. Such trees shall not be removed
except as provided on the approved subdivision or land development plan in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Township of Cumru Zoning
Ordinance. The filling of soil over the roots of trees to be preserved is
prohibited. (The roots are presumed to extend out from the tree as far as the
tree's branches extend outward.)
N. Procedures for protecting soils or geologic structures with water supply potential
from contamination by surface water or other disruption by construction activity
shall be established in consultation with the Township and such areas shall include,
at minimum, those underlain by carbonate limestone formations. The Township may
require pollution control facilities to be provided on existing and proposed
stormwater management systems within or adjacent to the project site.
0. Provisions for protecting existing wells or other water supplies shall be established.
P. Unless otherwise permitted, graded slopes shall not be steeper than three (3)
horizontal units to one (1) vertical unit.
Q. A minimum of four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided on all disturbed areas
prior to final seeding and mulching.
R. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all
points of discharge (PA DEP Erosion, Sediment and Pollution Control Manual).
Township of Cumru Stormwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
23 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
Section 304. Nonstructural Project Design (Sequencing to Minimize Storm.water
Impacts)
A. For projects disturbing one (!) acre or more, the design of all Regulated Activities
shall include evaluation of practicable alternatives to the surface discharge of
stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces, and the degradation of waters of the
Commonwealth, and must maintain as much as possible the natural hydrologic
regime of the site. See Appendix E Low Impact Development Practices for several
alternatives.
1. An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of being done after
taking into consideration existing technology and logistics in light of overall
project purposes, and other municipal requirements.
2. All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are presumed to
have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of waters of the
Commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. For projects disturbing one(!) acre or more, the Applicant shall:
1. Prepare an Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map (ERSAM) showing
environmentally sensitive areas including, but not limited to, steep slopes,
ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, vernal pools, flood plains,
stream buffer zones, hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas conducive to
· infiltration), special geologic features, any existing recharge areas and any
other requirements outlined in the municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
2. Establish appropriate buffers for each of the delineated environmentally
sensitive areas per all applicable Township Ordinance (See Section 306.D. for
stream buffers and Section 305.K for special geologic feature buffers).
3. Prepare a draft project layout avoiding, to the maximum extent practicable,
sensitive areas identified in Section 304.B. l.
4. Identify site specific existing conditions drainage areas, discharge points,
recharge areas and hydrologic soil groups A and B.
5. Evaluate Nonstructural Stormwater Management Alternatives that:
a. Minimize earth disturbance
b. Minimize impervious surfaces
c. Break up large impervious surfaces.
Township of_Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
24 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
' I
--1 I
6.
7.
Satisfy infiltration objective (Section 305) and provide for stormwater
pretreatment prior to infiltration. Pretreatment may not be necessary for
rooftop runoff which enters the infiltration facility directly from a roofleader.
Satisfy water quality (Section 306) and streambank erosion protection
objective (Section 307).
8. Determine what Management District the site falls into (Appendix D) and
conduct an existing conditions runoff analysis.
9. Prepare a final project design to maintain existing conditions drainage areas
and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance and impervious surfaces,
and to the maximum extent possible, to ensure the remaining site
development has no surface or point discharge.
10. Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final design and
to meet the release rate and in tum the overbank flow and extreme event
requirements (Section 308).
11. Manage any remaining runoff through treatment prior to discharge, as part of
detention, bioretention, direct discharge or other structural control.
Section 305. Ground Water Recharge (Infiltration/Recharge/Bioretention)
Maximizing the ground water recharge capacity of the area being developed is required.
Design of the infiltration stormwater management facilities shall give consideration to
providing ground water recharge to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that
occurs when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. These
measures are required to be consistent with Section 103, and take advantage of utilizing any
existing recharge areas.
Infiltration may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations such as soil type.
If it cannot be physically accomplished due to seasonal high water table, soil permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances from special. geologic features, then the design
professional shall be responsible to show that this cannot be physically accomplished. If the
applicant seeks relief due to site-specific limitations, the Township has the right to hire an
independent professional, at the applicant's expense, to assess the applicant's claim. ifit can
be physically accomplished, then the volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined
from Sections 305.A.3 depending on demonstrated site conditions and shall be the greater of
the two volumes.
A. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Infiltration Requirements:
Townshi_p of Cumru Stonnwater Manage1nent Ordinance
GVC File 3022-06&
25 Issued Januaiy 4, 2010 Rev. I
a. Regulated activ1t1es will be required to infiltrate, where site
conditions permit, a portion of the runoff created by the development
as part of an overall stormwater management plan designed for the
site. The volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from
Sections 305.A.3.a. or 305.A.3.b, depending upon demonstrated site
conditions.
2. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall be
selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be
constructed on soils that have the following characteristics:
a. A minimum depth of24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and
the limiting zone.
b. An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept the
additional stormwater load and drain completely as determined by
field tests conducted by the Applicant's design professional.
c. The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
required retention (infiltration) volume within 4 days (96 hours).
d. Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
3. The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the following volume
criteria:
a. NRCS Curve Number equation.
The NRCS runoff equation shall be utilized to calculate infiltration
requirements (I) in inches.
I I (Infiltration requirement, in inches)= (200 I CN) - 2 Eqn: 305.1
Where:
CN = SCS (NRCS) curve number of existing conditions contributing
to the infiltration facility.
This equation is displayed graphically in, and the infiltration
requirement can be determined from Figure 305.1.
It has been determined that infiltrating 0.46 inches of runoff from the
impervious areas will aid in maintaining the hydro logic regime of the
watershed. However, the rounded number 0.5 inches will be used.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
26 Issued January"4, 2010 Rev. I
I d I
I
'2 3.5
~
~ 3 ~ ..... c:
Cl) 2.5
E
.C.l.) 2
::I
O" Cl) 1.5 c:::
c: 1 0
:;::;
...!.'..i..i 0.5
i+: c: 0
,------
Required Infiltration (I) in inches by NRCS CN
+H--i-1
- :-:TTll-hH-1~.-;.I-;-;
_! -! ·riT 1 :t=!-tt-r·, 1-+-+-1--f
40 45 50 55
-- _ _I I ..
60 65 70
•'
75 80
SCS Curve Number (CN)
• •
85 90
•
' •-.
95 100
Figure 305.1. Infiltration requirement based upon NRCS Curve Number.
The retention (infiltration) volume (Re,) required to meet the
infiltration requirement would therefore be computed as:
Rev = (0.5 or I, whichever is greater)* proposed impervious area
(square feet)/(12 in/ft) = Cubic Feet
Eqn: 305.2
Where:
I= infiltration requirements (in inches.)
b. Annual Recharge - Water Budget Approach.
·If the goals of Sections 305.A.3.a cannot be achieved, then 0.5 inches
of rainfall shall be infiltrated from at! impervious areas, up to an
existing site conditions curve number of 81. Above a curve number of
81, Equation 305.1 or the curve in Figure 305.1 should be used to
determine the infiltration requirement.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
27 Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. I
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) required agam would
therefore be computed as:
Rev= (0.5 or I, whichever is greater)* impervious area (sq.ft.) I (12in/ft) =Cubic
Feet.
B. Soils - A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required where
practicable to determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified design professional, and at a minimum, address soil
permeability, depth to bedrock and subgrade stability. The Township Engineer shall
be notified a minimum of two (2) working days prior to the site evaluation so that the
evaluation may be witnessed by the Township Engineer or its designee. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
1. Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made features
within the site to determine general areas of suitability for infiltration
practices. In areas where development on fill material is under consideration,
conduct geotechnical investigations of sub-grade stability; infiltration is not
permitted to be ruled out without conducting these tests.
2 Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or hydraulic conductivity
tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface) to determine the
appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate. Percolation tests are not
recommended for design purposes.
3. Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev) volume based
on field determined capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration surface.
4. If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the Applicant's design
professional, it must be demonstrated to the Township of Cumru that the soils
are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
C. Carbonate Areas - The Applicant is required to investigate the ability of all areas on
the site which are not underlain by carbonate rock to meet the infiltration
requirements of Section 305.A. If this investigation proves infeasible, infiltration can
occur on areas underlain by carbonate rock by following the recommended procedure
below in conjunction with Figure B-1 in Ordinance Appendix B. However, the
Applicant is not required to use infiltration in carbonate areas even if the site falls into
the "Recommended" range on Figure B-1 in Ordinance Appendix B. If infiltration is
not proposed, the calculated infiltration volume (Section 305.A) shall be treated by a
facility which prevents the required volume of runoff from being discharged off-site.
Acceptable methods for treating this volume are storage and reuse, bio-retention, wet
ponds, and soil composting. Other methods may be acceptable and all methods
should generally follow the design guidelines outlined in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practice Manual, latest edition.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
28 lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in Figure B-1 in Ordinance Appendix B
shall be calculated as follows:
(
Area tributary to the infiltration BMP) * 1
OO%
Base Area of the infiltration BMP
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as follows:
Area Description
All disturbed area to be made impervious
All disturbed areas to be made pervious
All undisturbed impervious areas
All undisturbed pervious areas
Weighting
100%
50%
100%
0%
Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed infiltration BMP.
The effective soil thickness in Figure B-1 in Ordinance Appendix B is the measured
soil thickness multiplied by the thickness factor based on soil permeability, as
follows:
Permeability Range
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hr
2.0 to 6.0 inches I hr
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hr
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hr
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hr
Thickness Factor
0.8
1.0
1.4
1.2
1.0
The design of all facilities over Karst shall include an evaluation of measures to
minimize adverse effects.
D. Stormwater Hotspots - Following is a list of examples of designated stormwater
hotspots. If a site is designated as a storm water hotspot, it has important implications
for how stormwater is managed. First and foremost, untreated stormwater runoff
from hotspots shall not be allowed to recharge into groundwater where it may
contaminate water supplies. Therefore, the Rev requirement shall NOT be applied to
development sites that fit into the hotspot category (i.e., the entire WQv must· still be
treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment shall be considered at
hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after construciion. It shall be noted that
EPA's NPDES stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and
implement a storm water pollution prevention plan.
Examples of Stormwater Hotspots:
• Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities
• Vehicle fueling stations
• Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
29 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
• Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities
•Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)
•Industrial sites (based on Standard Industrial Codes)
•Marinas (service and maintenance)
; Outdoor liquid container storage
• Outdoor loading/unloading facilities
• Public works storage areas
• Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials
• Commercial container nursery
• Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate review authority
The following land uses and activities are not normally considered Stormwater
Hotspots:
• Residential streets and rural highways
• Residential development
• Institutional development
• Office developments
•Non-industrial rooftops
• Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries (which may need an Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) Plan).
While large highways (i.e., those roads with average daily traffic volume (ADT)
greater than 30,000) are not designated as a stormwater hotspot; it is important to
ensure that highway stormwater management plans adequately protect groundwater.
E. Caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in Source Water Protection
Areas as defined by the Township of Cumru or Water Authority.
F. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative or traditional
stormwater control facilities that are found within the PaDEP State BMP Manual.
G. Caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (e.g., municipal salt storage) would
be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may contaminate the
groundwater. The qualified design professional shall evaluate the possibility of
groundwater contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and perform a
hydrogeologic justification study if necessary.
H. The infiltration requirement in High Quality or Exceptional Value waters shall be
subject to the Department's Chapter 93 Antidegradation Regulations.
I. Dependent upon certain land use or stormwater hotspots, an impermeable liner will
be required in detention basins where the possibility of groundwater contamination
exists. Applicant may be required to submit a detailed hydrogeologic investigation
for review and approval by the Township of Cumru.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
30 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
" ~ '
J. The Township of Cumru shall require the Applicant to provide safeguards against
groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination
should there be a mishap or spill.
K. For projects that disturb one (1) acre or more, unless a stricter setback is otherwise
specified in the Zoning Ordinance, the following minimum setback requirements for
infiltration facilities shall apply:
•. 100 feet from water supply wells
• 10 feet downslope or 100 feet upslope from building foundations
• 50 feet from septic system drainfields
• 50 feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock, unless a
preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to show the
absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed
infiltration area;
• 100 feet from the property line unless documentation is provided to show
all setbacks from wells, foundations and drainfields on the neighboring
property will be met.
Section 306. Water Quality Requirements
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of this Article.
A Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities necessary to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration volume computed under
Section 305 may be a component of the water quality volume if the Applicant
chooses to manage both components in a single facility. If the infiltration volume is
less than the water quality volume, the remaining water quality volume may be
captured and treated by methods other than infiltration BMPs. The required water
quality volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to capture and treat a portion
of storm water runoff from the developed areas of the site.
To achieve this goal, the following criterion is established:
The following calculation formula is to be used to determine the water quality
storage volume, (WQv), in acre-feet of storage for the Schuylkill River and
Conestoga River watersheds:
Eqn: 306.1
v ater ua 1ty o ume acre- eet
P = I inch (Schuylkill River Watershed)
P = 1.2 inches (Conestoga River Watershed)
A= Total contributing drainage area to the water quality BMP (acres)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(!) where I is the percent of the area that is impervious surface
((impervious area/Tributary Area)* 100)
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
31 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
B.
C.
D.
This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent volume of a wet
basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the facility shall provide
for protection from clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
For areas within defined Special Protection subwatersheds which include
Exceptional Value (EV) and High Quality (HQ) waters, and Cold Water Fishery
(CWF), the temperature and quality of water and streams shall be maintained.
To accomplish the above, the Applicant shall use innovative or traditional
stormwater control facilities that are found within the P ADEP BMP Manual.
If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the applicant shall create
a stream buffer extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet to either side of the top-ofbfilik
of the channel. The buffer area shall be maintained with appropriate native
vegetation (Reference to Appendix H of Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Area for plant lists). If the applicable rear or
side yard setback is less than fifty (50) feet, the buffer width may be reduced to
twenty-five (25) percent of the required setback, to a minimum often (10) feet, at the
discretion of the Township after consideration of the water quality rating of the
stream in question and the need to protect it. If an existing buffer is legally
prescribed (i.e. deed, covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of
this Ordinance, the existing buffer shall be maintained. The Township of Cumru
may permit a smaller or larger buffer width if desired, but the buffer width may not
be less than ten (1 O') feet. This does not include lakes, wetlands, or permitted
stream crossing.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance activities from
the appropriate PaDEP regional office must be provided to the Township of Cumru.
The issuance of an NPDES Construction Permit (or permit coverage under the
statewide General Permit (PAG-2) satisfies the requirements of Section 306.A.
Section 307. Streambank Erosion Requirements
In addition to control of the water quality volume, in order to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on downstream streambank erosion, the primary requirement is to design
a BMP to detain the proposed conditions 2-year, 24-hour design storm to the existing
conditions I-year peak flow using the SCS Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions
shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the
proposed condition I-year storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility,
measured from a point where the maximum volume of water from the I-year .storm is
captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of
water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the
invert of the facility).
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
32 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be a three (3) inch
diameter orifice and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. On sites with .
contributing drainage areas to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to allow
a 24-hour attenuation with the 3 inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing
this condition. Orifice sizes less than 3 inches can be utilized, provided that the design will
prevent clogging of the intake.
Section 308. Stormwater Management Districts
A. Schuylkill River Watershed
1. The Schuylkill River Watershed has been divided into stormwater
management districts as shown on the Management District Map in
Appendix D.
In addition to the requirements specified in Table 308.1 below, the
groundwater recharge (Section 305), water quality (Section 306), and
streambank eros10n control (Section 307), requirements shall be
implemented.
Standards for managing runoff rates from each subarea in the Schuylkill
River Watershed for the 2-year through 100-year design storms are shown in
Table 308.1. Development sites located in each of the Districts must control
proposed conditions runoff rates to existing conditions runoff rates for the
design storms in accord with Table 308.1.
Township of Cumru Stom1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
33 Issued January 4. 2010 Rev. I
I
-1
i
TABLE 308.1- Water Quantity Requirements
Management Proposed Condition Design
Existing
Condition
District Storm
Desi1m Storm
2-year * 1-year *
5- year 5-year
A
10-year
Reduce To
IO-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
JOO-year 100-vear
2-year * I-year*
5-year 2-year
B
IO-year
Reduce To
5-year
25-year IO-year
50-year 25-year
JOO-year 50-year
2-year * I-year*
5-year 5-year
c IO-year
Reduce To
10-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
* SCS Method may be used for 2-year to I-year reduction calculation in accordance
with stream bank erosion criteria.
All areas, regardless of the release rate, must still meet the requirements of the
groundwater recharge criteria (Section 305), water quality criteria (Section 306),
and streambank erosion criteria (Section 307).
2. General - Proposed condition rates of i;unoff from any regulated activity shall
not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development for the
design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District Watershed
Map (Ordinance Appendix D) and Section 308 of this Ordinance.
3. District Boundaries - The boundaries of the Stormwater Management
Districts are shown on the Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan that is available for inspection at the municipal office. A
copy of the Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan at a reduced scale is included in the Ordinance Appendix D. The exact
location of the Stormwater Management District boundaries as they apply to
a given development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries
using the twocfoot topographic contours (or most accurate data required)
provided as part of the Drainage Plan.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
34 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
I
--I
I
4. Sites Located in More Than One District - For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet the
Management District Criteria for which the discharge is located, as indicated
in Section 308. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of
whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception
to the above may be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine
in proximity to the discharge site. In this case, peak discharge in any direction
shall follow Management District A criteria provided that the overall site
discharge meets the Management District Criteria for which the discharge is
located.
5. Off-Site Areas - Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subj eel to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak
runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
6. Site Areas - Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development
activity is less than fifty (50) percent of the total site area, only the proposed
impact area shall be subject to the Management District Criteria. In other
words, unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater management facilities
would not be subject to the Management District Criteria.
B. Conestoga River Watershed
1. General
The following general standards shall be applied to all development within the
Conestoga River Watershed to promote flow attenuation, erosion and
sediment control and flood control.
a. The developer of any development site in the Conestoga River
Watershed which does not fall under the exemption criteria in Section
402 shall submit a Storm Water Management Site plan consistent with
the Conestoga River Watershed Act 167 Plan to the Municipality for
review. The exemption criteria in Section 402 shall apply to the total
proposed development on a parent tract even if development is lo take
place in stages. Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone
shall be assumed to be impervious.
b. All storm water management site plans shall be designed and certified
by individuals registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
qualified to perform such duties based on education and training in
hydrology and hydraulics.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
35 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
!
i
~'
g. Storm water runoff from a Development Site shall flow directly into a
natural drainageway, watercourse, or into an existing storm sewer
system, or onto adjacent properties in a manner similar to the runoff
characteristics of the pre-development flow. Maximum use shall be
made of the existing on-site natural and man-made storm water
management facilities.
h. Storm water runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another unless they are sub-watersheds of a common watershed which
join together within the perimeter of the Development Site, or the
effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge (in conformance
with the requirements of the Act 167 Plan) onto adjacent lands, or
drainage easements from the affected landowners are provided.
1. All storm water runoff flowing over the Development Site shall be
considered in the design of the storm water management facilities.
J. In accordance with Chapter 102, temporary facilities shall be included
in the submitted plans for a phased section where the following
conditions are met:
1. A regulated activity constitutes a Subdivision or Land
Development.
11. The Final Plan applications are submitted in sections.
111. Temporary facilities are required for construction of a section.
2. Match Pre-existing Hydrograph
Developers and/or landowners are encouraged to provide infiltration facilities
or utilize other techniques which will allow the post-development hydrograph
to match the pre-existing hydrograph, along all parts of the hydrograph, for
the development site. To match the pre-existing hydrograph means that it is
not to be exceeded at all points in time. This option is most feasible for small
subdivisions in areas of non-carbonate geology. "Groundwater Recharge" and
"Water Quality" volumes as given in Sections 305 and 306 can be used as part
of this option.
3. Detention/Infiltration Standards (only if existing hydro graph cannot be
matched)
a. Post-development rates of runoff from any regulated activity shall not
exceed a given percentage of the peal< rate of runoff prior to
development for all design storms unless the pre-existing hydrograph
Township of Cu1nru Storrnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 30:!2-06&
36 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
~ I
b.
is not exceeded at all points in time. The percentage of the predevelopment
peak rate which may be released is known as the "release
rate". The areas of the watershed for which a certain release rate
applies can be found in Appendix D, "Conestoga River Subwatershed
Boundary Map".
Innovative methods for the control of storm water runoff are
encouraged. Various combinations of methods should be tailored to
suit the particular requirements of the type of development and the
topographic features of the Development Site. The following is a
partial listing of detention and control methods which can be utilized
in storm water management systems where appropriate:
i. Detention basins
11. Retention basins (subject to prior municipal approval)
ni. Rooftop detention
1v. Parking lot storage
v. Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures
vi. Concrete lattice block surfaces
v11. Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
Vlll. Cisterns and underground reservoirs
1x. Routed flow over grass
x. Decreased impervious surface coverage
xi. Bio-retention areas (rain gardens)
x11. Other methods as may be found in the "Pennsylvania
Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing
Areas", the "Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual", or equivalent.
4. Sub-Regional (Combined Development Site) Storage Runoff can be managed
regionally by one or more developers, either on-site or off-site. The design
and release rate shall be consistent with the Conestoga River Act 167 Plan.
"Groundwater Recharge" and "Water Quality" volumes as described in
Sections 305 and 306 will be a part of this option.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
37 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
~ I
Section 309. Calculation Methodology
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of greater than
200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted calculation technique that is
based on the NRCS soil cover complex method. Table 309-1 summarizes acceptable
computation methods and the method selected by the design professional shall be
based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The Rational Method shall be used to estimate peak discharges from drainage
areas that contain less than 200 acres. The Soil Complex Method shall be used for
drainage areas greater than 200 acres.
TABLE 309-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies For
Stormwater Management Plans
METHOD
TR-20
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-20)
TR-55
(or commercial computer
package based on TR-55)
HEC-1 I HEC-HMS
PSRM
Rational Method
or commercial computer
package based on Rational
Method)
Other Methods
METHOD DEVELOPED
BY
USDANRCS
USDANRCS
US Army Corps of
Engineers
Penn State University
Emil Kuichling(l 889)
Varies
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
38
APPLICABILITY
Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary.
Applicable for land development
plans within limitations
described in TR-55.
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary.
Applicable where use of a
hydrolo gic computer model is
desirable or necessary; simpler
than TR-20 or HEC-1.
For sites less than 200 acres and
with time of concentratic;m less
than 60 minutes (tc< 60 min), or
as approved by the Township of
Cumru and/or Township
Engineer
Other computation
methodologies approved by the
Township of Cumru and/or
Township Engineer.
Issued January 4,2010 Rev. l
* Note: Successors to the above methods are also acceptable. These successors
include WINNTR55 for TR55 and WINTR20 for TR20 and SWMM.
B. All calculations consistent with this Ordinance using the soil cover complex method
shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
according to the region in which they are located as presented in Table B-1 in
Appendix B of this Ordinance. If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or
HEC-1 I HEC-HMS is used for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours. The rainfall distribution should reference to NOAA Atlas
14.
C. For the purposes of existing conditions flow rate determination, undeveloped land
and redeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition, unless the
natural ground cover has a Curve Number or Rational 'C' value (i.e., forest) lower
than that for meadow, as listed in Table B-1 or B-2 in Appendix B of this Ordinance.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent
with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow and return periods from
the NOAA Atlas 14 Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States (2004,
revised 2006). Times-of-concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using
the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times-ofconcentration
for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's
equation. NRCS lag equation divided by 0.6 as acceptable method for Tc in
undeveloped areas.
E. Time of concentration shalt be based on the following design parameters:
I. Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or overland flow
before shallow concentrated or open channel flow develops is one hundred
fifty (150) feet. The maximum construction phase and post-development
sheet flow length for unpaved surfaces shalt be one hundred (100) feet for
most situations (one hundred fifty (150) feet for areas which will remain
undisturbed).
2. Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time for shallow concentrated flow shall
be determined using Figure 3-1 from TR-55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, as shown in Appendix B6.
3. Open Channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow concentrated flows
concentrate in field depressions, swales, gutters, curbs, or pipe collection
systems, the travel times and downstream end of the development site
between these design points shall be based upon manning's Equation and/or
acceptable engineering design standards as determined by the Township
Engineer.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
39 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
F. Runoff Curve Numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in
the soil cover complex method shall be obtained from Table B-1 in Appendix B of
this Ordinance.
G. Runoff coefficients ( c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use in the
Rational method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Appendix B of this Ordinance.
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's equation shall be used for
hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open channels, pipes, and
storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent
with Table B-3 in Appendix B of the Ordinance. Full flow shall be assumed for
closed conduits.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be designed to meet the
performance standards of this Ordinance using any generally accepted hydraulic
analysis technique or method.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the performance
standards of this Ordinance shall be verified by routing the design storm hydro graph
through these facilities using the Storage-Indication Method. For drainage areas
greater than 200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using
a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph (i.e. TR-20, TR-55, HEC-1,
PSRM). The Township of Cumru may approve the use of any generally accepted
full hydro graph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full hydro graph.
K. During the construction progression of a project, the discharge of stormwater runoff
from the site may follow distinct patterns that will be altered during the course of the
construction. In such an event, the comparison of the construction phase discharge
rate to the pre-development rate shall be performed for eacp separate and distinct
pattern. At no time throughout the construction phase of a project shall the peak
discharge rate discharging from any location along the boundary ofa site exceed the
pre-development peak discharge rate at that location.
L. Where applicable, construction phase and post-development time of concentration to
a storage facility shall be the time of concentration in the storm sewer to its point of
discharge into the storage facility. Overland flow from the discharge point to the
outlet structure shall not be included in the time of concentration. ·
M. When designing regional storage facilities for office parks, industrial parks, etc., the
following design criteria shall be followed:
I. Assumed impervious, lawn, etc., coverage areas shall be noted in the
calculations for each lot which will drain to the storage facility. Impervious
coverage shall be assumed to be the maximum coverage allowed by the
Zoning Ordinance.
Township ofCu1nru Stom1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
40 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
~ I
2. A six (6.0) minute time of concentration shall be used to calculate the postdevelopment
basin inflow hydrographs (five (5.0) minutes for the Rational
Method). Longer times of concentration shall be allowed for the portions of
the drainage area that will remain undeveloped or where it can be
demonstrated that longer times will occur in the developed area after full
potential development occurs. The hydrographs for the developed and
undeveloped portions of the drainage area shall be combined prior to routing
through the stormwater facility.
3. For Jots which will have on Jot detention or retention basins, the predevelopment
time of concentration for the Jot shall be the same as the predevelopment
time of concentration for the entire pre-development drainage
area in which it is located.
Section 310. Design Criteria for Stormwater Management and Conveyance BMPs
A. General Regulations
1. Applicants may select a combination of runoff control techniques that are
most suitable to control stormwater runoff from the site. All controls shall be
subject to approval of the Township of Cumru. The Township Engineer may
request specific information on design and/or operating features of the
proposed stormwater controls in order to determine their suitability and
adequacy in terms of the standards of this Section, which must be promptly
submitted by the Applicant.
2. The Applicant shall consider the effect of the proposed stormwater
management techniques on any special soil conditions or geological hazards
that may exist on the development site. In the event such conditions are
identified on the site, the Township Engineer may require in-depth studies by
a Geotechnical Engineer.
3. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures), water encroachments, and any work involving
wetlands governed by PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or
replaced from time to time by PaDEP), are subject to PaDEP Chapter 105
regulations.
4. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at
all points of discharge (DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual).
5. The Township of Cumru reserves the right to deny or reject any design that
would result in the creation, exacerbation, or continuation of a stormwater
problem area.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
41 Issued January 4, 20 l 0 Rev. I
B. Detention and Retention Basins
Any BMP that is a dam, as defined in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, shall be designed
"according to the requirements in those regulations. Any stormwater BMP that does
not constitute a dam under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, but is designed to store runoff
and requires a berm or earthen embankment (i.e. detention basin), shall be designed
to comply with the following:
1. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic minimization controls
consistent with the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix F.
2. No stormwater detention facility shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of a
special geologic feature. No stormwater conveyance facility shall be
constructed within fifty (50) feet of a special geologic feature unless it is
constructed of durable pipe utilizing watertight joints.
3. Privately owned detention facilities and BMPs shall be situated such that Jot
lines do not divide the facility. Maintenance of an individual facility shall be
the responsibility of only one lot owner unless the facility is located in a
common area maintained by a homeowner's association.
4. Basins with earthen embankments shall be designed with an emergency
spillway that has capacity and stability to accommodate the 1 OD-year postdevelopment
hydrograph in a manner that will not damage the integrity of the
facility and will not create a downstream hazard. Emergency spillway design
shall assume that all other basin outlets are non-functional. Where practical,
the emergency spillway shall be constructed in undisturbed ground, and
locations in fill should be avoided. Regardless of location, appropriate
stabilization measures shall be provided and the use of a concrete spillway
maybe required in areas where it is constructed in fill.
5. The height of the embankment shall be designed to provide a minimum 1.0
foot of freeboard above the maximum elevation computed when the 100-year
peak post-development flow passes through the emergency spillway.
Embankment heights shall not exceed 15 feet, unless approved by the
Township of Cumru.
6. The minimum top width of earthen embankments shall be equal to threefourths
(3/4) of the embankment height, but in no case shall the top width be
Jess than eight feet (8').
7. Side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical.
Interior and exterior embankment side slopes shall not be greater than three
(3) horizontal to one (1) vertical. Depending upon the location and the
intended use of the detention facilities during nonfunctioning times, a side
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC Fi!e 3022-068
42 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
-i I
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
slope of less than three (3) horizontal to one(!) vertical may be required by
the Board of Commissioners. When a detention basin is to be maintained by a
future residential lot owner, the maximum side slope shall be four (4)
horizontal to one (I) vertical.
All pipes, conduits, etc. passing through basin embankments shall have
properly spaced concrete anti-seep collars. Minimum collar projection
beyond the pipe shall be two feet (2'), maximum collar spacing is 14 times the
projection, and the minimum thickness shall be twelve (12) inches. The joint
between collar and pipe shall be watertight.
Where the outfall point of a proposed detention facility is located at_ a point
subject to tailwater conditions, a tailwater elevation at the outfall point shall
be calculated and considered when performing the detention facility routing
calculations. The tailwater elevation shall be based on the frequency of the
storm being routed.
A key trench at least two (2) feet deep, or extending down to stable subgrade,
whichever is deeper, of compacted relatively impervious material (Unified
Soil Classification CL or ML) shall be provided within all basin
embankments. The minimum bottom width for the key trench shall be four
( 4) feet. Maximum side slopes for the key trench shall be one (1) horizontal to
one (1) vertical shall extend the full length of the embankment. A compacted
impervious core at least four ( 4) feet wide at the top, having a maximum side
slope of one (I) horizontal to one (1) vertical, shall extend for the full length
of the embankment, and the top elevation shall be set at the 25-year design
year water surface elevation.
All basins shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed of durable
materials. The completed structure and the foundation of all basins shall be
stable under all probable conditions of operation. Embankments shall be
placed in maximum eight-inch (8") lifts to a minimum of 95 percent of
maximum dry density, established by ASTM D-1557. Compaction test results
shall be provided to the Township of Cumru upon request. Embankments
shall be constructed a minimum of six inches ( 6") above design elevations to
allow for settlement.
All basins not including Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality Volume
shall include an outlet structure to permit draining the basin to a completely
dry condition within twenty-four (24) hours following the end of the design
rainfall.
All discharge control devices (outlet structures) with appurtenances (except
discharge pipes) shall be made of reinforced concrete and stainless or hot dip
galvanized steel. Bolts/fasteners and any orifice plates are to be stainless or
galvanized steel. Outlet barrels/pipes shall have a minimum diameter of
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinruice
GVC File 3022-06&
43 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
14.
15.
16.
fifteen (15) inches and shall be made of reinforced concrete pipe with
watertight joints, or approved equivalent. Where installation conditions merit,
structural calculations that address the actual design requirements will be
required .
. All basins employing small orifices (i.e., orifices less than six (6) inches
diameter or equivalent area), shall be provided with an apron of concrete or
similar durable material which abuts the orifice invert and extends a minimum
of eighteen (18) inches in all directions from the orifice, to prevent potential
blockage by vegetative growth or debris, and to allow for easy cleaning of the
area approaching the orifice. Appropriate trash racks are required for all
orifice openings.
All outlet structures in above ground detention/retention basin shall have the
top of grate set at least three (3) inches lower than the invert of the emergency
spillway to allow discharge through the outlet structure and associated outlet
barrel/pipes prior to discharge through the emergency spillway.
Outlet structures for underground detention facilities shall be provided within
a reinforced concrete junction box or inlet box. Flows through the outlet
structure shall be attenuated with a concrete weir wall with adequately sized
orifices. The dimensions of the weir wall should be designed to allow passage
of the 100-year post-development inflow without surcharging the junction
box.
17. Underground detention facilities that propose pipe/culvert storage as a means
of detention shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or smooth-lined
corrugated high-density polyethylene pipe (HDPE) with watertight joints
meeting ASTM D-3212. Where installation conditions merit, structural
calculations that address the actual design requirements will be required.
18. Underground detention and infiltration facilities utilizing pipe, box culverts
or chambers as the means of storage and located in areas receiving vehicular
traffic shall be designed to carry earth dead and AASHTO HS20 live load
conditions. Under warranted conditions AASHTO HS25 shall be the design
live load.
19. Low flow channels shall be provided from each water carrying facility to the
outlet structure for all basins that do not include Groundwater Recharge
and/or Water Quality Storage. Low flow channels shall be one (!) percent
minimum slope and shall be designed to enable ease of maintenance. All
basins that do include Groundwater Recharge and/or Water Quality storage
shall not be required to have a low flow channel.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
44 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
I
~
20. The mm1mum slope within a basin that does not include Groundwater
Recharge and/or Water Quality storage shall be two (2) percent positive grade
to the low flow channel.
2']. The effect on downstream areas if the basin embankment fails shall be
considered in the design of all basins. The basin shall be designed to
minimize the potential damage caused by such failure of the embankment.
22. All structures (detention basins, cisterns, etc.) other than those used for
Groundwater Recharge Volume, Water Quality Volume and streambank
erosion protection, must completely drain within 24 hours after the end of the
design storm.
23. Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by limestone, a
geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to determine
susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all facilities over
limestone formations shall include measures to prevent groundwater
contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole formation. Soils used for the
construction of basins shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors). The
Township of Cumru may require the installation of an impermeable liner in
detention basins.
24. Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a basin,
other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance systems where ponding
may occur shall be two (2) feet above the 100-year water surface. If basement
or underground facilities are proposed, detailed calculations addressing the
effects of storrnwater ponding on the structure and water-proofing and/or
flood-proofing design information shall be submitted for approval.
25. In addition to the above, Wet Ponds shall generally be designed in
accordance with the design parameters as found in the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Pennsylvania Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, latest edition and the following:
a. Water surface area shall not exceed 1/10 of the tributary drainage area,
b. Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion froin wave
action.
c. Minimum normal water depth shall be 4 feet. If fish are to be used to
keep the pond clean, a minimum of 1/4 of the pond area shall be a
minimum of 10 feet deep.
d. Facilities shall be provided to allow the pond level to be lowered by
gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC Fi!e 3022..068
45 Issued January 4, 20 J 0 Rev. I
I
~
e. Aeration facilities as may be required to prevent pond stagnation shall
be provided. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of
these aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans.
Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration
facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the Township of
Cumru.
f. In the event that the water surface of the pond is to be raised for the
purposes of storing water for irrigation or in anticipation of the
evapotranspiration demands of dry weather, the volume remaining for
storage of excess stormwater runoff shall still be sufficient to contain
the design year storm runoff.
C. Stormwater Collection and Conveyance Systems: Gutters, inlets, pipes, conduits,
swales, ditches and any other means for collecting and/or conveying stormwater shall
be designed to comply with the following:
1. All storm sewer pipes, culverts and bridges (excluding detention and retention
basin outfall structures), gutters and swales conveying water originating only
from within the boundaries of the development site shall be designed for a
twenty-five (25) year storm event. All storm sewer pipes, culverts and bridges
(excluding detention and retention basin outfall structures) conveying water
originating from off-site shall be designed for a fifty (50) year storm event.
Facilities that convey runoff to stormwater management facilities (e.g.,
detention basins, etc.) shall be designed for the I 00-year storm event, unless
adequate alternate means for conveying 100-year flow to the facilities are
provided. Drainage easements having widths no less than 20 feet shall be
provided to contain and convey the 100-year frequency flood throughout the
development site. Easements shall begin at the furthest upstream property line
of the proposed development site in a watershed.
2. When designing storm sewers that discharge into a detention/retention facility,
a tailwater condition at the storm sewer discharge point shall be considered
where applicable. The tailwater elevation shall be equal to the detention
facility water surface elevation resulting from the design storm that was used
to design the storm sewer.
3. Water obstructions shall convey runoff from the 25-year design storm with a
minimum of 2.0 feet of free board measured below the lowest point along the
top of the roadway, without damage to the drainage structure or the roadway,
unless more restrictive local, state and/or federal regulations apply. A
concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within
an existing watercourse or otherwise an easement and appropriate agreements
shall be required.
Township of Cumru Storn1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022·068
46 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
: -1 '
4. Storm sewer pipes, to be constructed within the right-of-way of existing
streets or streets offered for dedication to the Township of Cumru, other than
those used as roof drains, detention basin underdrains, and street subbase
underdrains, shall have a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches and be
Class III reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). RCP joints shall have pre-lubed 0-
ring gaskets. Water-tight specification is required in areas of carbonate
geology and elsewhere as may be specified by the Township. Where
installation conditions merit (e.g., deep fills), structural calculations that
address the actual design requirements will be required.
5. Storm sewer pipes, to be constructed on private property or streets not offered
for dedication to the Township of Cumru, other than those used as roof drains,
detention basin underdrains, and street subbase underdrains, shall have a
minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches and be Class III reinforced concrete
pipe (RCP) or smooth-lined corrugated high-density polyethylene pipe
(HDPE). Corrugated metal pipe is not permitted. HDPE pipe joints shall be
silt-tight at a minimum (e.g., ADS N-12 ST/IB, or equal), and RCP joints shall
have pre-lubed 0-ring gaskets. Water-tight specification is required in areas
of carbonate geology and elsewhere as may be specified by the Township.
Where installation conditions merit (e.g., deep fills), structural calculations
that address the actual design requirements will be required.
6. Storm sewer pipes and culverts shall be installed on sufficient slopes to
provide a minimum velocity of three (3) feet per second when flowing full;
however, a minimum slope of not less than 0.005 ft/ft shall be provided.
7. Storm sewers shall be placed within in the cartway of curbed streets and
parallel to the road shoulders of streets without curbs. At curbed street
intersections, inlets shall be placed on the tangent and not on the curved
portion of the curbing. Storm sewer crossings of streets shall be perpendicular
to the street centerline to the maximum extent practicable.
8. Storm facilities not located within a public right-of-way shall be contained in
and centered within an easement not less than 20 feet wide. Easements shall
follow property boundaries where possible.
9. Manning "n" values used for design of pipes and culverts shall be in
accordance with generally accepted engineering practice. Adequate
documentation shall be provided in support of the chosen values.
10. All storm sewer pipe and culverts shall have a minimum cover of 18 inches.
Embedment for all storm sewer pipe and culverts shall consist of AASHTO
No. 8 (IB) aggregate from a minimum of six (6) inches of bedding beneath
the pipe, to a minimum of 12 inches over the pipe. Aggregate requirements
for street construction shall take precedence over the lB specification, but in
no case shall total aggregate cover over the pipe be less than 12 inches.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
47 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
l
I
~
\
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
Compaction shall be in conformance with manufacturer's specifications.
PennDOT 2A aggregate placed in eight (8) inches lifts and compacted to 95
percent of maximum dry density, as per PennDOT Publication 408, latest
edition, shall complete the trench to pavement subgrade. Compaction test
results shall be provided to the Township of Cumru upon request. Select
backfill shall complete the trench to topsoil layer in grassed areas.
Curves, tees, elbows and wyes are not permitted in pipes other than those used
as roof drains, detention basin underdrains, and street subbase underdrains.
Manholes or inlets are required to facilitate such configurations.
Manholes and inlets shall not be spaced more than 400 feet apart for pipes
with diameters of 24 inches and less, and not more than 500 feet apart for
pipes of greater diameter. Ladder rungs shall be placed in manholes and inlets
with depths exceeding five feet (5').
When there is a change in the pipe size in a manhole or inlet, the elevations of
the top of the pipes shall be the same, or the smaller pipe(s) higher. A
minimum drop of one-tenth foot (0.1 ') shall be provided from the inlet invert
elevation(s) to the outlet invert elevation.
Manholes, inlets, headwalls, endwalls and end sections proposed for
dedication or located along streets or subject to vehicular traffic, shall
conform to the requirements of PennDOT, or to specifications as otherwise
modified by the Township of Cumru. Manhole covers shall have the word
"STORM" cast clearly on the lid.
Inlets along curbed streets shall be spaced to limit gutter spread to maximum
of one half of the width of the travel lane during a I 0-year storm. Inlet
capacities and by-pass calculations shall be determined by PennDOT design
techniques.
All proposed inlets within curbed streets shall be designed such that the top of
grate elevations are equal to the top of base course elevation to permit proper
drainage of the streets prior to wearing .course placement.
Inlets shall be located at curb tangents on the uphill side of street intersections
and at other locations as may be required by the Township as necessary to
intercept runoff. Design and location of curb inlets shall be in accordance
with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Design Manual Part 2 and be
approved by the Township Engineer.
Storm sewer inlets proposed to be sumped shall be a minimum of 6' long.
Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazards to vehicles, bicycles
and pedestrians.
Township of Cun1ru Stor_mwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
48 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
20. Pipe underdrains and/or pavement base drains shall be provided in areas
known or otherwise documented to have a seasonal high water table, and as
directed by the Township Engineer.
21. Appropriate headwalls, endwalls or end sections shall be used where
storm water runoff enters or leaves the storm sewer horizontally from a natural
or manmade channel. Such facilities shall conform to the requirements of
PennDOT, or to specifications as otherwise modified by the Township of
Cumru.
22. Adequate erosion and sediment control protection shall be provided along all
open channels, and at all points of discharge.
23. Storm water roof drains, sump pumps, and pipes installed after the effective
date of this Ordinance shall not directly discharge water into a street right-ofway
or discharge into a sanitary sewer or storm sewer unless approval is given
by the Township.
24. All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems, wetlands
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
condition unless an alteration is approved by the Township of Cumru and any
other necessary approving body.
25. Flow velocities from any storm sewer may not result m eros10n of the
receiving channel.
26. Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all storm sewer pipes,
culverts, and bridges where flow velocities exceed maximum permitted
channel velocities as specified in the P ADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Manual, as amended. ·
27. Drainage facilities, including detention ponds, shall not convey water over
land 1 onto any existing or proposed public road right-of-way
D. Open Channels
1. Open channels shall be designed in accordance with the Channel Design
procedures found in the Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of
Water Quality Protection, Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual.
2. All open channels shall be designed to convey the 25-year stormwater flow.
In addition, open channels shall be designed to convey the 100-year
stormwater flow to detention/retention facilities and from emergency
spillways and areas where damage to property would result.
Township of Cuinru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
49 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
3. Open channels located adjacent to streets in residential subdivision and/or
developments shall be limited to a top width of 6-feet, depth of 1.5-feet, and if
trapezoidal in cross section, a minimum bottom width of2-feet.
4. Open channels located along non-residential streets, in side yards, rear yards,
or open space shall be limited to a top width of 12-feet, a depth of 3-feet, and,
if trapezoidal in cross section, a minimum bottom width of 2-feet. Open
channels located in side yards, rear yards, or open space shall provide a
minimum of 6-inches of freeboard.
5. The minimum longitudinal slope shall not be less than 0.010 ft/ft nor greater
than 0.100 ft/ft.
E. The following standards shall apply to all stormwater management facilities
proposing infiltration as a method to reduce the proposed condition runoff to the
existing condition design storm as required by Section 308.
I. Infiltration testing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 305.
2. A minimum depth of 24 inches shall be provided between the bottom of the
infiltration facility and the limiting zone. ·
3. The infiltration and/or percolation rate shall be sufficient to accept the
additional stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the Applicant's design professional.
4. The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the required
retention/detention volume within twenty-four (24) hours.
5. Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
6. When stormwater runoff accesses the infiltration bed or trench via surface
flow, the volume of runoff controlled by infiltration shall be limited to 25
percent of the detention volume required to satisfy Section 308. This is in
consideration of loss of function during freezing weather.
7. When runoff is piped underground to the infiltration facility; 50 percent of the
detention volume required to satisfy Section 308 may be infiltrated providing
the following conditions are also met:
(i) There exists at least eighteen (18) inches between the top of the
infiltration facility and the ground surface.
(ii) An emergency overflow is provided capable of controlling the
maximum year design storm for the watershed and district in which
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
50 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
'
~ !
the facility is located when the infiltration facility is independent of the
detention facility.
(iii) The point of discharge of the emergency overflow shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The preferred point
of discharge is into a detention or retention facility.
F. Any infiltration and water quality facilities proposed to meet the requirements of
Sections 305 and 306 shall be designed in a manner consistent with the requirements
of the NPDES Permit, if one is required. Design of the infiltration and water quality
facilities shall be in accordance with the guidelines provided in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, latest edition.
G. Construction of Streets
I. All streets shall be designed to provide for the discharge of surface water from
their rights-of-way.
2. The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall not be less than 1/4" per foot
and not more than Yz inch per foot.
3. The typical slope of the shoulder areas shall not be less than% inches per foot
and not more than 1 inch per foot.
3. Cross drainage in intersections or in tangent sections of roadway will not be
permitted.
4. Gutter flow shall not exceed Yz of the travel lane width during the I 0-year
storm.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
51 IssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l '
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
52 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
\ 1 ARTICLE IV-DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Section 401. General Requirements
For any of the activities regulated by this Ordinance, the preliminary or final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy
permit, or the commencement of any earth disturbance activity may not proceed until the
Property Owner or Applicant or his/her agent has received written approval of a Drainage
Plan from the Township of Cumru, unless the project qualifies for an exemption from the
requirements to submit a Drainage Plan.
Section 402. Exemptions
A. General Exemptions
The following land use activities are exempt from the drainage plan submission
requirements of this ordinance.
1. Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
2. Agricultural plowing and tilling are exempt from the rate control and
Stormwater Management site plan preparation requirements of this
ordinance, provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 PA Code Chapter .102, and applicable Township
Ordinances. The property owner shall have an approved Erosion and
Sedimentation Pollution Control Plan for the agricultural activity.
3. Forest Management and timber operations are exempt from the rate control
and Stormwater Management site plan preparation requirements of this
ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements
of 25 PA Code Chapter 102, and applicable Township Ordinances. An
approved Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution Control · Plan must be
submitted to the Township prior to the start of a forest management or timber
operation that would cause disturbance to the site.
4. The construction of improvements on a lot where the impervious surface of
the proposed improvements does not exceed the percentage of the net tract
area, or the maximum square footage in the aggregate, whichever is lesser as
found in Table 402-1 Impervious Area Exemption Criteria. The applicable
minimum distance requirement set forth in Table 402-1 and the additional
exemption requirements of Section 402.C shall also be met by the applicant.
Such determinations shall be made by the Township Zoning Officer, after
consultation with the Township Engineer. Further, to the extent that the
Township Zoning Officer determines that the particular characteristiCs of the
subject property and/or of the proposed improvements may result in
deleterious stormwater impacts to a neighboring property, the Township
Zoning Officer may deny such exemption request and a drainage plan would
be required.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
53 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
Multiple exemptions may be requested and granted up to the maximum
percentage or square footage permitted for the tract of land after which
compliance with this Ordinance shall be demonstrated by the applicant.
Total Parcel Size
less than Y. acre
Y. to less than Yz acre
Yz to less than I acre
I to less than 2 acres
2 to 1 ess than 3 acres
3 acres and greater
TABLE 402-1
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria
Percentage of
Net Lot Area
Exempt
4.0
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Maximum
Impervious Area
Exempt (sq.ft.)
400
600
1,000
1,500
. 1,900
4,000
Minimum
Distance*
(feet)
IO ft.
15 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft .
100 ft.
150 ft.
*Note: The minimum distance is between the proposed impervious area and I or stormwater controls I structures
discharge point to the downstream property line.
B. Stormwater Quantity Control Exemption
Any Regulated Activity that meets the impervious area exemption criteria in Table
402-2 shall not be required to implement the stormwater quantity controls, specified
in Section 308 of this Ordinance. These criteria shall apply to the total development
even if development is to take place in phases. February 28, 2005 the date of the
Township adoption of Ordinance No. 591 shall be the starting point from which to
consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective
impervious area computations shall be cumulatively considered. Impervious areas
existing on the "parent tract" prior to adoption of Ordinance No. 591 shall not be
considered in cumulative impervious area calculations for exemption purposes.
TABLE402-2
Impervious Area Exemption Criteria
(Applicable to Section 308 Stormwater Quantity Controls Only)
Total Parcel Size
less than Y. acre
Y. to less than Yz acre
Yz to less than I acre
I to less than 2 acres
2 to less than 3 acres
3 acres and greater
Impervious Area
Exemption (sq.ft.)
10% of total parcel size;
not to exceed I 0,000 s.f.
"
"
"
"
"
Minimum Distance *
(feet)
IO ft.
15 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft.
100 ft.
150 ft.
* Note: The minimum distance is between the proposed impervious area and I or stormwater controls I structures
discharge point to the downstream property line.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC Fife 3022-068
54 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
C.
Submissions for projects that utilize the exemption under section 402.B shall still be
required to meet the groundwater recharge (Section 305), water quality (Section 306),
and streambank erosion (Section 307) controls of this Ordinance. Drainage plans in
accordance with Sections 403 A.2, 403 B.7, 8, 11, 15, and 22 and 403.D.2 must still
be submitted. Any exemption must first be approved by the Township of Cumru.
Additional Exemption Requirement:
1. Exemption responsibilities - An exemption shall not relieve the Applicant
from implementing such measures as are necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and property.
2. HQ and EV streams - This exemption shall not relieve the Applicant from
meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to high quality
(HQ) or exceptional value (EV) waters, identified and Source Water
Protection Areas (SWPA) and requirements for nonstructural project design
sequencing (Section 304), groundwater recharge (Section 305), water quality
(Section 306), and streambank erosion (Section 307).
3. Drainage Problems - If a drainage problem is documented or known to exist
downstream of, or expected from the proposed activity, then the Township of
Cumru may require a drainage plan submittal by the upstream 1 an downer.
4. All regulated activities occurring in drainage areas tributary to waters
designated HQ/EV pursuant to 25 PA Code, Chapter 93, shall not change any
biological, chemical, or physical characteristics, including volume, rate,
velocity, course, current, cross section, or temperature of the waters, unless
the activity is specifically permitted in accordance with the environmental
laws of the Commonwealth.
Section 403. Drainage Plan Contents
The Drainage Plan shall consist of a general description of the project including sequencing
items described in Section 304, calculations, maps and· plans. A note on the maps shall refer
to the associated computations and erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The
cover sheet of the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All Drainage Plan materials shall be submitted· to the
Township of Cumru in a format that is clear, concise, legible,. neat, and well organized;
otherwise, the Drainage Plan shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
Applicant.
Township of Curpru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
55 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
-:
'
The following items shall be included in the Drainage Plan:
A. General
·1. General description of the project including those areas described m
Section 304;
2. General description of permanent stormwater management techniques,
including construction specifications of the materials to be used for
stormwater management facilities;
3. Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities; and
4. An Erosic,n and Sediment Control Plan, including all reviews and approvals
by the Conservation District.
5 A general description of nonpoint source pollution controls.
B. Maps
Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on 24-inch x 36-inch sheets and/or
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording at the offices of
the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County. If the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (SALDO) has more stringent criteria then the more stringent criteria shall
apply. The contents of the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
1. The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or other
identifiable landmarks.
2. Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater
than 15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
3. Existing streams, lakes, ponds or other Waters of the Commonwealth within
the project area.
4. Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries, stream buffers,
existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be preserved, and the
total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
5. The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers, and water
lines extending fifty (50) feet beyond property lines.
6. An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC Fite 3022-068
56 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
i
I'
~ !
I
7. Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious
area that would be added.
8. Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
9. Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than
15 percent), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
10. The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
11. The date of submission.
12. A graphic and written scale of one (1) inch equals no more than fifty (50)
feet; for tracts of twenty (20) acres or more, the scale shall be one (1) inch
equals no more than one hundred (100) feet.
13. A north arrow and/or compass.
14. The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the nearest foot
and bearings to the nearest degree.
15. Existing and proposed land use(s).
16. A key map showing all off site existing man-made features which may be
affected by stormwater runoff or stormwater management controls for the
project.
17. Location of all open channels.
18. Overland drainage patterns and swales.
19. A twenty-foot (20) wide access easement around all stormwater management
facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
20. The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
21. A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for maintenance
of stormwater management facilities that would be located on/off-site. All
on/off-site facilities shall meet the performance standards and design criteria
specified in this Ordinance.
22. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that any revision to the
approved Drainage Plan must be approved by the Township of Cumru and
the Conservation District.
Township of Cun1ru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 302:!-068
57 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
I
l
c-c-j
I'
I
23.
24.
The following signature block for the Design Engineer:
"I, (Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify that the
Drainage Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Township of
Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance."
The approved Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted to the
Township in ARCview shapefile (preferable) or AutoCAD.DWG format.
C. Supplemental Information
1. A written description of the following information shall be submitted.
a. The overall stormwater management concept for the project designed
in accordance with Section 304.
b. Storm water runoff computations as specified in this Ordinance.
c. Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during and
after development.
d. Expected project time schedule.
e. Development stages (project phases) if so proposed.
f. An operation and maintenance plan in accordance with Section 702 of
this Ordinance.
2. An erosion and sediment control plan.
3. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows) on
adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater collection
system that may receive runoff from the project site.
D. Stormwater Management Facilities
1. All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan, described in
detail, and details/cross-sections provided illustrating their construction.
2. Profiles shall be provided for all storm sewers and underground
detention/retention facilities at one of the following sets of scales:
a. One inch (1 ")equals ten feet (IO') horizontal and one inch (I") equals
one foot (I') vertical, or
b. One inch (1 ") equals twenty feet (20') horizontal and one inch (I")
equals two feet (2') vertical, or
c. One inch (l") equals forty feet (40') horizontal and one inch (1")
equals four feet ( 4 ') vertical, or
Township of Cumru Stormwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
58 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
.,
i
i --1
'
d. One inch (l ") equals fifty feet (50') horizontal and one inch (I")
equals five feet (5') vertical, or
When infiltration facilities such as seepage pits, beds or trenches are used,
the locations of existing and proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells
rriust be shown.
4. All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used m the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
E. Responsibilities for Operations and Maintenance of Stormwater Controls and BMPs
1. No Regulated Earth Disturbance activities within the Township of Cumru
shall commence until approval by the Township of Cumru of a Stormwater
Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan which describes how the
permanent (e.g., post-construction) stormwater controls and BMPs will be
properly operated and maintained.
2. The following items shall be included in the Stormwater Control and BMP
Operations and Maintenance Plan:
a. Map( s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements for
recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks County,
and shall be submitted on sheets up to 36-inches x 48-inches. The
approved map(sO shall be submitted to the Township in ARCview
shapefile (preferable) or AutoCAD.DWG format. The contents of the
maps(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(i) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs,
(ii) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks,
(iii) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others
as appropriate,
(iv) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area,
(v) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved,
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
59 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
(vi) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site,
(vii) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added,
(viii) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings,
and
(ix) A twenty-foot (20) wide access easement around all
stormwater controls and BMPs that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way.
b. A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance.
c. The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
d. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stcirmwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by Commissioners of the Township of
Cumru.
3. The Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan for the
project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and
maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and _BMPs, as follows:
a. If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately owned
and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements are to be
dedicated to the Township of Cumru, stormwater controls and BMPs
may also be dedicated to and maintained by the Township of Cumru;
b. If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single ownership,
or if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
4. The Commissioners of the Township of Cumru shall make the final
determination on the continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities.
The Township of Cumru reserves the right to accept or reject the operations
and maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and
BMPs.
Township of Cumru Storrnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
60 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
F. Township of Cumru Review of Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan
L The Township Engineer shall review the Stormwater Control and BMP
Operations and Maintenance Plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this ordinance, and any permits issued by DEP.
2. The Township of Cumru shall notify the Applicant in writing whether the
Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan is approved.
3. The Township of Cumru may require a "Record Drawing" of all stormwater
controls and BMPs, and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
Operations and Maintenance Plan.
Section 404. Plan Submission
The Township of Cumru shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified m this
Ordinance.
For any activities that require an NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from
Construction Activities, a PaDEP Joint Permit Application, a PennDOT Highway
Occupancy Permit, or any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations or are
regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106
(Floodplain Management) of PaDEP's Rules and Regulations, the proof of application for
said permit(s) or approvals shall be part of the plan. The plan shall be coordinated with the
state and federal permit process and the Township's SALDO review process.
A. For projects that require SALDO approval, the Drainage Plan shall be submitted by
the Applicant as part of the Preliminary Plan submission where applicable for the
Regulated Activity.
B. For these regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, See Section 401,
General Requirements.
C. Six (6) copies of the Drainage Plan shall be submitted to the Township and
distributed as follows:
1. Two (2) copies to the Township of Cumru accompanied by the requisite
Township Review Fee, as specified in The Township of Cumru Fee
Schedule.
2. Two (2) copies to the Conservation District.
3. One (I) copy to the Township Engineer.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
61 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
4, One (I) copy to the Berks County Planning Commission.
I
~ Section 405. Drainage Plan Review
A The' Township Engineer shall review the Drainage Plan with the standards set forth
in the Township of Cumru's Stormwater Management Ordinance for consistency
with the adopted Schuylkill River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan
and the Conestoga River Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. Any
Drainage Plan found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be
returned to the Applicant
B. For activities regulated by this Ordinance, the Township Engineer shall notify the
Applicant and the Township of Cumru in writing, within ninety (90) calendar days,
of whether the Drainage Plan is consistent with the Storm water Management Plan.
1. Should the Drainage Plan be determined to be consistent with the Stormwater
Management Plan, the Township Engineer shall forward an approval letter to
the Township Planning Secretary who will then forward a copy to the
Applicant
2. Should the Drainage Plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
Stormwater Management Plan, the Township Engineer shall forward a
disapproval letter to the Municipal Secretary who will then forward a copy to
the Applicant The disapproval letter shall cite the reason(s) and specific
Ordinance sections for the disapproval. Disapproval may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to compliance with
the stormwater management plan. Any disapproved Drainage Plans may be
revised by the Applicant and resubmitted consistent with this Ordinance.
C. For Regulated Activities specified in Section 104 of this Ordinance, which require a
building permit, the Township Engineer shall notify the Municipal Building Permit
Officer in writing, within a time frame consistent with the Municipal Building Code
and/or SALDO, whether the Drainage Plan is consistent with the Stormwater
Management Plan and forward a copy of the approval/disapproval letter to the
Applican1. Any disapproved drainage plan may be revised by the Applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this Ordinance.
D. For regulated activities under this ordinance that require an NPDES Permit
Application, the Applicant shall forward a copy of the Township Engineer's letter
stating that the Drainage Plan and supporting calculations are consistent with this
Ordinance to the Conservation District. PaDEP and the Conservation District may
consider the Township Engineer's review comments in determining whether to issue
a permit
E. The Township of Cumru shall not grant approval or grant preliminary approval to
any subdivision or land development for Regulated Activities specified in Section
Township of Cumru Stormwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
62 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
F.
105 of this Ordinance if the Drainage Plan has been found to be inconsistent with
this Ordinance, as determined by the Township Engineer.
The Applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all stormwater
management facilities included in the approved Drainage Plan. The record drawings
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer and the Township of Cumru for final approval. The
Township of Cumru may withhold approval of the record drawings until the
Township of Cumru receives a copy of an approved Highway Occupancy Permit
from the PennDOT District Office, NPDES Permit, and any other applicable permits
or approvals, from PaDEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
G. The Township of Cumru's approval of a Drainage Plan shall be valid for a period not
to exceed five (5) years commencing on the date that the Township of Cumru signs
the approved Drainage Plan. If stormwater management facilities included in the
approved Drainage Plan have not been constructed, or if constructed and record
drawings of these facilities have not been approved within this five (5) year time
period, then the Township of Cumru may consider the Drainage Plan disapproved
and may revoke any and all permits. Drainage Plans that are considered disapproved
by the Township of Cumru shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 407 of
this Ordinance.
Section 406. Modification of Plans
A. A modification to a Drainage Plan under review by the Township of Cumru for a
development site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or re-design of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
Drainage Plan as determined by the Township Engineer anc;l/or the Township of
Cumru, shall. require a resubmission of the modified Drainage Plan consistent with
Section 404 of this Ordinance and be subject to review as specified in Section 405 of
this Ordinance.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved Drainage Plan shall be
submitted to the Township of Cumru, accompanied by the applicable Municipal
Review and Inspection Fee. A modification to a Drainage Plan for which a formal
action has not been taken by the Township of Cumru .shall be submitted to the
Township of Cumru, accompanied by the applicable Review and Inspection Fee.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
63 Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. I
' I : i
'
Section 407. Resubmission of Disapproved Drainage Plans
A disapproved Drainage Plan may be resubmitted, with the rev1s10ns addressing the
Township Engineer's and the Township of Cumru's concerns documented in writing and
addressed to the Township Secretary in accordance with Section 404 of this Ordinance and
distributed accordingly and be subject to review as specified in Section 405 of this
Ordinance. The applicable Review and Inspection Fee must accompany a resubmission of a
disapproved Drainage Plan.
TownsJ1ip of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
64 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
I
~ '
ARTICLE V-INSPECTIONS
Section 501. Schedule oflnspections
A. The Township Engineer or his designee shall inspect all phases of the installation of
the permanent stormwater management facilities as deemed appropriate by the
Township Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, ifthe Township Engineer and/or Township of Cumru
or their designee determines that the pennanent stormwater management facilities
are not being installed in accordance with the approved Stormwater Management
Plan, the Township of Cumru shall revoke any existing building permits and issue a
cease and desist order until a revised Stormwater Management Plan is submitted and
approved except as directed by the Township Engineer and the Township of Cumru
or Conservation District, as specified in this Ordinance.
C. A final inspection of all storm water management facilities shall be conducted by the
Township Engineer and/or the Township of Cumru or their designee to confirm
compliance with the approved Stormwater Management Plan prior to the issuance of
any Occupancy Permit.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
65 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
I 1 ;
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022"01i8
56 Issued January 4, 20 JO Rev. I
ARTICLE VI-FEES AND EXPENSES
Section 601. Township of Cumru Drainage Plan Review and Inspection Fee
Fees shall be established by the Township of Cumru to defray plan review and construction
inspection costs incurred by the Township of Cumru. All fees shall be paid by the Applicant
at the time of Drainage Plan submission. Review and Inspection Fee Schedule shall be
established by resolution of the Commissioners of the Township of Cumru based on the size
of the Regulated Activity and based on the Township of Cumru 's costs for reviewing
Drainage Plans and conducting inspections pursuant to Section 50 I. The Commissioners of
the Township of Cumru shall periodically update the Review and Inspection Fee Schedule
to ensure that review costs are adequately reimbursed.
Section 602. Expenses Covered by Fees
The fees required by this Resolution shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the Drainage Plan by the Township of Cumru and the Township
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage improvements
during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management facilities and
drainage improvements presented in the Drainage Plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this
Resolution, correct violations, and assure proper completion of stipulated remedial
actions.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022~068
67 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
I
_ _J
i
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
68 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
ARTICLE VII-MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES
Section 701. Performance Gnarantee
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the Applicant shall provide a financial
guarantee to the Township of Cumru to secure the timely and proper installation and
constrnction of all stormwater management controls as: I) required by the approved
drainage plan equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required
controls; and 2) in the amount and method of payment provided for in the SALDO.
B. For other regulated activities, the Township of Cumru may require a financial
guarantee from the Applicant.
C. At the completion of the projeCt, and as a prereqms1te for the release of the
performance guarantee, the Applicant or his representatives shall:
1. Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect, surveyor or
other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved revisions
thereto.
2. Provide a set of record drawings.
D. After the Township of Cumru receives the certification, a final inspection shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer and/or the Township of Cumru or designee to
certify compliance with this ordinance.
Section 702. Adherence to Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control and BMP required
by an approved Storm water Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan, or to allow
the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved Stormwater
Control and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan.
Section 703. Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Privately Owned
Stormwater Controls and BMPs
A. The property owner shall sign an Operations and Maintenance Agreement with the
Township of Cumru covering all stormwater controls and BMPs that are to be
privately owned. The Agreement shall be substantially the same as the agreement in
Appendix A of this Ordinance.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022.068
69 Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. I
B. Other items may be included in the Agreement where determined necessary to
guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
controls and BMPs. The Agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Township of Cumru.
Section 704. Stormwater Management Easements
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site
stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Township of Cumru.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner if
necessary for (I) access for inspections and maintenance, or (2) preservation of
stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and other stormwater
controls and BMPs, by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under Section 705.
Section 705. Recording of Approved Stormwater Control and BMP Operations and
Maintenance Plan and Related Agreements
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and BMPs will be
placed, constructed or implemented, as described in the Stormwater Control and
BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan, shall record the following documents in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Berks County, within fifteen (15) days of
approval of the Stormwater Control and BMP Operations Plan by the Township of
Cumru:
1. The Operations and Maintenance Plan, or a summary thereof,
2. Operations and Maintenance Agreements under Section 705, and
3. Easements under Section 706.
B. The Township of Cumru may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with this Section.
Section 706. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay a specified
amount to the Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses. The
amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
1. If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by the
Township of Cumru for a period of ten (10) years, as estimated by the
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022.068
70 Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. I
Township Engineer. The inspections should take place on or about the first,
third, seventh, and tenth anniversary of the satisfactory completion of the
installation of the facilities. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed at the expense of the Township of Cumru.
2. If the stormwater control or BMP is to be ovmed and maintained by the
Township of Cumru, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for ten (10) years. The Township Engineer will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the
Applicant.
3. The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present worth of
the annual series values. The Township Engineer shall determine the present
worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the approval of the governing
body.
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility
(e.g., ballfield, lake), the Township of Cumru may reduce or waive the amount of the
maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for public recreation
purpose.
C. If at some future time a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other storage facility,
the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will be applied to the cost of
abandoning the facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility.
Any amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be
returned to the depositor.
D. Stormwater Related Problems - The Township of Cumru may require applicants to
pay a fee to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund. to cover stormwater
related problems which may arise from the land development and earth disturbance.
The Township Engineer will establish the estimated cost from utilizing information
submitted by the Applicant.
Township of Cumru Stom1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
71 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
~ I
'
Township of Cuniru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
72 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
ARTICLE VIII- PROHIBITIONS
Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any
non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters of this
Commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except (I) as
provided in Subsection C below, and (2) discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant
contributors to pollution to the waters of this Commonwealth:
- Discharges from fire fighting - Flows from riparian habitats and
activities wetlands
- Potable water sources including water - Uncontaminated water from
line flushing foundations or from footing drains
- Irrigation drainage - Lawn watering
- Air conditioning condensate - Dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges
- Springs - Uncontaminated groundwater
- Water from crawl space pumps - Water from individual residential car
washing
- Pavement wash waters where spills - Routine external building wash down
or leaks of toxic or hazardous (which does not use detergents or
materials have not occurred (unless other compounds)
all spill material has been removed)
and where detergents are not used
D. In the event that the Township of Cumru or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute to pollution of the
waters of this Commonwealth, the Township of Cumru or DEP will notify the·
responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
Section 802. Roof Drains
Roof drains and sump pumps installed after the effective date of this Ordinance in association
with new building construction shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMP's and, to the
maximum extent practicable, satisfy the criteria for Disconnected Impervious Areas.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
73 lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities, areas, or
structures, without the written approval of the Township of Cumru.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
74 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. J
I -1 ARTICLE IX- ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section 901. Right-of-Entry
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the
Township of Cumru may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Township of Cumru to inspect the implementation, condition, or operation and
maintenance of the stormwater controls or BMPs in regard to any aspect governed
by this Ordinance.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township of Cumru ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this Ordinance.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township of Cumru shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the Township of Cumru
such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays (>24 hrs.) in allowing the Township of Cumru access to a
stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this Article.
Section 902. Public Nuisance
A. The violation of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed a Public
Nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Section 903. Enforcement Generally
A. Whenever the Township of Cumru finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this Ordinance, the Township of Cumru may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
3. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
6. The implementation of stonnwater controls and BMPs; and
7. Operation and maintenance ofstormwater controls and BMPs.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
75 Issued January 4. 2010 Rev. I
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time
limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice may further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the Township of Cumru or designee and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such person to the
penalty provisions of this Ordinance. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative
and shall not prevent the Township of Cumru from pursuing any and all other
remedies available in law or equity.
Section 904. Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the Township
of Cumru may be suspended or revoked, in whole or in part, by the Township of
Cumru for:
I. Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit;
2. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance; or
3. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the Township of Cumru, m
whole or in part, when:
I. The Township Engineer and/or the Township of Cumru or designee has
inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs,
or the eliminatfon of the hazard or nuisance, and/or;
2. The Township of Cumru is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked in whole or in part by the Township of
Cumru cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this Ordinance.
Section 905. Penalties
A. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable vvith costs. Each day that the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and the applicable fines are
curnulatiye.
Township of Cumru Storrnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022.068
76 lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
B. The Township of Cumru may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of the
Ordinance with the court of competent jurisdiction to obtain restraining orders,
te'mporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
Section 906. Notification
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, or fails to
conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the Township of Cumru will
provide notification of the violation. After notice is provided, failure to correct violations in
a timely manner may result in additional violations.
Section 907. Enforcement
The Township Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this ordinance. All inspections regarding compliance with the drainage
plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or other qualified persons
designated by the Commissioners of the Township of Cumru.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities,
areas, or structures, without the written approval of the Township of Cumru.
B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township may enter at reasonable times
upon any property within the Township of Cumru to inspect the condition of the
stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this
Ordinance.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any Regulated Activity except as
provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted from the
requirement to submit a SWM Site Plan by this Ordinance.
D. The Developer shall .be responsible for providing as-built plans of all SWM BMPs
included in the approved SWM Site Plan. The as-built plans and an explanation of
any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted by the Developer to
the Township of Cumru. ·
E. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion signed by a
Qualified Professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been
constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. If any licensed
Qualified Professionals contributed to the construction plans, then ·a licensed
Qualified Professional must sign the completion certificate.
F. After receipt of the completion certificate by the Township of Cumru, the Township
of Cumru may conduct a final inspection.
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GYC File 3022-068
77 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
G. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM Site Plan are a responsibility of the
. Township of Cumru.
H. The Township of Cumru may withhold an occupancy permit until a certificate of
completion has been provided by the Developer.
Section 908. Appeals
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township of Cumru or its designee may
appeal to the Township of Cumru Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days of
that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Township of Cumru Board of
Commissioners may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the County
where the activity has taken place within thirty (30) days of the Township's decision.
ENACTED and ORDAINED at a regular meeting of the
Board of on the i 9th of
alljake effect !mme~iately.
!/ ~,,.,L--~
January
E. Rohrbach
President
[Title]
@lc.;.,,,_Q-. ~~4fwl\
[Name] Edward L. Gottschall
[Title]
[Name]
[Title]
[Name]
[Title]
Township of Cun1ru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022"068
78
Vice President
lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
[Name]
[Title]
I hereby certify that the foregoing Ordinance was advertised in the
Reading Eagle on January 7, 2010, a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township of Cumru and was duly enacted and approved as set forth
at a regular meeting of the Commissioners of the Township of Cumru held on
January 19 , 2010.
Township of .Cumru Stormwater Managen1ent Ordinance
GVC File 30'.!2-068
79 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
80 Issued January 4. 2010 Rev. I
ORDINANCE APPENDIX A
STORMWATER CONTROLS AND BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this _____ day of , 20_,
by and between , (hereinafter the "Landowner"),
and County,
Pennsylvania, (hereinafter "Municipality");
WITNESS ETH
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property as recorded by deed in the
land records of County, Pennsylvania, Deed Book at Page __ _
(hereinafter "Property").
WHEREAS, the Landowner is proceeding to build and develop the Property; and
WHEREAS, the Stormwater Controls and BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan
approved by the Municipality (hereinafter referred to as the "Plan") for the property
identified herein, which is attached hereto as Appendix A and made part hereof, as approved
by the Municipality, provides for management of stormwater within the confines of the
Property through the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs); and
WHEREAS, the Municipality, and the Landowner, his successors and assigns, agree
that the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Municipality and the protection and
maintenance of water quality require that on-site stormwater Best Management Practices be
constructed and maintained on the Property; and
WHEREAS, for the purposes of this agreement, the folio.wing definitions shall
apply:
BMP - "Best Management Practice;" activities, facilities, designs, measures or
procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from land development, to protect and
maintain water quality and groundwater recharge and ·to otherwise meet the purposes of the
Municipal Stormwater Management Ordinance, including but not limited to infiltration
trenches, seepage pits, filter strips, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, rain gardens,
grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters and detention basins.
• Infiltration Trench - A BMP surface structure designed, constructed, and maintained
for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or
groundwater aquifer,
• Seepage Pit - An underground BMP structure designed, constructed, and maintained
for the purpose of providing infiltration or recharge of storm water into the soil and/or
groundwater aquifer,
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 30~2~068
lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. 1
• Rain Garden - A BMP overlain with appropriate mulch and suitable vegetation
designed, constructed, and maintained for the purpose of providing infiltration or
recharge of stormwater into the soil and/or underground aquifer, and
WHEREAS, the Municipality requires, through the implementation of the Plan, that
stormwater management BMPs as required by said Plan and the Municipal Stormwater
Management Ordinance be constructed and adequately operated and maintained by the
Landowner, his successors and assigns. and
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing promises, the mutual
covenants contained herein, and the following terms and conditions, the parties hereto agree
as follows:
1. · The BMPs shall be constructed by the Landowner in accordance with the plans and
specifications identified in the Plan.
2. The Landowner shall operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the Plan in good
working order acceptable to the Municipality and in accordance with the specific
maintenance requirements noted on the Plan.
3. The Landowner hereby grants permission to the Municipality, its authorized agents
and employees, to enter upon the property, at reasonable times and upon presentation
of proper identification, to inspect the BMP(s) whenever it deems necessary.
Whenever possible, the Municipality shall notify the Landowner prior to entering the
property.
4. In the event the Landowner fails to operate and maintain the BMP(s) as shown on the
Plan in good working order acceptable to the Municipality, the Municipality or its
representatives may enter upon the Property and take whatever action is deemed
necessary to maintain said BMP(s). This provision shall not be construed to allow the
Municipality to erect any permanent structure on the land of the Landowner. It is
expressly understood and agreed that the Municipality is under no obligation to
maintain or repair said facilities, and in no event shall this Agreement be construed to
impose any such obligation on the Municipality.
5. In the event the Municipality, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any
nature, or expends any funds in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment,
supplies, materials, and the like, the Landowner shall reimburse the Municipality for
all expenses (direct and indirect) incurred within l 0 days of receipt of invoice from the
Municipality.
6. The intent and purpose of this Agreement is to ensure the proper maintenance of the
onsite BMP(s) by the Landowner; provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be
deemed to create or effect any additional liability of any party for damage alleged to
result from or be caused by storm water runoff.
7. The Landowner, its executors, administrators, assigns, and other successors in
interests, shall release the Municipality's employees and designated representatives
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
from all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or claims which might arise or be
asserted against said employees and representatives from the construction, presence,
existence, or maintenance of the BMP(s) by the Landowner or Township. In the event
that a claim is asserted against the Township, its designated representatives or
employees, the Township shall promptly notify the Landown.er and the Landowner
shall defend, at his own expense, any suit based on the claim. If any judgment or
claims against the Township's employees or designated representatives shall be
allowed, the Landowner shall pay all costs and expenses regarding said judgment or
claim.
8. The Township shall inspect the BMP(s) at a minimum of once every three years to
ensure their continued functioning.
This Agreement shall be recorded at the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Berks
County, Pennsylvania, and shall constitute a covenant running with the Property and/or
equitable servitude, and shall be binding on the Landowner, his administrators, executors,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interests, in perpetuity.
WITNESS the following signatures and seals:
Attest:
Secretary
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC Fik 3022-068
For the Township:
Name:
Title:
For the Landowner:
Name:
Title:
Issued January 4, 20 I 0 Rev. l
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
SS:
COUNTY OF BERKS:
On this the day of , before me, a Notary public
in and for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
_______ ,who acknowledged himself to be the of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Cumru, a Political Subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and that he as such , being authorized to do so, executed the
foregoing instrument for the purposes therein contained by signing the name of the Township
of Cumru by himself as _______ _
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
Notary Public
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
SS:
COUNTY OF BERKS:
On this the day of , , before me, a Notary public
in and for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the undersigned officer, personally appeared
_______ ,who acknowledged themselves to be the landowner(s) and that they as
such landowner(s), being authorized to do so, executed the foregoing instrument for the
purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-06&
Notary Public
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
ORDINANCE APPENDIX B
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
TABLEB-1
RUNOFF CURVE NUMBERS
Source: NRCS (SCS) TR-55
TABLEB-2
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
TABLEB-3
MANNING ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENTS
FIGURE B-1
RECOMMENDATION CHART FOR INFILTRATION STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT BMPS IN CARBONATE AREAS
Township of Cumru Storn1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
L
TABLE B-1
Runoff Cunie Numbers
(From NRCS (SCS) TR-55)
LAND USE DESCRIPTION HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP
Open Space
Meadow I Orchard
Agricultural
Forest
Commercial (85% Impervious)
Industrial (72% Impervious)
Institutional (50% Impervious)
Residential
Average Lot Size % impervious
1/8 acre or less* 65
I /8 - 113 acre 34
113 - I acre 23
I - 4 acres 12
Farmstead
Smooth Surfaces (Concrete, Asphalt,
Gravel or Bare Compacted Soil)
Water
Mining/Newly Graded Areas
(Pervious Areas Only)
A
44
30
59
36
89
81
71
77
59
53
46
59
98
98
77
B
65
58
71
60
92
88
82
85
74
69
66
74
98
98
86
c
77
71
79
73
94
91
88
90
82
80
78
82
98
98
91
D
82
78
83
79
95
93
90
92
87
85
82
86
98
98
94
* Includes Multi-Family Housing unless justified lower density can be provided.
Note: Existing site conditions of bare earth or fallow ground shall be considered as meadow
when choosing a CN value.
Township of Cumru Storn1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
lssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. J
TABLE B-2
RATIONAL RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
By Hydrologic Soils Group and Overland Slot>e (%)
Land Use 0:2°;;--·--.... -
Cultivated Land o.osa
0.14"
Pasture 0.12
0.15
Meadow 0.10
0.14
Forest 0.05
0.08
Residential
Lot Size 1/8 Acre 0.30
[25%1 Impervious] 0.36
Lot Size 114 Acre 028
[22o/o [mpervious] OJ3
. Lot Size 1/3 Acre 0.26
[19%1 Impervious] OJ I
Lot Size t/2 Acre 0.23
[15o/o Impervious] 0.28
Lot Sjzc I Acre 0.21
[12% Impervious] 0.25
tndustrial 0.70
[80% Impervious] 0.79
Commercial 0.74
[85% Impervious] 0.8]
Lawn 0.12
0.16
Impervious 0.85
0.95
a Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence iptervals less than 25 years.
b Runoff coefficients for storm recurrence intervals of25 years or more.
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File .1022-068
2A-6 %··-·- .......6 %+···
0.13 0.16
0.18 0.22
0.20 OJO
025 OJ7
0.16 0.25
0.22 0.30
0.08 0.11
0.11 0.14
0.36 0.44
0.44 0.51
0.34 0.42
0.41 0.49
OJ2 0.40
OJ8 0.47
0.29 0.38
OJ 7 0.44
0.27 0.36
0.34 0.42
0.73 0.75
0.82 0.85
0.76 0.78
0.86 0.88
0.19 029
0.26 .035
0.86 0.87
0.96 0.97
B
·-···o-~io/; ...... i-6%·- ·"·-·60;;+··-·-
0.11 0.15 0.21
0.16 0.21 0.28
0.18 0.28 0.37
0.23 0.34 0.45
0.14 0.22 0.30
0.20 0.28 0.37
0.08 0.11 0.14
0.10 0.14 0.18
0.33 0.40 0.47
0.40 0.47 0.55
0.31 0.38 0.46
0.38 0.45 0.53
0.29 0.37 0.44
OJ6 0.43 0.52
0.26 OJ4 0.42
0.33 0.41 0.49
024 0.32 0.40
0.31 0.39 0.48
0.71 0.74 0.76
0.80 0.83 0.86
0.75 0.77 0.79
0.84 0.86 0.89
0.16 0.25 OJ4
0.22 0.31 0.41
0.85 0.86 0.87
0.95 0.96 0.97
issued.lanuary4,2010 Rev.!
......... c . . ..... .!:)......... . .•
0-2% 2-6%1 6°/o+ -···0:2·o/o- 2-6% 6%+
0.14 0.19 0.26 0.18 0.23 OJ I
0.20 0.25 0.34 0.24 0.29 0.41
0.24 0.34 0.44 0.30 0.40 0.50
0.30 0.42 0.52 0.37 0.50 0.62
0.20 0.28 0.36 0.24 0.30 0.40
026 0.35 0.44 0.30 0.40 0.50
0.10 0.13 0.16 0.12 0.16 0.20
0.12 0.16 0.20 0.15 D.20 0.25
0.38 0.44 0.51 0.40 OA6 0.53
0.45 0.53 0.60 0.48 0.56 0.64
OJ6 0.42 0.50 0.38 0.44 0.52
0.43 0.51 0.59 0.46 0.54 0.63
0.34 0.41 0.48 0.36 0.42 0.51
0.41 0.49 0.57 0.44 0.52 0.61
OJ I OJ8 OA6 OJ4 0.40 0.49
OJ8 0.47 0.55 0.41 0.50 0.60
0.30 0.37 0.45 0.32 0.38 0.47
0.36 0.45 0.54 0.40 0.48 0.58
0.72 0.75 0.77 0.73 0.75 0.78
0.82 0.84 0.87 0.82 0.85 0.88
0.76 0.78 0.80 0.76 0.78 0.80
0.85 0.87 0.90 0.86 0.88 0.90
0.22 0.30 039 025 0.32 0.42
0.28 0.38 0.48 0.32 0.42 0.53
0.85 0.86 0.87 0.85 0.86 0.87
0.95 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.97
TABLEB-3
Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Overland Flow
(U.S. Army Corps Of Engineers, HEC-1 Users Manual)
Surface Description
Dense Growth
Pasture
Lawns
Bluegrass Sod
Short Grass Prairie
Sparse Vegetation
Bare Clay-Loam Soil (eroded)
Concrete/ Asphalt - very shallow depths
(less than 1/4 inch)
small depths
(1/4 inch to several inches)
n
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.10
0.05
Roughness Coefficients (Manning's "n") For Channel Flow
Reach Description
Natural stream, clean, straight, no rifts or pools
Natural stream, clean, winding, some pools or shoals
Natural stream, winding, pools, shoals, stony with some weeds
Natural stream, sluggish deep pools and weeds
Natural stream or swale, very weedy or with timber underbrush
Concrete pipe, culvert or channel
Corrugated metal pipe
High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Pipe
Corrugated
Smooth Lined
(1) Depending upon type, coating and diameter
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.2
0.13
0.03
0.15
0.10
n
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.10
0.012
o.oi2-o.02i1l
0.021-0.029(2)
0.012-0.020(2
)
(2) Values recommended by the American Concrete Pipe Association, check Manufacturer's
recommended value.
Township of Cumru Stonriwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
IssuedJanuary4,2010Rev. l
FIGUREB-1
Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMP's in Carbonate Bedrock
~ I Gl>lll~TYJlll ~ "
CJIRSOPIA TESEDROCK
~ <~ I Etk-f:ll-n!S"41 I LC"1:~1rum.Zl\'at>t I 21o4f~t
~ Thlcimnr.'o ~
av.,.r4ht'IMDfunl Ov111·1J f(t<JI
a
w
~ 1 Spr!el:llO.:olapi.: IL n~ 11t1 hDurt I LDw Butte< I r.ll!'dlumDutfw I lllUh Dur!"' ff!lltlrt't!." - <>t ~ ....
lawlh>lfM r~t-d!umSutT<:r tt~J"1 tlullur LowU111IJ;)t M•1dl11nrOun.., !llmh n .. u~r
--
SHE ltlVCSTltJATIOfl I (Un;iCO:ep!;bbbJ I rn11rnm.iory I Pti!lirniri:ity I IPrl!l-min:uy Rt:cow.mrmw rm,mlnnry Prniimln:trv r>r~'1mlnil..., f'rtt~p101tMY Jlrdiotilnnry f'udlmi•ln'1
r. ~
~~
R~
/nUl,..U1>11 L<>ading
&Jc1. rlf. lni:.,,..,_ •••
Pfl.OOMMMJM1'U1ITT
CIUlbAtlct! "ft
(Un11~cpl.,,,b)
100.
0.1(111<%! 3001. ,., · 1 I ,.,. 6011~~ IMOin:. JOl!!l~
• R!;COMMUNtl(!O
• Spcclnl Gwloak: Faflllurc Duff(!( widths aro 1JJJ foUO'Wll:
Low Buffer ts ICS$ llDlln 50 fool
tllodlum Bull.or t~ 6'1 fe(ll lo 1c'.IO lt:tcrt
Ulgh suffer bl graDl~ lhrui 100 fool
Rn.lo& grenlcr Kh.Dn SO~ no! rllc:omm1;mded,
""· lo-1ow..I ''"· E<lll'Y. JOl17'o "
0
• 1 I '00
000"/0 Q..10cti; JOO'fO• s"o"ir".' IO·tll!Tit.
100·
3001~
• 110T ru~cor.11imoro
Assumos adequald)' J)(lmmial>lo "o/1$ and loci<: of nnlural con11trlllnts as r>Cf1uirt1d for all lnfllt~Uon sy~oma
.,, .. I I .,.,. ~D~~ 0-1011'.4 lll0%
1 ll'lflllrlltlon sya;h1tl'IS maybe allowt11d.U the dcll?fni!niillon orlht! Er'lglnccrand!or GeolGgis!, prt1vlded lhat a Dofollcd Sll11 ltlvct1llg1lkm Is umfarlO!ktm ,...,1Jich confirms
n~tlff(l·9fro;:~. l~lltl9fl il1f $pllC;Jlll 1Y'1-;>l1>9I~ F~l1,1rq,, JITI4 1Hlllq1JP.q 'i'rtlll,\' f,l\lffC!!'"l,l(!(WV~ tile SGf ~lld UH,! JHl?V?$1):\;l t\tOnTI"""11f.!r ~!J-~01('$).
&"J'C'I·% t0 -lO!r.~I 310"0%'·
2 In tlttl$o Sp11doll GeoSOl)le Folll"R:s: t.owSUfror s1tunUt1m1, inn11rallon :sysi\?ma muy bl.'! a!lowoo al lll11 r:lolltrm!n1111on of the Eng!necrandrorGeologlsr. provided rtJu a
O<!tallcd SMc fnVf!$llgatlon Is umlertilken illld a 25 foot bllrtl!I' rrom SGFs Is malntaenctl.
Source: Little Lehigh Creek Watershed ACT 167 -Stormwater Management Ordinance. May 2004
,,,,_
"
0
• SOO".t; 1Q•l CO'l'~ I 3"00'1·~ 6"0"0\ l·. 10· 100'1, I 3'0"0•',-i;. "". 5·00",t.
ORDINANCE APPENDIX C
DRAINAGE PLAN APPLICATION
(To be attached to the "land subdivision plan or development plan review application or "minor
land subdivision plan review application")
Application is hereby made for review of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan and related data as submitted herewith in accordance with the
______________ Township Stormwater Management and Earth Disturbance
Ordinance.
_______ Final Plan _______ Preliminary Plan ________ Sketch
Plan
Date of Submission -----------Submission No. ------------
1. Name of subdivision or development ___________________ _
2. Name of Applicant _______________ Telephone No. _____ _
(If corporation, list the corporation's name and the names of two officers of the corporation)
----------------------------~Officer]
-------------------------------Officer 2
Address
------------------------------~ Zip _______________________________ _
Applicants' interest in subdivision or development
(If other than property owner give owners name and address)
3. Name of property owner _________ ~ __ Telephone No. _____ _
Address
------------------------------~ Zip _______________________________ _
4. Name of engineer or surveyor ___________ Telephone No. ______ _
Address
------------------------------~ Zip _____________________________ ~
Township of Cumru Storm water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rey. 1
5. Type of subdivision or development proposed:
Single-Family Lots
Two Family Lots
Multi-Family Lots
Cluster Type Lots
Planned Residential
Development
Townhouses Commercial (Multi-Lot)
Garden Apartments Commercial (One-Lot)
Mobile-Home Park Industrial (Multi-Lot)
Campgro'und Industrial (One-Lot)
Other( ______________ )
6. Lineal feet of new road proposed ___________________ L.F.
7. Area of proposed and existing impervious area on entire tract.
a. Existing (to remain) _______ S.F. _______ %of Property
b. Proposed _______ S.F. % of Property
8. Stormwater
a. Does the peak rate of runoff from proposed conditions exceed that flow which occurred
for existing conditions for the designated design storm? ____ _
b. Design storm utilized (on-site conveyance systems) (24 hr.) _________ _
No. of Subarea ---------------
Watershed Name ___________ _
Explain: ______________________________ _
c. Does the submission and/or district meet the release rate criteria for the applicable
subarea? ------------------------------
d. Number of subarea(s) from Appendix D of this Ordinance. _________ _
e. Type of proposed runoff control ___________________ _
f. Does the proposed stormwater control criteria meet the requirement/guidelines of the
Stormwater Ordinances? ------------------------
If not, what variances/waivers are requested? _______________ _
Reasons ---------------------------------
g. Does the plan meet the requirements of Article III of the Storrnwater Ordinances? _
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022"068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
If not, what variances/waivers are requested? ____ ~-----------
Reasons\Vhy __________________________ _
h. \Vas TR-55, June 1986 utilized in determining the time of concentration? ___ _
I. \Vhat hydrologic method was used in the stormwater computations? ______ _
J. Is a hydraulic routing through the stonnwater control structme submitted? ___ _
k. Is a construction schedule or staging attached? ______________ _
I. Is a recommended maintenance program attached? ____________ _
9. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control (E&S):
a. Has the stormwater management and E&S plan, supporting documentation and narrative
been submitted to the Berks County Conservation District? __ _
b. Total area of earth disturbance _________________ S.F.
I 0. \V etlands
a. Have the wetlands been delineated by someone trained in wetland delineation? __ _
b. Have the wetland lines been verified by a state or federal permitting authority? _ _
c. Have the wetland lines been surveyed? _________________ _
d. Total acreage of wetland within the property ______________ _
e. Total acreage of wetland disturbed, __________________ _
f. Supporting documentation. ______________________ _
11. Filing
a. Has the required fee been submitted? _________________ _
Amount·--------'--------------------------
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File J022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
b. Has the proposed schedule of construction inspection to be performed by the Applicant's
engineer been submitted? ______________________ ~
c. Name of individual who will be making the inspections __________ _
d. General comments about stormwater management at the development ____ _
Township of Cumru Stonnwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. 1
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF APPLICATION:
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
COUNTY OF BERKS
On this the day of , 20 __ , before me, the undersigned officer,
personally appeared who being duly sworn, according to law, deposes
and says that owners of the property described in this
application and that the application was made with knowledge and/or
direction and does hereby agree with the said application and to the submission of the same.
My Commission Expires ___________________ 20 ____ _
Notary Public ___________________________ _
THE UNDERSIGNED HEREBY CERTIFIES THAT TO THE BEST OF HIS KNOWLEDGE
AND BELIEF THE INFORMATION AND STATEMENTS GIVEN ABOVE ARE TRUE
AND CORRECT.
//l////////////////ll/llllllll////////////////ll//ll//l////////////ll//l/////////////////ll////ll////////////////////ll/////////
(Information Below This Line To Be Completed By The Township of Cumru)
____________ (Name of) Municipality official submission receipt:
Date complete application received ------~Plan Number ________ _
Fees ______ date fees paid ______ received by ________ _
Official submission receipt date-----------------------
Received by ___________ _
Township of Cumru
Township of Cumru Stom1water Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068
Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. I
Township of Cumru Stormwater Management Ordinance
GVC File 3022-068 Issued January 4, 2010 Rev. l
ORDINANCE APPENDIX D
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
WATERSHED MAP
ORDINANCE APPENDIX E
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) PRACTICES
ALTERNATIVE APPROACH FOR
MANAGING STORMW ATER RUNOFF
Natural hydrologic conditions may be altered radically by poorly planned development
practices, such as introducing unneeded impervious surfaces, destroying existing
drainage swales, constructing unnecessary storm sewers, and changing local topography.
A traditional drainage approach of development has been to remove runoff from a site as
quickly as possible and capture it in a detention basin. This approach leads ultimately to
the degradation of water quality as well as expenditure of additional resources for
detaining and managing concentrated runoff at some downstream location.
The recommended alternative approach is to promote practices that will mm1m1ze
proposed conditions runoff rates and volumes, which will minimize needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities. To simulate pre-development hydrologic conditions,
infiltration is often necessary to offset the loss of infiltration by creation of impervious
surfaces. The ability of the ground to infiltrate depends upon the soil types and its
conditions.
Preserving natural hydrologic conditions reqmres careful alternative site design
considerations. Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features,
minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious
surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage. A well-designed site will contain a
mix of all those features. The following describes various techniques to achieve the
al temati ve approach:
• Preserving Natural Drainage Features. Protecting natural drainage features,
particularly vegetated drainage swales and channels, is desirable because of their
ability to infiltrate and attenuate flows and to filter pollutants. However, this
objective is often not accomplished in land development. In fact, commonly held
drainage philosophy encourages just the opposite pattern -- streets and adjacent
storm sewers typically are located in the natural headwater valleys and swales,
thereby replacing natural drainage functions with a completely impervious
system. As a result, runoff and pollutants generated from impervious surfaces
flow directly into storm sewers with no opportunity for attenuation, infiltration, or
filtration. Developments designed to fit site topography also minimizes the
amount of grading on site.
Protecting Natnral Depression Storage Areas. Depressional storage areas have
no surface outlet, or drain very slowly following a ~torm event. They can be
commonly seen as ponded areas in farm fields during the wet season or after large
runoff events. Traditional development practices eliminate these depressions by
filling or draining, thereby obliterating their ability to reduce surface runoff
•
volumes and trap pollutants. The volume and release-rate characteristics of
depressions should be protected in the design of the development site. The
depressions can be protected by simply avoiding the depression or by
incorporating its storage as additional capacity in required detention facilities.
Avoiding introduction of impervious .areas. Careful site planning should
consider reducing impervious coverage to the maximum extent . possible.
Building footprints, sidewalks, driveways and other features producing
impervious surfaces should be evaluated to minimize impacts on runoff.
Reducing the Hydraulic Connectivity of Impervious Surfaces. Impervious
surfaces are significantly less of a problem if they are not directly connected to an
impervious conveyance system (such as storm sewer). Two basic ways to reduce
hydraulic connectivity are routing of roof runoff over lawns and reducing the use
of storm sewers. Site grading should promote increasing travel time of
stormwater runoff, and should help reduce concentration of runoff to a single
point in the development.
Routing Roof Runoff Over Lawns. Roof runoff can be easily routed over lawns
in most site designs. The practice discourages direct connections of downspouts
to storm sewers or parking lots. The practice also discourages sloping driveways
and parking lots to the street. By routing roof drains and crowning the driveway
to run off to the lawn, the lawn is essentially used as a filter strip.
Using Permeable Paving Materials. These materials include permeable
interlocking concrete paving blocks or pervious bituminous concrete. Such
materials should be considered as alternatives to conventional pavement surfaces,
especially for low use surfaces such as driveways, overflow parking lots, and
emergency access roads.
Constructing Cluster Developments. Cluster developments can also reduce the
amount of impervious area for a given number of lots. The biggest savings is in
street length, which also will reduce costs of the development. Cluster
development clusters the construction activity onto less-sensitive areas without
substantially affecting the gross density of development.
In summary, a careful consideration of the existing topography and implementation of a
combination of the above mentioned techniques may avoid construction of costly
stormwater control measures. Other benefits include reduced potential of downstream
flooding, water quality degradation of receiving streams/water bodies and enhancement
of aesthetics and reduction of development costs. Beneficial results include more stable
baseflows in receiving streams, improved groundwater recharge, reduced flood flows,
reduced pollutant loads, and reduced costs for conveyance and storage.
ORDINANCE APPENDIX F
West Nile Virus Guidance
(This sBurce is from the Monroe County, PA Conservation District who researched the
potential of West Nile Virus problems from BMPs due to a number of calls they were
receiving)
Monroe County Conservation District Guidance:
Stormwater Management and West Nile Virus
Source: Brodhead McMichaels Creeks Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance 2/23/04
The Monroe County Conservation District recognizes the need to address the
problem of non-point source pollution impacts caused by runoff from impervious
surfaces. The new stormwater policy being integrated into Act 167 Stormwater
Management regulations by the PA Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) will
make non-point pollution controls an important component of all future plans and updates
to existing plans. In addition, to meet post-construction anti-degradation standards under
the state National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting program,
applicants will be required to employ Best Management Practices (BMPs) to address
non-point pollution concerns.
Studies conducted throughout the United States have shown that wet basins and in
particular constructed wetlands are effective in traditional stormwater management areas
such as channel stability and flood control, and are one of the most effective ways to
remove stormwater pollutants (United States Environmental Protection Agency 1991,
Center for Watershed Protection 2000). From Maryland to Oregon, studies have shown
that as urbanization and impervious surface increase in a watershed, the streams in those
watersheds become degraded (CWP 2000). Although there is debate over the threshold of
impervious cover when degradation becomes apparent (some studies show as little as 6%
while others show closer to 20%), there is agreement that impervious surfaces cause nonpoint
pollution in urban and urbanizing watersheds, and that degradation is ensured if
stormwater BMPs are not implemented.
Although constructed wetlands and ponds ai:e desirable from a water quality
perspective there may be concerns about the possibility of these stormwater management
structures becoming breeding grounds for mosquitoes. The Conservation District feels
that although it may be a valid concern, municipalities should not adopt ordinance
provisions prohibiti.ng wet basins for stormwater management.
Mosquitoes
The questions surrounding mosquito production in wetlands and ponds have
intensified in recent years by the outbreak of the mosquito-borne West Nile Virus. As is
the case with all vector-borne maladies, the life cycle of West Nile Virus is complicated,
traveling from mosquito to bird, back to mosquito and then to other animals including
humans. Culex pipiens was identified as the vector species in the first documented cases
from New York in 1999. This species is still considered the primary transmitter of the
disease across its range. Today there are some 60 species of mosquitoes that inhabit
Pennsylvania. Along with C. pipiens, three other species have been identified as vectors
of West Nile Virus while four more have been identified as potential vectors.
The four known vectors in NE Pennsylvania are Culex pipiens, C. restuans, C.
salinarius and Ochlerotatus japonicus. All four of these species prefer, and almost
exclusively use, artificial containers (old tires, rain gutters, birdbaths, etc.) as larval
habitats. In the case of C. pipiens, the most notorious of the vector mosquitoes, the dirtier
the water the better they like it. The important factor is that these species do not thrive in
functioning wetlands where competition for resources and predation by larger aquatic and
terrestrial organisms is high.
The remaining four species, Aedes vexans, Ochlerotat us Canadensis, 0.
triseriatus and 0. trivittatus are currently considered potential vectors due to laboratory
tests (except the 0. trivittatus, which did have one confirmed vector pool for West Nile
Virus in PA during 2002). All four of these species prefer vernal habitats and ponded
woodland areas following heavy summer rains. These species may be the greatest threat
of disease transmission around stormwater basins that pond water for more than four
days. This can be mitigated ho.wever by establishing ecologically functioning wetlands.
Stormwater Facilities
If a stormwater wetland or pond is constructed properly and a diverse ecological
community develops, mosquitoes should not become a problem. Wet basins and wetlands
constructed as stormwater management facilities, should be designed to attract a diverse
wildlife community. If a wetland is plarmed, proper hydrologic soil conditions and the
establishment of hydrophytic vegetation will promote the population of the wetland by
amphibians and other mosquito predators. In natural wetlands, predatory insects and
amphibians are effective at keeping mosquito populations in check during the larval stage
of development while birds and bats prey on adult mosquitoes.
The design of a stormwater wetland must include the selection of hydrophytic
plant species for their pollutant uptake capabilities and for not contributing to the
potential for vector mosquito breeding. In particular, species of emergent vegetation with
little submerged growth are preferable. By limiting the vegetation. growing below the
water surface, larvae lose protective cover and there is less chance of anaerobic
conditions occurring in the water.
Stormwater ponds can be designed for multiple purposes. When incorporated into
an open space design a pond can serve as a stormwater management facility and a
community amenity. Aeration fountains and stocked fish should be added to keep larval
mosquito populations in check.
Publications from the PA Department of Health and the Penn State Cooperative
Extension concerning West Nile Virus identify aggressive public education about the
risks posed by standing water in artificial containers (tires, trash cans, rain gutters, bird
baths) as the most effective method to control vector mosquitoes.
Conclusion
The Conservation District understands the pressure faced by municipalities when
dealing with multifaceted issues such as stormwater management and encourages the
incorporation of water quality management techniques into stormwater designs. As
Momoe County continues to grow, conservation design, groundwater recharge and
constructed wetlands and ponds should be among the preferred design options to reduce
the impacts of increases in impervious surfaces. When designed and constructed
appropriately, the runoff mitigation benefits to the community from these design options
will far outweigh their potential to become breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
BMP Manuals
California
ORDINANCE APPENDIX G
REFERENCES
California Stormwater BMP Handbook: New Development and Redevelopment (January
2003) - separate file available at http://www.cabmphandbooks.orgffievelopment.asp
Georgia
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2: Technical Handbook (August
2001) separate file (http://www.georgiastormwater.comD
Maryland
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual -
http://www.mde.state.md.us/Programs/Waterprograms/SedimentandStormwater/st
ormwater design/index.asp
Massachusetts
Storm water Management, Volume Two: Stonnwater Technical Handbook
(Massachusetts, 1997) - separate file available at
http://wv."W.state.ma.us/dep/brp/stormwtr/storrnpu b.htm
Minnesota
Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual: Stormwater Best Management Practices for
Cold Climates (July 2001) -
http://www.metrocouncil.org/environment!Waterslied/BMP/rnanual.htm
New Jersey
Revised Manual for New Jersey: Best Management Practices for Control of Non-point
Source Pollution from Stormwater (Fifth Draft May 2000) -
http ://wv.w.state. n j. us/d ep/watershedmgt/bmpman ual.htm
New York
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (2001)http://
www.dee.state. nv. us/website/ <low /swman ualf swmanual.html
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas, November 14, 1997.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Pennsylvania Storm water Best
Management Practices Manual, December 30, 2006 -
bttp://www.depweb.state.pa.us/watershedmgmt/cvvp/view.asp?a=l437&Q=518682&
PM=l
L
Washington
Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (August 2001) -
http://www.ecv.wa.gov/programs/wg/stormwater/manual.html
Fed era]·
Stormwater Best Management Practices in an Ultra-Urban Setting: Selection and
Monitoring (FHWA) - http://www.fbwa.dot.gov/environment/ultraurb/3fsl.htm
USEPA Infiltration Trench Fact Sheet (September 1999) -
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/post.cfm
Riparian Buffer References
Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
September 2000._ Forest Buffer Toolkit, Stream ReLeaf Program.
Penn State College of Agricultural Sciences, 1996. Establishing Vegetative Buffer Strips
Along Streams to Improve Water Quality. Publication# AGRS-67.
Fike, Jean, June 1999. Terrestrial & Palustrine Plant Communities of Pennsylvania,
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory, The Nature Conservancy, Western
Pennsylvania Conservancy, and Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources.
Peru1sylvania Association of Conservation Districts, Inc., Keystone Chapter, Soil and
Water Conservation Society, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, 1998. Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas. Prepared by CH2MHill.
Palone, R. S. and A.H. Todd (eds), 1997. Chesapeake Bay Riparian Handbook: A Guide
for Establishing and Maintaining Riparian Forest Buffers. Chesapeake Bay
Program and Northeastern Area State and Private Forestry. Natural Resources
Conservation Service Cooperative State Research. Education and Extension Services.
The Federal Interagency Stream Restoration Working Group (FISRWG, 10/1998).
Stream Corridor Restoration Principles, Processes, and Practices. GPO Item No.·
0120-A; SuDocs No. A57.6/2:EN3/PT.653. ISBN-0-934213-59-3. Published
October 1998. Revised August 2000.
ORDINANCE APPENDIX H
Reserved For Future Use
ORDINANCE APPENDIX I
Stormwater Management Practices
for projects which are exempt under Section 402 of this
Ordinance
STORMW ATER MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
FOR PROJECTS MEETING THE LAND COVER EXEMPTION CRITERIA
What are the Act 167 Stormwater Management Requirements?
Pennsylvania Act 167 was authorized on October 4, 1978 (32 P.S., P.L. 864) and gave
Pennsylvania Municipalities the power to regulate activities that affect stormwater runoff,
surface and groundwater quantity and quality.
Who is affected by these requirements?
The Act 167 Stormwater Management Requirements affect all NEW development in the
Township of Cumru. Individual home construction projects on single family lots which
are exempt under Section 402 of this Ordinance, are not required to submit formal
drainage plans to the Municipality or County; however, they are still required to address
Water Quality and Groundwater Recharge criteria specified in this Ordinance (Ord.
Sections 305 and 306).
Do I require professional services to meet these requirements?
This brochure has been developed to assist the individual homeowner in meeting the
water quality and groundwater recharge goals of this Ordinance. If t.he guidelines
presented in this brochure are followed, the individual homeowner will not require
professional services to comply with these water quality and groundwater recharge goals.
What do I need to Send to the Municipality?
Even though a formal drainage plan is not required for individual lot owners, a brief
description of the proposed infiltration facilities, including types of material to be used,
total impervious areas and volume calculations as shown above, and a simple sketch plan
showing the following information shall be submitted to the contractor prior to
construction:
• Location of proposed structures, driveways or other paved areas with approximate
size in square feet.
• Location of any existing or proposed on-site septic system and/or potable water
wells showing rough proximity to infiltration facilities.
Determination of Recharge Volume
The amount of recharge volume that should be provided can be determined by following
the simple steps below. Impervious area calculations should include all areas on the
individual lots that are covered by roof area or pavement which would prevent rain from
naturally percolating into the ground, including sidewalks, driveways or parking areas.
Sidewalks, driveways or patios that are constructed with gravel or turf pavers and will not
be blacktopped in the future, need not be included in this calculation.
Example Recharge Volume:
STEP l - Determine Total Impervious Surfaces:
House Roof (Front) 12 ft. x 48 ft. -- 576 sq. ft.
}{ouse Roof (Rear) 12ft. x 48ft. = 576 sq. ft.
Driveway 12 ft. x 50 ft. = 600 sq. ft.
Parking Pad 12 ft. x 12 ft. = 144sq.ft.
Walkway 6 ft. x 20 ft. -- 120 sq. ft.
-------------
2,016 sq. ft.
STEP 2 - Determine Required Infiltration Volume (Rv) Using the Following Equation
Rv = 0.50 inches x (total impervious area in square feet)
12
___ cubic feet of recharge
R = 0.50in.x2,016sq.ft. =
v . 84 . 0 cu .f.t
12
STEP 3 - Sizing of Select Infiltration Method
The following pages show several methods of infiltrating stormwater runoff from
residential areas. Their appropriateness depends on the amount of infiltration volume
required and the amount of land available. More than one method can be implemented
on a site, depending on site constraints. Dry wells should be. used only for receiving
runoff from roof drains. Infiltration trenches are appropriate for receiving runoff from
driveways, sidewalk or parking areas. Other methods may be appropriate, but these
should be discussed with the Township Engineer prior to installation.
Dry Wells
Dry wells are effective methods of infiltrating runoff from roof leaders. These facilities
should be located a minimum of 10 feet from the building foundation to avoid seepage
problems. A dry well can be either a structural prefabricated chamber or an excavated pit
filled with aggregate. Construction of a dry well should be performed after all other areas
of the site are stabilized, to avoid clogging. During construction, compaction of the
subgrade soil should be avoided and construction should be performed with only light
machinery. Depth of dry wells in excess of 3 Y, feet should be avoided. Gravel fill
should be an average 1.5 - 3.0 inches in diameter. Dry wells should be inspected at least
four times annually as well as after large storm events.
FIGURE I-1
TYPICAL DRY WELL CONFIGURATION
BUILDING
FOUNDATION
ROOF LEADER
Source: Maryland Stonnwater Design Manual, 2000
Example Sizing:
STEP 1 - Determine Total Impervious Surfaces
House Roof Area: 12 ft. x 48 ft.= 576 sq. ft.
12" SAND LAYE-R
STEP 2 - Detennine Required Infiltration Volume using Equation
0.50 in. x 576 sq. ft. =
24 0
ft
' cu. '
12
24.0 CU. ft. = 60 O ft
0.4 * ' cu. ' (* assume 40% void ratio in gravel bed)
STEP 3 - Sizing of Select Infiltration Method
Volume of facility= Depth x Width x Length
Set D = 3.5 ft.; Set W = L for a square chamber
60.0 cu. ft.= 3.5 ft. x L XL; L = 4.1 ft
Final Facility Dimensions: 3.5 ft. (D) x 4.1 ft. (W) x 4.1 ft. (L)
Infiltration Trenches
An infiltration trench is a long, narrow, rock-filled trench with no outlet that receives
stormwater runoff. Runoff is stored in the void space between the stones and infiltrates
through the bottom and into the soil matrix. Infiltration trenches perform well for removal
of fine sediment and associated pollutants. Pretreatment using buffer strips, swales, or
detention basins is important for limiting amounts of coarse sediment entering the trench
which can clog and render the trench ineffective.
FIGUREI-2
TYPICAL INFILTRATION TRENCH CONFIGURATION
ovt: l{i"LOV\/ B·ERM ''"''\
'.
, .. nn_<:;~RV/'o.ni>NWFI I
1 Wl>rH'scREvv10P uo
Source: Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, 2000
2~ PEA GRAVEL FILTER LAYER
PROTECTlvt:: LA. YER or f'll TER F-AB!~lC
rRt:.NCH 3-a FEET DEEP
Fil.LED \VITH 1.6 - 2.5 INCH Dt'A.METER
CLEAN STONE
(BANK RUN GR;\\f!;;f. P:REfr;:RJrU;:D)
.-- SA.ND Fil TffiR 6~ OEeP
\"OR FAflR!C EQUIVALENT)
RUNOFF EXFiL'fRATES THROUGH
UNDISTlHUlEO SUB-SOILS \o'JlTH A
MINIM-i,JM RAT!: OF'0.5 INCHES PER HOUR
Example Sizing:
STEP 1 - Determine Total Impervious Surfaces
Driveway 12ft. x 50ft. =
Parking Pad 12 ft. x 12 ft. =
Walkway 6 ft. x 20 ft. =
STEP 2 - Determine Require Infiltration Volume using Equation
0.50 in. x 864 sq. ft. =
36 0
ft
. cu ..
12
36·0 cu. ft. -- 90 . 0 cu. ft . (* assume 40°1/0 v01' d rati.o 1.1 1 grave lb e d)
0.4*
STEP 3 - Sizing of Select Infiltration Method
Volume of facility= Depth x Width x Length
Set D = 3 ft.; Determine Required Surface Area of Trench
90.0 cu. ft. 13 ft.= 30.0 sq. ft.
600 sq. ft.
144 sq. ft.
120 sq. ft.
-------------
864 sq. ft.
The width of the trench should be greater than 2 times it depth (2 x D); therefore in this
example a trench width of 6 feet is selected;
Determine trench length: L = 30.0 sq. ft./ 6 ft.= 5.0 ft.
Final Trench Dimensions: 3 ft. (D) x 6 ft. (W) x 5.0 ft. (L)
FIGURE I-3
SAMPLE SITE SKETCH PLAN
.-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·1
I
ng:;.g~%W~;~kiVW@~;;;;;%@f'.0%i~%i\iX:g;1
/ Grade to Drain
12 ft
··-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·~
' Propose Septic Field ~
~--·-·-·-·-·-·-·-·-··
1 - 3.5 ft (D) x.4.1 ft (VV} x 4.1 ft (L) Dry Well
2 - 3 ft (D) x 6 ft (W) x 5.0 ft (L) Trench Drain
.•. :::
!~J----
\ 12ft
Parking
I
I
I
I
Smith Property
115 Oak Hill Drive
Storrnwater Infiltration Sketch Plan
Submitted: 15 - October- 2000
2 ft
RoofiArea
12 ft
I
1.
12 ft
48 ft
----{:~]





