Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],1 the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Columbia,
County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 220, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a
single ordinance of the Borough of Columbia, which shall be known and is
hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of Columbia," hereinafter
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Columbia and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
1. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-14-2003.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. All legislation regarding creation of a Civil Service Commission or
establishment of rules and regulations therefor, and any amendments
thereto.
T. Any and all amendments to the Existing Structures, Property
Maintenance and Fire Prevention Chapter (now Chapter 112) enacted
by Ord. No. 722, which was adopted after the 2003 republication of the
Borough of Columbia Code but prior to enactment of this Code
Adoption Ordinance. It is intended that the amendments to specific
sections enacted by Ord. No. 722 supersede and control over any
amendments to those same sections listed under "Chapter 112" of
Schedule A, attached to this ordinance.2
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
2. Editor’s Note: In accordance with §§ 1-4T and 1-16B, the chapters, parts and sections
which were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated
throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions
will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed have
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.3
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the Code, the following references are updated as
indicated:
(a) Justice of the Peace or District Magistrate (or District Judge, as
appropriate) to District Justice.
(b) Department of Environmental Resources (or DER) to
Department of Environmental Protection (or DEP).
(c) Department of Community Affairs to Department of
Community and Economic Development.
(d) Borough Secretary or Borough Treasurer to Borough
Secretary/Treasurer.
(e) Generally, Burgess to Mayor (unless revision of "Chief
Burgess" to "District Justice" was appropriate).
(2) Throughout Chapter 74, Alarms, all references simply to "the
Chief" are revised to read "the Chief of Police."
D. Fees. In the following sections, specific fees and/or charges are
removed and replaced with the provision that said fees and/or charges
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council:
§§ 74-5A(2); 74-7B(2); 74-8A(2); 74-9A(2)(a); 74-10A; 82-7; 82-8; 86-4;
86-8; 112-6E and F; 138-3B and C; 149-7C; 173-3B; 173-4B; 173-5E(1);
173-30; 173-55B(1); 181-21A; 186-3; 186-10A and B; 186-12B; 186-27;
198-7; 207-33; and 207-74.
E. Penalties.
(1) In the following sections, provisions are generally standardized to
provide for a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
3. Editor’s Note: In accordance with §§ 1-4T and 1-16B, the chapters, parts and sections
which were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated
throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions
will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days: §§ 77-4; 82-4; 82-14A; 82-17A;
126-13A and B; 126-25; 138-7; 173-6; 173-11; 173-22; 173-70A;
173-71; 186-5; 186-21; 186-22B; 186-28; 186-29; 186-30; 186-32;
186-34B; 186-47; 186-48; 186-50 194-41; 202-14; and 207-83.
(2) In the following sections, provisions are generally standardized to
provide for a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days: §§ 27-4B; 90-6;
149-9A; and 198-12A.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 1-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 1-14
1:8
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 1, 2004.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Certain Ordinances
[Adopted 7-28-2014 by Ord. No. 855]
§ 1-16. Authorization of Manager.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations to implement and supplement the provisions of this article.
The Borough Manager shall make the rules and regulations available for
inspection during regular business hours.
§ 1-17. Violations of certain provisions.
Violations of the following Borough of Columbia Code sections or provisions
shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
Offense Code Sections
Fire Prevention:
Smoke detectors IFC 907.2.11.2
Illegal burning IFC 307.1
Property Maintenance:
Grass and weeds IPMC 302.4
Accumulation of trash IPMC 308.1
Abandoned hazardous vehicle IPMC 302.8
Infestation of rodents IPMC 302.5 and Borough Code
§ 126-29
Sewage in basement/exterior
premises
IPMC 302.1 and 305.1 and Borough
Code § 173-8A
Waste Management:
Trash storage and collection
procedure
Borough Code §§ 181-12 and 181-17
Streets and Sidewalks:
Failure to remove snow from
sidewalk
Borough Code § 186-49
Note: "IPMC" means "International Property Maintenance Code" and "IFC"
means "International Fire Code," both as adopted by ordinance of the
Borough of Columbia incorporated in § 112-1D of the Code of the Borough
of Columbia. "Borough Code" means Code of the Borough of Columbia,
signifying the codified ordinances of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 1-18. Citations, tickets and notices of violation.
A violation of any of the above code and/or Borough Code sections may be
cause for a citation, violation ticket and/or a notice of violation in addition
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11
to any other remedy or fine that the Borough may be entitled to under its
ordinances or other applicable law.
§ 1-19. Issuance and serving of tickets.
Upon finding a violation of any of the above code and/or Borough Code
sections, any Borough of Columbia Code Enforcement Officer, police officer,
fire official, or similar officer hired by or appointed by Borough Council or
the Borough Manager, or any other public officer authorized to enforce the
ordinances of the Borough of Columbia, may issue violation tickets to the
owner and/or occupant of the property at issue or to the individual known to
have violated the code and/or Borough Code section. Violation tickets shall
be issued in the amount of $25 and shall be served by mail. The Borough
may, however, serve the violation ticket by handing it to an adult member of
the household or other person in charge of the residence at the residence
of the person to be served, by leaving or affixing the violation ticket to the
property where the violation exists, or by handing it at any office or usual
place of business of the violator, to his/her agent or to the person for the
time being in charge thereof. Any person who receives a violation ticket for
a violation of this article may, within 15 days, admit the violation, waive
a hearing and pay the fine in full satisfaction of $25, as indicated on the
violation ticket.
§ 1-20. Penalty for nonpayment; abatement and charges; appeals.
A. If the person in receipt of a $25 violation ticket does not pay the fine or
request a hearing within 15 days, that person will be subject to a $10
penalty for days 16 through 30. Failure of the person to make payment
within 30 days shall make the person subject to a citation for the fines
indicated in the relevant sections of the Code of the Borough of
Columbia.
B. The Borough may, with its violation ticket, direct a person to abate the
violation noticed on such ticket ("Notice of Violation"), or if the Borough
determines that the immediate abatement of the same by the Borough
is necessary, the Borough may take the necessary action to abate the
violation at the violator's expense.
C. In the instance that such person does not comply with the Notice of
Violation, the Borough may, itself, take the action set forth in the Notice
of Violation at the violator's expense (which expenses are set forth
below).
D. If the Borough corrected the violation set forth in the Notice of
Violation, the cost thereof may be charged to the owner of the property,
tenant or offending party. The cost shall be as set forth in Subsection E
below, as supplemented or modified by the rules and regulations
adopted by the Borough Manager, in order that the Borough shall be
compensated for both direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred.
§ 1-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 1-20
1:12
E. In all instances where the Borough abates the violation, in addition to
the fine set forth in the violation ticket, the Borough is authorized to
recover from the offending party, the owner of the property, or tenant
the abatement charges set forth below and which may be amended
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. [Amended
7-27-2015 by Res. No. 15-14]
Offense: Code Sections: Abatement Cost:
Fire:
Smoke detectors IFC 907.2.11.2 $200 plus the cost
of smoke detector
Illegal burning IFC 307.1 $200
Property Maintenance:
Grass and weeds IPMC 302.4 $75
Accumulation of
trash
IPMC 308.1 $200
Abandoned
hazardous vehicle
IPMC 302.8 $180
Infestation of rodents IPMC 302.5 and
Borough Code Section
$100
Sewer in basement/
sidewalk
IPMC 302.1 and 305.1
and Borough Code
§ 173-8A
$200
Waste Management:
Trash storage and
collection procedure
Borough Code
§§ 181-12 and 181-17
$50
Streets and sidewalks:
Failure to remove
snow from sidewalk
Borough Code § 186-49 $50
F. In the instance where the Borough has abated the violation and the
charged party fails to pay the abatement costs set forth in a written
notice thereof from the Borough to such individual, the Borough may
include such costs in any citation it issues.
G. A separate offense under this article shall occur for each and every day
such violation continues and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by
this section.
H. In every instance where the recipient of a violation ticket has requested
an appeal within 15 days as set forth above and has made the payments
for appeal set forth in the rules and regulations, a hearing officer
designated by the Borough Manager may uphold the appeal, deny the
appeal, or may modify the violation ticket and/or any associated cost,
fines or penalty amounts.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 1-20
1:14
ARTICLE I
Duties and General Regulations
§ 5-1. Duties of President.
The President shall take the chair at the proper time of meeting and
immediately call the members to order. On the appearance of a quorum and
after call of the roll he shall, at stated meetings, cause the minutes of the
preceding meeting or meetings to be read, which may then be corrected
by Council. He shall preserve order and decorum and, in debate, shall
prevent personal reflections and confine members to the questions under
discussion. When two members rise at the same time, he shall name the one
entitled to the floor. He shall decide all questions of order, but an appeal
in all such cases shall lie to Council. He shall not participate in debate,
except in the enforcement of a rule of order, unless he vacates the chair
and appoints a President Pro Tempore to preside while he is so engaged. He
shall vote last on questions on which the roll is called.
§ 5-2. Order of business at stated meetings.
The order to be observed in taking up business at stated meetings, after roll
call and reading of the minutes, shall be as follows:
A. Extending the privilege of the floor to persons not members of the
Council for the purpose of offering oral or written petitions or
remonstrances.
B. The reading of reports of committees not deemed to be committees of
Council.
C. Receiving report of objections from the Mayor and the reconsideration
of ordinances not approved.
D. The consideration of unfinished business.
E. The offering and reading of original ordinances, memorials and
petitions presented by or through members, and the consideration
thereof.
F. The reading of communications addressed to the Council.
G. The consideration of new business.
H. The consideration of bills.
I. Public comment will be allowed by Borough Council in accordance with
Pennsylvania law at such times during stated meetings as Council shall,
from time to time, deem appropriate.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:15
§ 5-3. Order of business at organizational meeting.
The order to be observed in taking up business at the meeting for the
organization of the Council, after new members and officials have taken and
subscribed the proper oath, shall be as follows:
§ 5-4. Business and debate.
Members speaking shall arise and address the President and, when
presenting a paper, shall first state its import. Members shall not speak
more than twice on any question without permission of the Council, nor be
interrupted when speaking, except by a call to order by the President or by
a member through the President, or by a member to explain or by a call for
the previous question. At the request of any member, a call of the yeas and
nays shall be ordered, and the vote of each member shall be entered on the
minutes.
§ 5-5. Motions.
When a motion is made and seconded, it shall, before debate, be stated by
the President. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the President or
any member requires it; but a motion may be withdrawn by the member
making it any time before final action thereon.
A. Assumption of the chair by the Mayor or formation of a temporary
organization in case of the absence of the Mayor;
B. Roll call;
C. Election of a President, who shall thereupon take the chair;
D. Election of a Vice President;
E. Election of a President Pro Tem;
F. Fixing salaries and election of the following officials:
(1) Secretary/Treasurer, who shall thereupon assume his duties;
(2) Solicitor (only at the organization meeting when his term is about
to expire);
(3) Engineer;
(4) Auditor.
G. Fixing appropriation for the Board of Health;
H. Naming of committees by the President;
I. Appointment of a Vacancy Board.
§ 5-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 5-6
1:16
§ 5-6. How interrupted.
A question regularly before the Council can be interrupted only by a call
for the previous question, for amendment, postponement, commitment or
adjournment.
§ 5-7. When motion to adjourn in order.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when on the call for the
previous question the main question shall have been ordered to be now put,
or when a member has the floor, and shall be decided without debate.
§ 5-8. Powers and duties of Vice President and President Pro Tem.
In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall sign all orders
for the payment of bills authorized at that meeting, and shall exercise all
other powers, perform all other duties of the President and vote last on all
questions on which the roll is called. In the absence of the President and the
Vice President, the President Pro Tem shall perform all of the above duties
in the same manner as the Vice President.
§ 5-9. Reading of ordinances; procedures.
Every ordinance under consideration by the Council shall be read at length,
unless an individual copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member
of the Council in advance of the consideration thereof, provided that, by an
affirmative vote of 2/3 of the members of Council present at the meeting,
the above requirement for reading at length or for furnishing an individual
copy of a particular ordinance or group thereof shall be dispensed with, but
in such case the title of said ordinance shall be read out at length and an
explanation of the purpose and effect of such ordinance or ordinances shall
be given by the Borough Secretary/Treasurer, the Solicitor or the member
of Council introducing such ordinance.
§ 5-10. Committees.
The Council may establish from among its members such committees as
it may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate. The manner
of appointment shall be specified in a motion to create the committee.
The committee may be discharged in the same manner as appointed. The
President shall be an ex-officio member of all committees.
§ 5-11. Authority of Chairman; duties of committees.
A. Should Council have appointed committees, notice of meetings shall be
advertised and, to the extent possible, shall be established on a fixed
schedule for the year at the first meeting of Council, and at the first
monthly meeting of each calendar year thereafter, and the annual
schedules shall then be advertised. Meetings shall be governed and
regulated by the Sunshine Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.4
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:17
§ 5-12. Privilege to floor.
No person, except under the first item of the regular order of business,
shall be permitted to address Council except as otherwise approved by the
President of Borough Council (or any other member of Council chairing
a meeting of Council) in accordance with policies established by Borough
Council from time to time dealing with the provision of public comment
at stated meetings of Borough Council in accordance with applicable
Pennsylvania law.
§ 5-13. Dispensing with rules.
The consent of 2/3 of the members elected to Council shall be necessary to
dispense with any rule.
§ 5-14. Voting by all members required.
Every member present shall vote upon every question before Council,
unless a member is personally interested in that result or is otherwise
excused from or prohibited from voting by applicable Pennsylvania law.
§ 5-15. Duties and direction of officials and employees.
All employees of the Borough whose duties are not herein specified shall
obey the direction and orders of the Borough Manager. The duties of the
following officials appointed by Borough Council shall be as follows:
B. Every member of a committee shall attend the call of the Chairman, and
in case of his absence, sickness or neglect, the committee shall attend
the call of the person named second thereon.
C. Every committee shall submit a monthly report at each stated meeting
of Council and an annual report at the meeting designated in Article II,
Council Meetings, for that purpose.
A. Secretary/Treasurer. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be subordinate to
the Borough Manager and shall report to the Borough Manager and the
Borough Council. The Secretary/Treasurer shall perform all duties
required of a Borough Secretary as prescribed in the Borough Code, Act
of February 1, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, No. 581),5 as amended (the "Act").
The Secretary/Treasurer shall perform all duties required of a Borough
Treasurer as prescribed by the Act and in particular Section 11066 of
the Act. The bond or surety, given by the Secretary/Treasurer shall be in
the form and amount required by Borough Council. The Secretary/
Treasurer shall perform all duties required of a Borough Controller by
the Act and in particular Section 10637 of the Act. In addition to
4. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1106.
7. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1063.
§ 5-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 5-15
1:18
performing all duties required by the Act, as above detailed, the
Secretary/Treasurer shall:
(1) In the absence of the Borough Manager, supervise all nonpolice
employees of the Borough. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be such
person designated by the Borough Manager pursuant to § 40-8 of
the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania;
(2) Comply with all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations
pertaining to care, maintenance and execution of Borough records
and documents, the Borough's accounting and budgeting systems
and programs, and the Borough's financial funds and investments;
(3) Develop, implement and maintain policies, procedures and
programs, including automated data systems, to effectively and
accurately create and store Borough records and reports,
including, but not limited to, fiscal reports as may be requested by
Borough Council and/or the Borough Manager;
(4) Attend all meetings (in addition to Borough Council meetings) as
may be assigned by Borough Council or the Borough Manager;
(5) Keep full minutes of any and all meetings which the Secretary/
Treasurer is assigned to or otherwise required to attend;
(6) Subject to the review, supervision and discretion of the Borough
Manager, Borough Council, and in compliance with the Act and any
other applicable federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations,
assist the Borough Manager to administer and control the fiscal
affairs of the Borough, including, but not limited to, budget
preparation and compliance, financial and accounting systems
development, implementation and maintenance, financial record
keeping, financial reporting, internal auditing, preparing for
external audits, and general book and record keeping;
(7) Prior to complying with any order to pay any bill or claim for labor,
services, salary or for goods or materials sold, furnished or
delivered, and before payment is delivered to the payee, or any
other person, ascertain from the Collector of Borough Taxes the
amount of any tax which may be due by the payee to the Borough
and, if the payee shall owe the Borough a sum in excess of the
amount of the bill or claim, the Secretary/Treasurer shall write or
stamp across the face thereof, with red ink, the words "The within
payee is indebted to the Borough of Columbia for taxes in excess of
the amount hereof, and this Order is hereby transferred to . . .
(name of Collector), Collector of Borough Taxes, as a credit on
account of such indebtedness, and is payable to the order of such
Collector," and sign the same, and shall deliver such order so
endorsed to the Collector of Borough Taxes as a cash credit on
account of such indebtedness of such payee; and if such bill or
claim shall be for an amount in excess of the indebtedness of such
payee, the Secretary/Treasurer shall, in like manner, write or
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-15
1:19
stamp across the face thereof the words "The within payee is
indebted to the Borough of Columbia for taxes in the sum of .
. . (amount) . . . dollars, which amount the Borough Secretary/
Treasurer is required to deduct therefrom and place the same
to the order of the Collector of Borough Taxes," and sign the
same, and shall deliver to the Collector of Borough Taxes an order
describing said transaction and the requisite funds therefor;
(8) Such other duties and responsibilities as assigned by the Borough
Manager or Borough Council; and
(9) Deliver to his/her successor the Seal, books, papers, accounts and
other things belonging to the Borough.
B. Solicitor. The Solicitor shall perform all duties required of a Borough
Solicitor by the Act and in particular Sections 1116 and 11178 of the Act
or by any other federal, state or local law, regulation or rule. The
Solicitor shall deliver to his/her successor all books, papers, records,
documents and other things belonging to the Borough. Additionally, the
Solicitor shall keep a record of all taxes which have become a lien and
shall, at least 60 days before the expiration of any lien, report such
expiring lien to Council's Committee on Finances.
C. Engineer. The Engineer, subject to the Act and all other federal, state
and local laws, rules and regulations, shall be under and subject to the
direction and control of Borough Council. The Engineer shall survey
and ascertain all lines and grades and fix and correct all permanent
points of reference; prepare and preserve all necessary notes, drafts
and surveys and shall deliver them to his/her successor; have the
exclusive custody of all instruments pertaining to his/her office; direct
the construction, reconstruction and repair of all streets, alleys,
sidewalks and gutters; shall make such recommendations and
suggestions to Council, affecting highways, as to him/her may seem
proper; and perform such other services, not incompatible with the
duties of a Municipal Engineer, as may be required.
D. Supervisor (also known as the Public Works Manager). The Supervisor,
subject to the control of Council, shall report to the Borough Manager,
and, subject to the direction of the Engineer, shall personally supervise
the construction, reconstruction and repair of all streets, alleys,
sidewalks and gutters and shall be in charge of the labor employed
thereon. When so requested, the Supervisor shall also assist the
Borough Manager, Council and its committees in budget preparations,
design, implementation and maintenance of all appropriate policies and
procedures for the construction, reconstruction and repair of streets,
alleys, sidewalks and gutters, and in the identification, application for
and administration of appropriate federal, state, local or other grants of
funds for the purposes of construction, reconstruction, or repair of
Borough streets, alleys, sidewalks and gutters.
8. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 1116 and 1117.
§ 5-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 5-15
1:20
§ 5-16. General duties and requirements of designated officials.
Employees or officials of the Borough of Columbia designated in § 5-15 of
this chapter shall:
E. Janitor. The Janitor shall be under and subject to the control and
direction of the Borough Manager and the Borough Council and shall
exercise a general oversight of the Municipal Building and prevent the
loitering therein of any persons not in the employ of any lessees. The
Janitor shall remove all snow and ice from gutters and sidewalks about
the Municipal Building and shall immediately report to the Borough
Manager all breaks, leaks or damage to the Municipal Building.
F. Attendant of Municipal Building Clock. The Attendant of the Municipal
Building Clock shall be under and subject to the control and direction of
the Borough Manager and the Borough Council. The Attendant of the
Municipal Clock shall possess the qualifications of a clock repairman,
shall keep the clock in the tower of the Municipal Building accurate and
shall wind the same whenever necessary.
G. Fire Chief/Safety Inspector. The Fire Chief/Safety Inspector shall report
to the Borough Manager and is subject to the authority of the Borough
Council. The Fire Chief/Safety Inspector shall have all powers and
duties set forth in § 24-17 of Chapter 24, Fire Department, of this Code.
H. The Health Officer, subject to the authority of Borough Council and the
Board of Health, shall report to the Borough Manager and shall perform
all duties and have all of the powers of the Health Officer as prescribed
by Chapter 126 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania,
and shall perform all duties assigned him/her by the Board of Health,
the Borough Manager or Borough Council. The Health Officer shall
have and maintain all certifications and training required by the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Borough Council.
I. Confidential Clerk. The Confidential Clerk shall be the administrative
assistant of the Borough Manager and shall report to the Borough
Manager and Borough Council. The Confidential Clerk shall perform
such duties as may be assigned him/her by the Borough Manager or
Borough Council.
A. Comply with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations
pertaining in any way whatsoever to that employee/official's job duties
or performance;
B. Supervise subordinates in a manner consistent with federal, state and
local laws, rules and regulations and in conformity with any applicable
employment contract under which the Borough is bound; such
supervision shall include, but not be limited to, counseling, discipline,
professional development and performance reviews;
C. Operate any and all Borough vehicles in a safe and reasonable manner;
and
§ 5-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16
1:21
D. Timely and courteously respond in an appropriate manner to all
requests of a superior or Borough Council and to citizens of the
Borough.
§ 5-16 COLUMBIA CODE § 5-16
1:22
ARTICLE II
Council Meetings
§ 5-17. Time of meeting fixed.
Council shall meet at least once a month, at the regular-stated meeting
in January of each year, or at any adjournment thereof, Council shall, by
resolution, fix a time for its regular-stated meeting.
§ 5-18. Special business meetings.
Council may adjourn to a particular time for general business or for special
business.
§ 5-19. Determining date of meeting.
If the quorum is present at a regular or adjourned meeting, a majority of
those who do meet may agree upon another date for like business and may
continue to so agree until the meeting is held.
§ 5-20. Power to call special meetings; notice.
Special meetings may be called by the President of Council or upon written
request of at least 1/3 of the members thereof. Members shall have at least
24 hours' notice of said special meetings. The notice shall state whether
it is for general or special purposes, and if it is for special purposes, the
notice shall contain a general statement of the purpose of the business to
be transacted. Presence at a meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice.
§ 5-21. Adoption of rules.
Council may adopt rules relating to the calling and holding of all meetings,
which rules shall supersede the provisions of this article.
§ 5-22. Robert's Rules of Order.
The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in Robert's Rules of Order
shall govern in all cases in which they are applicable and not inconsistent
with the standing rules of the Council and with the provisions regarding the
conduct of meetings previously set forth in this chapter.
§ 5-23. Committee of the whole.
Council may sit as a committee of the whole. When sitting as a committee
of the whole, no vote may be taken. Council may establish rules for the
governing meetings of the committee of the whole including the designation
by Council President of members of Council to lead discussions on various
topics. All committees of the whole meetings shall be advertised and opened
to the public.
§ 5-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-23
1:23
Chapter 9
AUDITOR
§ 9-1. Appointment of independent auditor.
Borough Council shall, by resolution, appoint an independent auditor who
shall be a certified public accountant registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of
certified public accountants so registered or a competent public accountant
or a competent firm of public accountants.9
§ 9-2. Duties.
The auditor appointed pursuant to this chapter shall make an independent
examination of the accounting records of the Borough for each fiscal year
and perform all other duties and exercise all other powers as authorized by
the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) ............, No. 581.10
Chapter 15
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
9. Editor's Note: Former § 9A-2, Annual appointment, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
10.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. Former § 9A-4, Abolition of elected office,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 5-23 COLUMBIA CODE § 9-2
1:24
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 10-14-2013 by Ord. No. 839]
§ 15-1. Adoption and approval.
The proposed rules and regulations for the Borough of Columbia Civil
Service Commission promulgated by the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, on September 10,
2013, attached hereto and incorporated herein11 shall hereby replace the
existing rules and regulations for the Borough of Columbia Civil Service
Commission in their entirety, and such rules and regulations be and hereby
are approved.
11.Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:25
Chapter 24
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Inspector — See Ch. 27.
Fire Police — See Ch. 31.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Fire loss insurance claims — See Ch. 134, Art.
I.
§ 15-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 15-1
1:26
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Recognition
§ 24-1. Establishment; purpose; organization. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
There is hereby established and reestablished as an administrative division
of the Borough of Columbia a department known as the "Columbia Borough
Fire Department ." The purpose of such Department shall be to provide
services for the Borough and its residents as follows:
§ 24-2. Composition. [Amended 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 690;
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The Columbia Borough Fire Department shall be composed of the following
designated personnel, who shall have the duties, authorities, and
responsibilities specified in this article:
A. Emergency response services, including, but not limited to, the control,
suppression and extinguishment of fires, search and rescue for persons
necessitated by man-made or natural disaster accidents, the isolation
and cleanup of hazardous materials and substances, rendering of
assistance to other emergency services and generally to provide for the
protection and safety of persons and property within the Borough.
B. Nonemergency public services to or for the use of persons and property
within the Borough.
C. Conduct of and participation in training activities and drills, whether
inside or outside of the Borough, as may be deemed necessary or
desirable for maintaining proficiency and providing fire protection and
emergency public response services.
D. Response to emergency calls outside the boundaries of the Borough but
within a reasonable service area of the Columbia Borough Fire
Department responding, or response to or for any municipality which
has entered into a mutual aid agreement with the Borough.
E. The Columbia Borough Fire Department shall have the following
organizational structure:
(1) Borough Council.
(2) Borough Manager/Borough Council Safety Committee.
(3) Fire Chief.
(4) Columbia Borough Fire Department .
A. Fire Chief.
B. Deputy Fire Chief.
C. Assistant Fire Chiefs.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:27
§ 24-3. Consolidation and enumeration of fire companies. [Amended
6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 704; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 891]
Fire protection within the Borough of Columbia was provided for many
years by five Columbia Borough Fire Department . In 2001, three of the five
companies consolidated, leaving three Columbia Borough Fire Department
serving the Borough of Columbia: Columbia Consolidated Fire Department,
Columbia No. 1 Fire Department, and Susquehanna Fire and Rescue No. 4.
Two of those three fire companies subsequently consolidated into one Fire
Company known as "Columbia Borough Fire Department," while Columbia
Consolidated Fire Department was removed from service, thereby leaving
one Columbia Borough Fire Department serving the Borough of Columbia.
The Borough, in recognition of the services provided, has for many years
contributed financial support to the Columbia Borough Fire Department
and is, by adoption of this article, officially recognizing it as the Columbia
Borough Fire Department of the Borough. Such recognition has the effect
of extending to the Columbia Borough Fire Department certain rights and
immunities enjoyed by municipalities and also provides assurance that
members of the Columbia Borough Fire Department injured while engaged
in authorized activities are covered by workers' compensation insurance.
§ 24-4. Recognition of fire companies. [Amended 6-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 704; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 891]
Columbia Borough Fire Department is hereby recognized by the Borough
as the Columbia Borough Fire Department which has been organized by
residents of said Borough and is hereby designated by the Borough as the
officially recognized fire company in and for the Borough of Columbia. No
other organization is dedicated to the fighting of fires or authorized to
operate within the Borough of Columbia except for those acting under a
mutual aid or other agreement approved by Columbia Borough Council.
Columbia Borough Council may, by resolution from time to time, recognize
additional fire companies and designate them as part of the Columbia
Borough Fire Company to operate in accordance with the terms of Chapter
24 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia. Upon adoption of any such
resolution, all such fire companies shall be authorized to perform the
services set forth in Chapter 24 and shall be entitled to the rights and
subject to the obligations set forth in such chapter.
D. Administrative personnel.
E. Volunteer firefighters working for the Columbia Borough Fire
Department as provided for in this article.
§ 24-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 24-4
1:28
ARTICLE II
Volunteer Fire Company
[Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 762; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 24-5. Services authorized.
The Columbia Borough Fire Department as recognized in § 24-4 is
authorized to provide services for the Borough and its residents, without
limitation; however, as follows:
§ 24-6. Authority of Fire Chief.
The Columbia Borough Fire Department recognized in § 24-4, while
performing any of the services specified in § 24-5, shall be subject to and be
under the direction and control of the duly appointed and designated Fire
Chief of the Borough of Columbia operating under the established Borough
organizational structure.
§ 24-7. Additional activities.
In addition to the service activities authorized in § 24-5, the Columbia
Borough Fire Department recognized by the Borough and the members of
A. Emergency response services, including, but not limited to, the control,
suppression and extinguishment of fires; search and rescue for persons
necessitated by man-made or natural disasters or accidents; the
isolation and containment of hazardous materials and substances;
rendering of assistance to other emergency services; and generally to
provide for the protection and safety of persons and property within the
Borough.
B. Nonemergency public services to or for the use of persons and property
within the Borough.
C. Conduct of and participation in training activities and drills, whether
inside or outside of the Borough, as may be deemed necessary or
desirable for maintaining proficiency in providing fire protection
services and emergency response services.
D. Response to emergency calls outside the boundaries of the Borough in
response to any municipality which has entered into a mutual aid
agreement or within the best interest of the Borough.
E. Members of the Columbia Borough Fire Department, if authorized in
advance by the local fire company chief, may respond individually to
emergencies outside the Borough at the request of the municipal fire
department or volunteer company. The local fire company chief shall
maintain a roster of the volunteer firefighters so authorized.
F. Participation in parades and ceremonial functions designed to promote
the Columbia Borough Fire Department and encourage volunteer
support.
§ 24-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-7
1:29
such Columbia Borough Fire Department are authorized to engage, without
limitation, in the following activities for the purpose of and on behalf of the
Columbia Borough Fire Department:
§ 24-8. Control of equipment.
All engines, trucks, hose and other fire apparatus of the Columbia Borough
Fire Department shall, when in service for any purposes stated in § 24-5
hereof, be under the control, direction and subject to inspection by the Fire
Chief.
§ 24-9. Status of equipment.
Should the Columbia Borough Fire Department not meet local policy and
standard operating procedures established by the Borough’s Fire Chief in
readiness with serviceable apparatus and equipment, it shall be deemed not
in a state of effectiveness for service and shall not be called for use at a
service provided for in § 24-5 hereof for response by the Fire Chief.
§ 24-10. Insubordination.
Should the Columbia Borough Fire Department which may or shall through
any of its members or employees or otherwise be guilty of insubordination
to the Fire Chief, while acting in any of the services listed in § 24-5 hereof,
it shall be subject to the penalties provided for herein.
§ 24-11. Compliance with rules and regulations.
The Columbia Borough Fire Department and its members shall at all times
comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the Fire Chief in
accordance with the established organization structure in conjunction with
any of the services set forth in § 24-5. Moreover, the Columbia Borough
Fire Department and its members must comply with all of the rules and
requirements set forth by the Fire Chief regarding training, certification
and equipment maintenance. Failure to comply with this § 24-11 may result
in the imposition of any of the penalties provided for herein.
§ 24-12. Violations and penalties; appeals.
A. Projects and activities for the purpose of providing financial resources
for the acquisition and maintenance of equipment and facilities.
B. Generally engage in activities intended to promote, encourage, support
and assist the Columbia Borough Fire Department in the performance
of their service activities.
A. Should any Columbia Borough Fire Department member or volunteer
company violate any provisions of this chapter, the Fire Chief in
accordance with the established organizational structure may institute
any or all of the following penalties, as the Fire Chief, in his sole
discretion, deems appropriate:
§ 24-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 24-12
1:30
(1) Any action or penalty allowed or prescribed by the rules and
regulations established and adopted by the Fire Chief;
(2) Prohibit individual fire fighter from taking part in any service
authorized pursuant to § 24-5 hereof;
(3) Prevent any Columbia Borough Fire Department from taking part
in any service authorized by § 24-5 hereof;
(4) Take any apparatus of any Columbia Borough Fire Department out
of service, such that it cannot be used in any service authorized by
§ 24-5 hereof;
(5) Recommend that Council institute any or either of the following
penalties:
(a) Lowering or eliminating any appropriations budgeted for
disbursement to any Columbia Borough Fire Department
recognized pursuant hereto; and
(b) Decertifying or, in other words, removing the recognition of
any Columbia Borough Fire Department as the Columbia
Borough Fire Department which is a member of the Columbia
Borough Fire Department .
(6) Take any other applicable actions available at law to the Borough.
B. Appeals.
(1) Any Columbia Borough Fire Department member or volunteer
company aggrieved by a decision of the Fire Chief may appeal the
same to the Borough Manager by filing with the Borough Manager
of the Borough of Columbia, or his or her designated agent, a
written appeal from the decision of the Fire Chief within 10 days of
the date of said decision. The written appeal shall be verified by an
affidavit and shall state the grounds therefor. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such
right is requested in the written appeal. The Borough Manager
shall make a prompt decision on such appeal.
(2) Should the appellant be aggrieved by the decision of the Borough
Manager, the appellant may file an appeal to the Borough Council
from the decision of the Borough Manager within five business
days of said decision. The appeal shall again be in writing, shall be
verified by an affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor, and shall
be filed with the Borough Secretary/Treasurer. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if such
right is requested in the appeal. The Borough Council shall make a
prompt decision on such appeal and shall render a written decision,
copies of which shall be provided to the Fire Chief, the Borough
Manager and the appellant.
§ 24-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-12
1:31

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 24-13. Appointment of Fire Chief. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726; 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 743; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 891;
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The position of Fire Chief shall be made by Borough Council based on
nomination from the Columbia Borough Fire Department. This appointment
is at the Borough Council's sole and absolute discretion, and the Borough
Council may at any time remove or terminate the Fire Chief. If the Borough
Council should choose not to appoint the nominee from the Columbia
Borough Fire Department, the Columbia Borough Fire Department shall
submit to the Borough Council the name of another individual as a nominee
to serve as Fire Chief.
§ 24-14. Appointment of Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire
Chiefs. [Amended 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 690; 12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 891]
The Fire Chief may appoint a Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chiefs
meeting established standards as set forth in the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Fire Chief. All such assistants of the Deputy Fire Chief
and Assistant Fire Chiefs shall serve at the discretion of the Fire Chief. The
Fire Chief shall, however, notify Borough Council of the appointment of any
of the same.
§ 24-15. through § 24-16. (Reserved)12
§ 24-17. Duties of Fire Chief. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No.
918]
The Fire Chief shall supervise and be responsible for the services and
activities of the Columbia Borough Fire Department . The Fire Chief shall
be subordinate to and report to the Borough Manager and is subject to the
authority of Borough Council. The authority, duties and responsibilities of
the Fire Chief shall include, but need not be limited to, the following:13
A. Should Borough Council not have appointed a Fire Inspector, the Fire
Chief shall perform all duties and have all of the powers of the Fire
Inspector prescribed by the Code of the Borough of Columbia,
Pennsylvania; [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Supervising, directing and controlling volunteer fire fighters while
actually engaged in any of the services and activities specified in § 24-5
hereof;
12.Editor’s Note: Former § 24-15, Removal of Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chiefs, and
§ 24-16, Term of office for Fire Chief; vacancies, as amended, were repealed 12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 891.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 31-17(1) and (2), regarding the duties of the Code Official and Fire
Inspector, were repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 24-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-17
1:33
§ 24-18. Duties of Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chiefs.
[Amended 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 690; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
C. Developing, implementing and maintaining policies and procedures for
fire protection and prevention, for fire-fighting operations, for
personnel training and for application of safety codes adopted by
Borough Council;
D. Preparing and submitting an annual operating budget to the Borough
Manager for the Columbia Borough Fire Department , including capital
expenditures for buildings and/or equipment proposed for the current
budget year;
E. Preparing an annual update of long-range capital budget proposals, as
required;
F. Establishing procedures for the inspection of any and all equipment
used by the recognized Columbia Borough Fire Department in any of
the services set forth in § 24-5 hereof to assure that such equipment is
in conformity with any rules, regulations and policies set forth by the
Fire Chief and in accordance with all local, state and federal laws
related to the operation and use of such equipment.
G. Performing such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned
from time to time to the Fire Chief by the Borough Manager or Borough
Council.
A. The Deputy Fire Chief shall be subordinate to the Fire Chief and shall
perform such duties and activities as the Fire Chief designates,
including, but not limited to, supervising fire operations as outlined by
established procedures, coordinating activities with the appointed
Assistant Fire Chiefs, assuming management duties and responsibilities
in the absence of the Borough Fire Chief, maintaining liaisons between
the Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chiefs and volunteers on all operational
matters, insuring that fire loss and incident reports are submitted to the
Fire Chief within 24 hours after the incident necessitating the
preparation of such reports, maintaining current training as required to
keep abreast of current trends in the field, and scheduling, supervising
and participating in duty officer programs.
B. The Assistant Fire Chiefs shall, when the Columbia Borough Fire
Department is in service, render such services and assistance to the
Fire Chief as he may order and direct. In his absence, such Assistant
Fire Chiefs shall provide such services and assistance to the Deputy
Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire Chief who shall first arrive on the scene of
any fire/emergency shall assume the duties and be vested with the
power of the Fire Chief until the arrival of that official or, in his absence,
the Deputy Fire Chief.
§ 24-17 COLUMBIA CODE § 24-19
1:34
§ 24-19. Jurisdiction of Fire Chief. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The Fire Chief shall, subject to the ordinances, rules, resolutions and
regulations of Borough Council, have full, absolute and complete control
of the Columbia Borough Fire Department when in service as provided in
§ 24-5 hereof, and his orders and directions shall be obeyed by every officer
and member of Columbia Borough Fire Department recognized pursuant
hereto. Moreover, the Fire Chief shall, as his sole responsibility, assign
to no more than 25 members of the Columbia Borough Fire Department
recognized pursuant hereto and fire police of the Borough of Columbia the
privilege of using mobile two-way radios, and red and blue lights of the
flashing and revolving type on their private vehicles. The approved list,
signed by the Fire Chief, shall be filed with the Borough Police Department,
with the Fire Chief, and with any and all other officials required by
Pennsylvania law. The foregoing shall be in addition to all of the obligations
and requirements of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4572 of the Vehicle Code, as amended
from time to time. The Fire Chief shall have the power to require any
member of the Columbia Borough Fire Department to remove such blue
lights if such member does not follow the rules, regulations and policies set
forth by the Fire Chief. Failure to comply with such request of the Fire Chief
shall subject the individual Columbia Borough Fire Department member
and the Columbia Borough Fire Department of which he is a member to the
penalties set forth in § 24-12 hereof.
§ 24-20. Authority of Fire Chief at fires; damaged buildings.
[Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The Fire Chief shall, subject to the ordinances, rules, resolutions and
regulations of Council, have full and complete control and authority over
every burning building and the ruins of every building which has been
wholly or partially destroyed, and such authority shall, if necessary, be
enforced and maintained by the assistance of the Police Department of the
Borough of Columbia. Such authority shall include the right and privilege
of adopting all and every reasonable effective needs for preventing a
communication of flames to other or adjoining buildings, and such authority
shall not cease until the fire, whether confined to members or otherwise,
has been wholly and entirely extinguished. The authority set forth in this
§ 24-20 shall also apply to any services rendered by the Columbia Borough
Fire Department pursuant to § 24-5A, B and D.
§ 24-21. Reports by Fire Chief; pre-fire inspections. [Amended
3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 690; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The Fire Chief shall, on or before the afternoon of the first Tuesday of each
month, submit to the Borough Manager and the Committee on Public Safety
a full, complete and detailed report of all matters of interest and importance
concerning the service, equipment and condition of the Columbia Borough
Fire Department, and offer such suggestions and recommendations for the
improvement of the fire service by legislation or acquisition as to him
§ 24-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-21
1:35
may seem proper and necessary. It shall also be the duty of the Fire
Chief, together with the Deputy Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chiefs,
to perform a pre-fire survey of every public, mercantile and manufacturing
building and warehouse within the limits of the Borough, for the purpose
of acquiring such knowledge and plans of construction of the buildings
as would be essential to effective direction of the Columbia Borough Fire
Department at the time of fire.
§ 24-22. Sending fire apparatus beyond Borough limits. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
No volunteer fire company recognized pursuant hereto shall take or send or
permit to taking or sending of its engine, hose, or apparatus to any other
municipality or beyond the Columbia Borough limits except by permission
of the Fire Chief or his appointed designee; provided, however, that in no
event shall any engine, hose or apparatus be sent to any other municipality
or beyond the Columbia Borough limits if such action will leave the Borough
without the service of at least two pumpers and one aerial type truck and
rescue unit.
§ 24-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 24-22
1:36
ARTICLE IV
Fiscal Responsibilities
§ 24-23. Budgets. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
The Columbia Borough Fire Department shall submit to the Fire Chief
annually on or before October 15 a proposed budget for the coming year.
§ 24-24. Audit of financial records. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 918]
The Borough Council may, at its expense, audit any of the Columbia
Borough Fire Department as provided by law where a reasonable doubt
exists as to the proper operation and management of said Columbia
Borough Fire Department.
§ 24-25. Annual appropriations. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No.
918]
§ 24-26. Cost recovery. [Added 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 713]
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia shall appropriate
annually to the Columbia Borough Fire Department from the general
fund of the Borough or from any special fund established for the
purpose such amounts of money as the Borough Council in its sole
discretion shall deem reasonable and necessary for the operation and
maintenance of the Columbia Borough Fire Department and its
facilities and the rehabilitation or acquisition of land, buildings or
equipment, as may from time to time be authorized by the acts of
general assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Nothing
herein shall be construed as requiring the Borough Council to make any
annual appropriation to any Columbia Borough Fire Department.
B. No appropriation shall be made to the Columbia Borough Fire
Department if it has failed to file with the Borough in acceptable form
for the preceding fiscal year the budgets and/or audited filings as
required by § 24-23 of this article.
C. Any and all appropriations made by Borough Council may be limited,
decreased or eliminated should the Columbia Borough Fire Department
have violated any of the provisions of this article.
A. The Columbia Borough Fire Department may recover the reasonable
cost of the equipment necessarily damaged, destroyed or used and fire
extinguishing agents used or consumed in the course of mitigating fire
emergencies, hazardous material spills or releases, including, but not
limited to, environmental, industrial, residential and motor vehicle
rescue incidents or in the performance of their authorized duties from
the persons, corporations, designated agents or other entities for whom
the Columbia Borough Fire Department performed their services.
[Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 24-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-26
1:37
B. The Columbia Borough Fire Department shall follow the latest cost
recovery guidelines approved by the Lancaster County Fire Chiefs
Association and adopted by the Lancaster County Fireman's
Association. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
C. The reasonable costs as outlined above may be recovered directly by
the Columbia Borough Fire Department, Columbia Borough, with
consent of the Borough Council, or through an approved third party
cost recovery service as an authorized agent for the collection of said
reasonable costs. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
(1) Cost recovery for all hazardous material spills or releases that are
under the direct control of the Lancaster County Emergency
Management Hazardous Materials Team or its designated
representative(s) shall be submitted to the Director of the
Lancaster County Emergency Management Agency, as the
designated authority having jurisdiction.
D. After receipt of the items listed in Subsection D(1) and (2) below by the
Columbia Fire Chief, the following documents shall be provided by the
appropriate Fire Company to the insurance company or other third
party:
(1) Initial Columbia Borough Fire Department report (completed on
the scene of incident).
(2) Completed Columbia Borough Fire Department Uniform Cost
Recovery Form.
(3) Cover letter from the Borough Fire Chief.
(4) Copy of the Cost Recovery Ordinance.
E. The Columbia Borough Fire Department shall submit a uniform
quarterly report to the Borough Fire Chief on or before the 15th of the
first month of the following quarter (ex., first quarter report, on or
before the 15th of April), regarding cost recovery. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
F. The following information will be reported:
(1) The number of incidents for that period;
(2) The number of incidents year to date;
(3) Total amount requested for cost recovery for that period;
(4) Total amount requested for cost recovery year to date;
(5) Total amount received for that period;
(6) Total amount received year to date; and
(7) Total number of outstanding incidents.
§ 24-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 24-26
1:38
Chapter 27
FIRE INSPECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
Fire Police — See Ch. 31.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
§ 27-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Fire Inspector is hereby created in the Borough of Columbia,
such officer to be appointed by the Council of the Borough. Said Fire
Inspector shall report to the Committee on Public Safety, except on those
matters of which he is required by law to report directly to the Council.
§ 27-2. Appointment and compensation.
§ 27-3. Duties.
A. Appointments shall be made on the first Monday of January of each
even-numbered year, such appointee to serve until his respective
successors have been duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made, for the
unexpired portion of the term. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726]
B. The compensation of the Fire Inspector shall be fixed from time to time
by the Council by resolution.
A. The Fire Inspector shall inspect all constructions or buildings within the
Borough or upon property owned or controlled by the Borough or a
municipal authority of the Borough within the commonwealth, whether
public or business, and private property by complaint, and shall enforce
all ordinances of the Borough relating to such constructions or
buildings for the prevention, containment or investigation of fire and
fire hazards, both as to the constructions or buildings and as to the
contents or occupancies thereof. [Amended 10-10-1983 by Ord. No.
582]
(1) Fire safety inspections will be performed on all commercial
businesses in Columbia Borough. In-home businesses where the
business owner lives in the same building are exempt from the fire
safety inspections. [Added 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 915]
B. The Fire Inspector shall report to the Committee on Public Safety any
faulty or dangerous construction or building or like condition in any
building that may constitute a fire hazard and any proposed use or
§ 24-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:39
§ 27-4. Interference prohibited; violations and penalties;
exemption.
Chapter 31
FIRE POLICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24.
Fire Inspector — See Ch. 27.
Police Department — See Ch. 31.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
occupation of any construction, building or premises which would
create or increase a hazard of fire.
C. The records of the Fire Inspector relating to his inspections of
constructions, buildings and property within the Borough shall be open
to public inspection. [Amended 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 582]
D. The Fire Inspector shall submit to the Council an annual report
consolidating the information contained in said records at the first
stated meeting in March of each year.
E. The Fire Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties and upon
proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
F. Fire safety inspections will be conducted on a biannual basis. [Added
7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 915]
A. No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct
or prevent the Fire Inspector in the discharge of his duties by denying
or attempting to deny him access to any premises owned or occupied by
him or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information requested by
him in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any
fire.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
C. Subsections A and B shall not apply to the State Police Fire Marshal, his
authorized assistants, deputies, designates, agents, servants and
employees, nor shall it apply to the Borough Fire Chief in the discharge
of his public duties. [Added 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 27-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 31-1
1:40
§ 31-1. Appointment; duties. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No.
918]
Annually there shall be nominated by the Columbia Borough Fire
Department those members of the Department who are to serve as special
fire police. When confirmed by the Mayor and sworn as provided by law,
such persons shall be designated "special fire police" and shall have all of
the powers and perform all the duties vested in special fire police by law
and, in addition, shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. Such
special fire police shall, during the interval between sounding of a fire alarm
and the recall of, or, if no alarm is sounded, until dismissed by, the Chief of
the Police or his designee, maintain order among the persons gathered at
the scene of any incident and assist the police and the firemen in securing
ready access to the scene of any incident.
§ 31-2. Duty to report to Police Chief upon sounding of alarm.
Such special fire police, upon the sounding of an alarm, shall forthwith
repair to the scene of the incident and report to the Chief of the police or
his designees for assignment to duty.
§ 31-3. Appropriate attire provided.
Any person functioning as special fire police, and performing a duty in
accordance with the Pennsylvania laws relating to emergency services and
special fire police, shall be identifiable by, at a minimum, the wearing of
a distinctive arm band or hat or uniform or insignia, and a badge, as the
Public Safety Committee of the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia
shall from time to time designate.
Chapter 33
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126.
§ 33-1. Membership and terms of office.
The five members and two alternate members of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Columbia shall be appointed, each for a five-year term, or until
his or her successor is appointed and qualified, by the Borough Council of
the Borough of Columbia. The terms shall be fixed so that the term of not
more than one member shall expire during any one calendar year. In the
event that a vacancy occurs in an office other than by expiration of a term,
it shall be filled by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia by an
appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 31-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-2
1:41
§ 33-2. Continuation in office of present members.
The present members of the Board of Health shall continue in office until
the end of the term for which they were appointed, or until a vacancy shall
occur in their office other than by expiration of term. In the event that a
vacancy occurs in an office other than by expiration of a term, it shall be
filled by Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia by an appointment for
the unexpired term.
§ 33-3. Expenditure of funds.
The Board of Health shall not have power to obligate the Borough of
Columbia for any sum or sums of money beyond that which is specifically
appropriated for its uses.
§ 33-4. Administrative officers; appointments; salaries.
§ 33-5. Meeting place.
The meeting place of the Board of Health shall be in the Municipal Building
of the Borough of Columbia located at 308 Locust Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania, provided that such meeting or meetings do not conflict with
the meetings of the Borough Council.
§ 33-6. Organization.
The Board of Health shall organize by the election of one of its members as
chairperson at its first regular meeting of each year and shall certify such
election to the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia. The term of
office of each member of the Board of Health shall begin on the first day of
January and end upon the last day of December of the year in which that
member's term terminates.
§ 33-7. Annual budget.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health by resolution to submit to the
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia before the commencement
of the fiscal year, a budget setting forth the probable receipts and
expenditures of the Board of Health during the ensuing year and further
setting forth the amount of the appropriation which the Board of Health
deems necessary for the Borough Council to make for the proper carrying
out of its duties.
A. The administrative officers of the Board of Health, to wit, chairperson,
and secretary, shall be appointed by the Board of Health and their
salaries fixed by the Board of Health, provided that such appointments
and such salaries shall first be approved by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia.
B. The Health Officer shall be appointed by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia.
§ 33-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 33-7
1:42
Chapter 40
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 40-1. Office created.
The Office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Columbia, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time to
abolish such office.
§ 40-2. Appointment; removal.
§ 40-3. Qualifications. [Amended 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 670]
The Manager shall be chosen on the basis of his or her executive and
administrative abilities. The Manager shall have a degree in business
administration or a degree in engineering or an equivalent degree as
determined by the Borough Council. The Manager shall be a citizen of the
United States, but he or she need not be a resident of the Borough.
§ 40-4. Compensation; bond.
The Manager shall receive such compensation for his or her services as
shall be fixed by the Council from time to time. Before entering upon his
or her duties, he or she shall give a bond in the amount prescribed by
the Borough Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of his or her
duties. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the Borough. The bond
of the Borough Manager may be included in and covered by a blanket bond
in effect for all Borough employees, if the Borough shall have obtained such
blanket bond.
§ 40-5. General powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he or she shall be responsible to the Borough Council as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. He or she
may perform any of the nonlegislative powers and duties of the Mayor that
shall be delegated to the Manager by the Mayor, subject to recall by written
notification at any time.
A. The Manager shall be appointed from time to time and, whenever there
is a vacancy, by a majority vote of all members of the Borough Council.
B. The Manager may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all the
members of the Borough Council.
§ 33-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-6
1:43
§ 40-6. Specific powers and duties.
The specific powers and duties of the Manager shall include the following:
A. The Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the activities and
the personnel of all Borough departments, facilities and property and of
all activities conducted by the Borough, including the sewage treament
plant, the streets, refuse removal and disposal, recreational centers and
parks and all other Borough-operated utilities and facilities. The Mayor
is authorized to delegate his control over his Department of Police to
the Borough Manager. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878]
B. He or she shall recommend to the appropriate committee the hiring or
discharge of any employee under his or her supervision, shall take such
action thereon as is approved and directed by the reviewing committee
and shall have the right to suspend any employee under his or her
supervision, provided that persons covered by the civil service
provisions of the Borough Code and any collective bargaining
agreement with the Borough shall be hired, suspended or discharged in
accordance with such provisions and provided further that the Manager
shall report, at the next regular meeting thereafter of the Council, any
such action taken by authority of this subsection.
C. The Manager shall prepare the Borough budget with the assistance of
Council committees and shall consult with the appropriate officials in
the preparation of the sewage treament plant budget. The Manager
shall be responsible for the administration of the Borough budget and
sewer budget after their adoption by the Council. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878]
D. The Manager shall hold such ex officio offices and positions as the
Council may from time to time assign to him or her.
E. The Manager shall prepare an agenda for and attend all meetings of the
Council and its committees, with the right to take part in the discussion,
and he or she shall receive notices of all special meetings of the Council
or its committees.
F. The Manager shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of
Borough affairs. He or she shall submit quarterly reports on the
condition of the Borough finances and such other reports as the Council
requests, and he or she shall make such recommendations to the
council as he or she shall deem necessary.
G. The Manager shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
H. The Manager shall supervise the performance and execution of all
contracts entered into by the Borough, except insofar as such duties are
expressly imposed upon another Borough officer by statute. He or she
shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law.
§ 40-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 40-6
1:44
§ 40-7. Relationship with Council.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Borough Council, its committees
and its members, shall deal with the administrative service of the Borough
solely through the Borough Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its
committees or any of its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to
any subordinate of the Manager.
§ 40-8. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he
or she shall designate, from the appointed officers or employees of the
Borough, one person who shall perform the duties of the Manager during
his absence or disability. The person so designated shall not perform those
duties for a period longer than two weeks without the approval of the
Council.
§ 40-9. Vacancy in office. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Borough Manager, the Borough
Council may appoint a temporary Borough Manager and a temporary
Zoning Officer to exercise the powers and to be subject to the duties
of the aforesaid offices. The person or persons so appointed shall serve
at the pleasure of Council at such salary as may be determined by the
Council upon such appointment. Additionally, in the event of a vacancy
in the office of Borough Manager, until a temporary Borough Manager or
permanent Borough Manager is appointed, Borough Council, in accordance
with applicable Pennsylvania law, shall exercise and perform all of the
I. If specifically requested by the Borough Council, the Manager shall see
that money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that the proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of the Borough's
claims.
J. The Manager shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough and shall
be responsible for the making of all purchases as directed by the
Borough Council. Furthermore, on his or her own initiative, he or she
shall have authority to make ordinary purchases, provided that no such
purchase shall exceed the legal limit provided by law for non-bid
contracts and established by the Legislature of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania from time to time and provided that such purchases are
consistent and in accordance with budgetary appropriations previously
approved by Borough Council. [Amended 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 735]
K. All complaints regarding services of any Borough employee shall be
referred to the Borough Manager. He or she shall investigate and
dispose of such complaints and report thereon to the Council.14
14.Editor's Note: Former § 18-6L and M, regarding powers as Market Master and Zoning
Officer, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726.
§ 40-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-9
1:45
rights, duties and obligations of the Borough Manager, which duties, rights,
powers and obligations may be assigned to the appropriate standing
committees of Borough Council.
§ 40-10. Assistant Borough Manager. [Added 12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 892]
Borough Council may from time to time appoint an Assistant Borough
Manager to exercise the powers of the Borough Manager in the absence
of the Borough Manager and/or at the direction of the Borough Manager.
The person or persons so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of Council at
such salary as may be determined by the Council upon such appointment.
Additionally, in the event of a vacancy in the office of Borough Manager,
such person may be appointed by Council to exercise and perform all of the
rights, duties and obligations of the Borough Manager until the vacancy is
filled.
Chapter 43
MAP, OFFICIAL
§ 43-1. Authority; purpose; review and hearing.
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPC") authorizes the
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia to prepare, adopt and amend
the Official Map of the Borough of Columbia showing existing and proposed
public streets, public grounds, public parks, playgrounds and open space
reservations. The Borough Council has determined that the amendment of
its Official Map will assist the Borough of Columbia in the implementation
of its Comprehensive Plan and will assist land owners in the determination
of uses and development of their lands within the Borough of Columbia. The
Borough of Columbia has solicited reviews of the proposed amendment to
its Official Map from the Borough of Columbia Planning Commission, the
Lancaster County Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors of West
Hempfield Township, the West Hempfield Township Planning Commission,
the Board of Supervisors of Manor Township, and the Manor Township
Planning Commission. Following the receipt of the comments and
recommendations of such bodies, Borough Council of the Borough of
Columbia held a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of
Article IV of the MPC.15
§ 43-2. Adoption.
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia hereby amends its Official
Map by adopting and implementing in its place the map entitled "Columbia
Borough Map prepared by ARRO Consulting, Inc."; and by adopting and
incorporating the same, the same shall be considered the Official Map of
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
§ 40-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 43-2
1:46
the Borough of Columbia. A true and correct copy of said map is attached
hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein.16
§ 43-3. Recording and filing.
The proper officials of the Borough of Columbia are hereby authorized
and directed to take all steps necessary to record the Official Map as
amended hereby in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, as required by Section 402(c) of the MPC.17 The proper
officials of the Borough of Columbia are further directed and authorized to
transmit certified copies of the Official Map as amended to those entities
required to be provided with copies pursuant to the MPC.
§ 43-4. Amendments.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia retains the right to amend
the Official Map adopted by this chapter from time to time by appropriate
action of Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia taken in accordance
with the procedural requirements of the MPC as it may be hereinafter
amended.
Chapter 47
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Foundation — See Ch.
48.
§ 47-1. Creation of Board.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia ("Borough Council")
hereby creates the Borough of Columbia Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board ("Board") for purposes of assisting the Parks and Recreation
Committee with decisions with regard to operating the Borough of
Columbia's parks and recreation places, all in conformity with the authority
granted to Borough Council to operate such parks and places under
Pennsylvania law.
§ 47-2. Membership and terms of office.
Commencing March 1, 2018, the Board shall consist of not more than five
members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Borough Council for
terms of three years, in such order that at least one member's term shall
expire annually. Each such member shall have a demonstrated interest
16.Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402(c).
§ 43-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-2
1:47
in parks and recreation. The aforesaid appointments for a specified term
notwithstanding, a Board member may stay in office until a successor
qualifies or is appointed, or the Borough Council may remove any member
of the Board at the pleasure of the Borough Council. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than by the expiration of a term shall be for the unexpired
term and shall be filled in the same manner as original appointees. The
Borough Council shall consider recommendations of the Board and the
School District of the Borough of Columbia to fill vacancies on the Board,
but the Borough Council shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to make
each and every appointment. There shall be no limit on the number of terms
which can be served, upon reappointment by a Board member by Borough
Council. All terms shall expire at the first meeting of Borough Council of the
calendar year three years after appointment. The initial membership of the
Board (which consisted of five members) was appointed by Borough Council
on a staggered schedule.
§ 47-3. Service without pay.
Members of the Board shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed
by the Borough of Columbia, at Borough Council's discretion, for certain
expenses incurred in performing their duties.
§ 47-4. Meetings.
The Board members shall attend meetings at least once a month and at such
other times and on a schedule to be established by Council and the Parks
and Recreation Committee.
Chapter 48
PARKS AND RECREATION FOUNDATION
§ 48-1. Creation.
The Columbia Borough Council does hereby create and organize a Parks
and Recreation Foundation.
§ 48-2. Purpose.
The purposes for which the Columbia Parks and Recreation Foundation is
formed are to provide support for parks and recreation within the Borough
of Columbia and to promote, sponsor and carry out related activities and
objectives within the Borough of Columbia.
§ 48-3. Appointments. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
The Borough Council shall appoint members to the board of said Foundation
from time to time, as may be required, and shall, from time to time, take
any and all action necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 47-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 48-4
1:48
§ 48-4. Tax-exempt status; budget; powers and duties.
Chapter 52
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 52-1. Establishment.
A commission of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
is hereby created to be known as the "Planning Commission of the Borough
of Columbia." The said Planning Commission shall consist of seven members
and is hereby reestablished and continued pursuant to the provisions of
Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,18
as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, Number 247, as
amended and reenacted.
§ 52-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of seven members who shall
be appointed for terms of office of four years, except that the terms of the
members first appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be so fixed that no
more than two shall be reappointed or replaced during any future calendar
year.
§ 52-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.
A. The foundation will be a not-for-profit corporation with tax-exempt
status to be known as the "Borough of Columbia Parks and Recreation
Foundation." The existence of said corporation is to be indefinite. The
corporation shall maintain a budget and oversee all contributions in
cash and in kind. The corporation shall have the power to disburse
funds necessary to promote the maintenance and development of parks
and recreation and to carry out related activities.
B. The Council authorizes the President of the Borough Council to
incorporate the corporation and to file all necessary documents to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201 et seq.
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:49
Chapter 56
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil Service Commission — See Ch. 15. Fire police — See Ch. 31.
§ 52-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 52-3
1:50
ARTICLE I
Creation; Organization
[Adopted 5-8-1978 by Ord. No. 548 (Ch. 61 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 56-1. Creation.
There is hereby created a Police Department for Columbia Borough which
shall consist of the Chief of Police, superior officers and patrolmen.
§ 56-2. Word usage.
All terms herein used in the masculine shall be deemed to include the
feminine.
§ 56-3. Superior officers.
All members of the Police Department shall be termed "patrolmen," except
those who may be designated by the Council as superior officers, of which
the following may be appointed to hold such rank or designation and
assignment during the pleasure of the Council: Sergeants.
§ 56-4. Rank.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have
supervision over all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank
shall be the Sergeants and then patrolmen, in order of seniority in each
group.
§ 56-5. Appointment; promotion; removal; suspension; demotion.
The Borough Council may, subject to the civil service provisions of the
Borough Code, appoint, promote, remove, suspend or reduce in rank
suitable persons as Borough policemen.
§ 56-6. Duties of Chief.
The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the Borough jail and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records
and make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may
be required by statute or by the Borough Council. The Chief shall be
responsible for the performance by the Police Department of its functions,
and all persons who are members of the Police Department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
§ 56-7. Duties of members.
It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the Borough and all statutes
applicable therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law
and arrest violators thereof.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-8
1:51
§ 56-8. Establishment of divisions.
With the approval of the Borough Council, the Chief of Police may establish
a traffic division or detective division or other special division within the
Police Department, assigning such policemen to such division and
designating such duties therefor as may be deemed necessary.
§ 56-9. Conduct of members.
It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct
himself or herself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and to
avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Department shall
obey the orders and directions of his superior.
§ 56-10. Fees and compensation.
§ 56-11. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as
he shall deem advisable, and such rules, when approved by the Borough
Council, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may
cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be
worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters
necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department. Such
rules and regulations must be consistent with the ordinances of the Borough
and the laws of the State of Pennsylvania, and must be posted.
§ 56-12. Special policemen.
The Borough Council may appoint any suitable person as a special
policeman to serve for such term and on such conditions as may be
designated by the terms of such appointment. No such special policeman
shall be entitled to any compensation from the Borough unless such
A. It shall be unlawful for any Borough policeman to charge or accept any
fee or other compensation in addition to his salary for any service
performed pertaining to the duties of his office as policeman, except as
provided herein.
B. With the approval of the Borough Council, members of the Police
Department may be allowed court pay for attendance at court
proceedings and hearings.
C. With the approval of the Borough Council, members of the Police
Department may receive payment for mileage for attendance at
approved training programs, court or hearing appearances or
otherwise, as specified by the Borough Council.
D. For meritorious service rendered by any member of the Police
Department in the due discharge of his duty, the Borough Council may
permit such member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be
permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor.
§ 56-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 56-12
1:52
compensation is ordered by the Council, nor shall such special policeman
be considered an employee of the Borough by reason of such appointment.
Appointments may be revoked at any time by the Council.
§ 56-13. Vehicles.
The Committee on Public Safety is hereby empowered to secure such
vehicles for the use of the Borough Police Department as they deem
necessary for the proper functioning of said Department.
§ 56-14. Temporary or Acting Chief.
A. A temporary or Acting Chief of Police may be appointed by the Borough
Council under any of the following circumstances:
(1) Should incapacity, illness or other involuntary cause render the
Chief of Police unable to fulfill his duties for a period of time
expected to be in excess of 30 days.
(2) Should the Chief of Police voluntarily absent himself from active
duty for a period of time in excess of 30 days.
(3) Should the Chief of Police resign or have his employment
terminated by Borough Council. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726]
B. Such temporary or Acting Chief of Police shall be charged with the
duties of the Chief of Police and shall exercise the complete authority of
the Chief of Police under this chapter.
C. Such appointment may be terminated at any time by the Borough
Council and is not a provisional appointment or promotion for purposes
of the civil service provisions of the Borough Code.
§ 56-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-14
1:53

ARTICLE II
Warrantless Arrests
[Adopted 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 832]
§ 56-15. Arrests without warrant authorized.
Borough Council hereby authorizes its police officers to make arrests
without warrant upon probable cause when there is ongoing conduct that
imperils the personal security of any person or endangers public or private
property or when there are circumstances involving violence, or the
imminent threat of violence, or the danger that the defendant might flee in
accordance with 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902.
§ 56-16. Display of badge.
If possible, the arresting officer should be in uniform or display some badge
of authority.
§ 56-17. Rules of Criminal Procedure.
The police officers of the Borough of Columbia are directed to follow all
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure regarding making arrests
and regarding the determination of whether probable cause exists for the
making of an arrest.
§ 56-18. Arrest guidelines.
Any procedures and policies of the Bureau of Police for the Borough of
Columbia regarding when, where and how its officers are authorized and
entitled to make arrests upon probably cause, whether with a warrant or
without, are incorporated herein and are determined to be the guidelines of
the Borough of Columbia for making arrests without warrant upon probable
cause in accordance with 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902.
§ 56-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-18
1:55
Chapter 58
PUBLIC MEETINGS
§ 56-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 56-18
1:56
ARTICLE I
Protocols and Rules of Decorum
[Adopted 5-14-2019 by Res. No. 2019-09]
§ 58-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTED OFFICIAL — An individual holding public office who won the
position in a free election or one who has been appointed by a majority vote
of the elected body when there is a vacancy of the office due to resignation
or other reason.
§ 58-2. Borough representation.
§ 58-3. Guidelines for ethical conduct.
A. Elected official participation in community activities. From time to time,
elected officials may choose to participate in community activities,
committees, events, organizational boards, and task forces. When a
Council member participates in these types of activities, the Council
member is acting as an interested party providing personal
observations or expression of thoughts rather than acting on behalf of
Borough Council which, by necessity, may act only as a body in a
properly noticed public meeting.
B. Elected official participation in community activities on behalf of
Borough Council. Acting or participating on behalf of Borough Council,
including oral and written correspondence such as speeches and/or
letters to residents and other groups or organizations, is limited to
those instances when Council has designated the elected official as its
representative for the matter and formally authorized that elected
official to speak on its behalf.
C. Speaking to the media. Normally, the Council President assumes the
responsibility for providing statements representing Council's
collective position to the press. The Council President may appoint
another elected official to assume the responsibility in his/her absence.
The Mayor may also at his/her discretion provide statements
representing his/her position to the press. Any comments made by
individual elected officials which have not been made by the President,
his designee or the Mayor should be understood to be that elected
official's personal observations or expression of thoughts.
D. Acting responsibly. Each elected official is responsible for their own
actions and words. Being in public office necessitates elected officials
being held to a higher standard. Elected officials are reminded that
when they speak, their words matter, and they are expected to take
ownership and be responsible for their words and actions.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-3
1:57
§ 58-4. Administrative support.
§ 58-5. Elected official reimbursement for travel expenses.
Elected officials may be reimbursed for expenses incurred while traveling
to, from, and during attendance at Borough-related events and conferences
A. Annual ethics forms shall be submitted to the Borough Office in a timely
manner.
B. Elected officials shall not disclose confidential information to which
they have access by virtue of their public office or position. Unless
otherwise noted, all emails and working draft documents shared
between staff and Borough Council are pre-decisional in nature,
considered privileged and confidential and, as such, are not intended
for public dissemination or discussion. Matters circulated by legal
counsel are subject to the attorney-client privilege which members
should not waive without action from Council. Personnel records should
also be held in the strictest confidence.
C. Personal gifts, favors, loans, services, payments and other inducements,
made either directly to the elected official or to a family member of the
official where there is reason to believe such gifts, favors, or
inducements are offered to influence official actions in favor of the
donor, should be refused. Any in-kind and/or cash gift, favor, tip,
service, etc. with a value over $20 shall be disclosed to the Borough
Manager and/or Borough Council who may require that such item be
refused or returned. Nominal token gifts including holiday food
baskets, calendars, and meals may be accepted.
D. In any situation where the Borough is a party, elected officials shall not
divulge any information or advice not generally available to the public.
A. Letters addressed to Mayor and/or Council: All letters addressed to the
Mayor and/or Council requiring a response from staff are copied to all
Council members, the Borough Manager, and the Mayor along with a
copy of any response provided.
B. Letters addressed to individual Council members: All letters addressed
to Council members requiring a response from staff are copied to all
Council members, the Borough Manager, and the Mayor along with a
copy of the response. Letters addressed to individual Council members
that do not require a response from staff but which provide information
on Council matters are copied to the full Council and the Mayor.
C. Council correspondence: All Council member correspondence written
with Borough resources (letterhead, logos, staff support, postage, etc.)
will reflect the position of the full Council, not individual Council
member positions. All Council member correspondence using Borough
resources will be copied to the full Council, the Borough Manager, and
the Mayor.
§ 58-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 58-5
1:58
pre-approved by Council. Reimbursement shall include mileage, meals,
tuition and lodging. Expenses for lodging may be paid in advance by the
Borough. All other reasonable expenses are reimbursed after submission of
an itemized account of expenses.
§ 58-6. Mayor.
§ 58-7. Nonobservance of rules.
These rules, wholly or in part, may be amended or repealed by majority vote
in any regularly scheduled meeting of Borough Council. Rules adopted to
expedite and facilitate the transition of the business of Council in an orderly
fashion shall be deemed to be procedural only, and the failure to strictly
observe any such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of or invalidate any
action taken by Council.
A. Mayor to Act as ceremonial representative: The Mayor is delegated the
responsibility to act as Council's ceremonial representative at public
events and functions. In the Mayor's absence, the Council President
assumes the responsibility. The Mayor may appoint another Council
member or the Borough Manager to assume the responsibility in his/
her absence.
B. Oversight of the Police Department: The Mayor directs the Chief of
Police on day-to-day activities of the Police Department. The Mayor's
powers with respect to the Police Department are pursuant to and
limited by the authority granted to the Mayor under the Borough Code,
as amended. Issues regarding Department ranks, including the duties
of each rank; appointing, suspending, reducing in rank, or discharging
officers; establishing the size of the Department; and controlling budget
and finance are reserved to Borough Council. Council's powers with
respect to the Police Department are pursuant to and limited by the
authority granted to Council under the Borough Code, as amended.
§ 58-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-7
1:59
Chapter 63
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 58-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 58-7
1:60
ARTICLE I
Councilmen and Mayor
[Adopted 3-8-1948 by Ord. No. 214 (Ch. 67, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 63-1. Compensation. [Amended 11-11-1968 by Ord. No. 431]
The members of Borough Council and the Mayor shall each receive as
compensation the sum of $100 per month.
§ 63-2. Failure to qualify for compensation. [Amended 11-23-1954
by Ord. No. 282]
Where any member of the Council shall not attend at least one regular
meeting of the Council during a calendar month, the said member failing
to attend at least one regular meeting shall not be entitled to receive
compensation for the said month.
§ 63-3. Payment period. [Amended 11-11-1968 by Ord. No. 431]
Compensation herein provided for Councilmen and the Mayor shall be paid
to them monthly.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:61
Chapter 66
TRUSTS AND FUNDS
§ 63-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 63-3
1:62
ARTICLE I
Columbia Historic Market House Trust
[Adopted 2-14-2011 by Ord. No. 811]
§ 66-1. Intent.
Pursuant to this article, the Borough of Columbia signifies its intention
to designate a not-for-profit trust to be responsible for the operation,
management, promotion, and preservation of the Columbia Historic Market
House, as a public market, pursuant to the terms of a lease and
management agreement to be negotiated with the not-for-profit entity and
approved by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia (hereafter
"Management Agreement").
§ 66-2. Designation of trust; purpose.
The name of the not-for-profit trust shall be the "Columbia Historic Market
House Trust."
§ 66-3. Borough ownership; solicitation of funds.
A. The Columbia Historic Market House, hereinafter "Market," shall
include the market building, the grounds surrounding the perimeter of
the market building, and any property heretofore acquired by the
Columbia Historic Market House Trust.
B. The Columbia Historic Market House Trust, hereinafter "Trust," shall
exist for the purpose of assuming day-to-day management
responsibilities for the Market; improving and maintaining operations
in a manner that is consistent with traditional market and historic
preservation standards; and responding to standholder, consumer, and
community input on matters related to Market operations.
C. In fulfillment of its management role, the Trust will enter into lease
agreements with standholders in accordance with master lease
provisions established by the Columbia Historic Market House Trust
Board of Directors.
A. The Borough of Columbia shall maintain ownership of the Market
building, and shall maintain control of the streets surrounding Market,
including parking thereon, in accordance with applicable ordinances,
laws and regulations, as they may be amended from time to time. The
Management Agreement between the Borough of Columbia and the
Trust shall contain, among other things, the Borough of Columbia's
right to establish and/or alter the days and hours of operation for
Market by resolution, based on recommendations offered by the Trust.
B. Upon approval of the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, the
Trust may solicit public and private funds to support capital
improvements to the Market as well as any other such fund solicitation
deemed beneficial to the advancement of the Market or its operation.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-4
1:63
§ 66-4. Board of Directors.
The power of the Trust shall be exercised through a governing body to
be called the Columbia Historic Market House Trust Board of Directors,
hereinafter "Board."
§ 66-5. Authorization to employ staff.
In furtherance of its legislative purpose, the Board of Directors of the Trust
is herein authorized to employ professional staff who shall be accountable
to the Board for the performance of his/her duties.
§ 66-6. Appointment of members of Board.
Promptly after the adoption of this article, and prior to the filing of the
Articles of Incorporation in the Office of the Secretary of the State, the
Borough of Columbia hereby signifies its intention to appoint members
of said Board from among initial nominations presented by the Columbia
Market Committee of Borough Council.
§ 66-7. Articles of Incorporation.
The substance of the Articles of Incorporation is attached hereto and made
a part hereof.19
A. Initial appointments to the Board shall be in accordance with provisions
established by the Articles of Incorporation of the Trust. Subsequent
nominations and appointment to the Board shall follow guidelines and
nomination procedures established in the organization's bylaws.
Appointment to the Board shall be made based on qualifications,
experience, or representation as defined in the Trust bylaws.
B. The Board shall be comprised of no more than seven and no fewer than
five members, each of whom shall serve a term of three years; provided,
however, that in making the first appointments to the Board, three
members shall be appointed for terms of three years each, two
members shall be appointed for terms of two years each, and two
members shall be appointed for a term of one year.
C. Vacancies on the Board of Directors shall be filled in accordance with
provisions established by the organization's bylaws.
D. No member of the Board shall hold elective office during his/her term of
service on the Board.
E. After appointment as a Director (as the case may be) and in order to
qualify to serve as a Director of the Trust, each individual shall execute
and abide by a Code of Ethics, that shall include, at a minimum, a
conflicts-of-interest policy that clearly states the procedures to be
followed if a Director's personal or financial interests may be advanced
by an action of the Board.
§ 66-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 66-8
1:64
§ 66-8. Consummation of formation by Borough Solicitor.
The Solicitor of the Borough of Columbia is hereby authorized and directed
to take all steps necessary in order to consummate the formation and
incorporation of said Trust within 30 days following adoption of this article.
19.Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 66-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-8
1:65
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 74
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 24. Police Department — See Ch. 56.
§ 66-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 66-8
1:66
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-10-1991 by Ord. No. 633; amended in its entirety
12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 637 (Ch. 5 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 74-1. Intent; purpose.
The Council, finding that there has been a proliferation of installation and
use of commercial and residential automatic burglar and robbery alarm
systems and fire alarm systems within the Borough, that a substantial
increase in the number of false alarms being reported from these systems
which have required Police and Fire Department response and that the
unregulated use of such alarm systems pose a substantial threat to the
orderly and effective provision of emergency services by the Police and Fire
Departments, hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater
control and more effective regulations of alarm systems, alarm businesses
and users.
§ 74-2. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Columbia Borough Alarm Ordinance."
§ 74-3. Definitions.
Certain terms, when used in this article, are defined as follows, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is self-employed in or employed by an
alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or
installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by any individual, including
a person self-employed or a partnership, corporation or other entity which
engages in the activity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be
sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or
installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility or
employing alarm agent(s). This definition does not include a person who
engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed
nor designs the scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm
system in a specific location.
ALARM SYSTEM —
Any mechanical or electrically operated instrument composed of
sensory apparatus and related hardware which is designed or used for:
The detection of an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into
a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the
commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or
(1)
A.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:67
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained which system is not specifically exempted from regulation under
this article. Sanctions imposed by this article shall be determined based
upon false alarms occurring per permitted location and not based upon the
total number of permits possessed by an alarm user.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (APD) — Any mechanical or electrically
operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware
which is designated or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into
a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, and which emits
a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated; or the detection of
a hazardous condition resulting from fire, heat, smoke or explosion within a
building, structure or facility and which emits a sound or transmits a signal
or message when activated. "Automatic protection devices" include but are
not limited to audible alarms, automatic dialing devices, alarms connected
directly to communication centers and proprietor alarms.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DEVICE — An alarm system which is
interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a
predetermined telephone number and transmit by prerecorded voice
message or coded signal an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
CENTRAL STATION — Any office, except the communication center, to
which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected,
facility, or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or
message when activated.
The detection of a hazardous condition resulting from fire, heat,
smoke or explosion within a building structure or facility and which
emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated.
(2)
"Alarm systems" include but are not limited to local alarm systems,
audible alarms, automatic telephone devices, alarms connected directly
to the communications center, central stations and certain proprietary
systems as set forth in Subsection A hereof.
B.
This definition shall not include the following devices and their related
hardware:
Devices which are not designed for and as used do not register
alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the
protected building, structure or facility unless police response is
expected or is a result of the alarm.
(1)
Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized
vehicles or trailers.
(2)
Devices maintained and operated by the Borough police used for
the detection of unlawful acts and sometimes known as a "portable
stakeout alarm system."
(3)
C.
§ 74-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-3
1:68
where operators supervise the circuits and/or where guards are maintained
continuously to investigate alarm signals.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Columbia Borough Police
Department or his designated representative. Wherever in this article
duties or responsibilities are assigned to the Chief of Police, he may
delegate them to such person or persons with the Police Department or
Columbia Borough Fire Department as he deems necessary and expedient
for the effective administration of this article.[Amended 10-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 918]
COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The radio communications room of the
Columbia Borough Police Department and the Lancaster County Fire and
Police Radio Network.
FALSE ALARM — An activation of an automatic protection device (APD)
signal, necessitating a response by the Columbia Borough Police
Department or Columbia Borough Fire Department where an emergency
situation does not exist at a particular permitted location. The term does
not include alarms caused by acts of nature or utility service
interruptions.[Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
FIRE CHIEF — The Borough of Columbia Fire Chief.[Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Columbia Borough Fire Department.[Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and which, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual warning signal which can be heard and/or seen
outside the building and is designed to attract attention when activated
by an intrusion or other emergency requiring Police or Fire Department
response.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, and when used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships,
associations and similar entities and the officers, directors and managers,
or any of them, of corporations.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — An alarm system which sounds within the
protected premises or a control center under the supervision of the
proprietor of the protected building, structure or facility. If Police or Fire
Department response is expected or is a result of that proprietary alarm
signal or message, it thereby becomes an alarm system as defined by this
article.
RESPONSE ASSESSMENT FEE — A fee charged a permittee for each and
every false alarm to which the Columbia Borough Police Department or Fire
Department responds. Exemption: No fee shall be charged if:
§ 74-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:69
§ 74-4. Prohibited activities.
The false alarm response is the first, second or third Police or Fire
Department response per permit year. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726]
A.
B. The alarm is received indicating line trouble.
C. The false alarm was caused by an act of nature.
D. The false alarm was caused by utility service interruptions.
A. Business permit required. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry
on an alarm business at any time without first applying to the Chief of
Police for and receiving an alarm business permit. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Alarm agent identification required. No person shall engage in or
conduct business or operate as an alarm agent without carrying and
displaying, upon request to any police officer, an alarm agent
identification card.
C. Alarm user permit required. No person shall install or use an alarm
system without having applied for and been issued a current and valid
alarm user permit or special interim permit that has not been
suspended or revoked.
D. Alarm system installations without permit. No alarm business or alarm
agent shall install any alarm system upon any premises unless and until
an alarm user permit for such alarm system has first been issued to the
alarm user.
E. False alarm fee. No alarm user shall fail to pay when due the false alarm
fee required by § 74-9C(1) for false alarms occurring during the term of
a special interim permit.
F. Testing prohibited without permission. No person shall conduct any test
or demonstration of any alarm system designed to make direct
connection to the communications center at any time without first
obtaining permission from the Chief of Police. Such permission is not
required where the equipment to be tested or demonstrated is
connected to an intermediary and the receipt of the alarm or signal is
not relayed to the Police Department or Columbia Borough Fire
Department by any means. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
G. Intentional false alarm. Section 4905 of the Penal Code, Act of 1972,
P.L. 1482, No. 334 (18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4905) makes it a misdemeanor of the
first degree for any person to knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or
other emergency to be transmitted to any organization, official or
volunteer, for dealing with emergencies involving danger to life or
property. Alarm users should be on notice that intentional activation of
an alarm system under circumstances where the physical security of
§ 74-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-4
1:70
§ 74-5. Alarm business permits; fees.
the premises or safety of the activator or other persons upon the
premises is not threatened which is responded to by the Columbia
Borough Police Department or Fire Department may subject the
activator to prosecution for violation of the aforesaid section of the
Penal Code.
H. Automatic dialing device prohibited. No person shall program, use or
permit to be used any automatic dialing device that has been
programmed to automatically transmit a request for emergency
response directly to the communications center or any other Columbia
Borough Police Department or Fire Department telephone number.
A. Applications and fees.
(1) Applications. Any person engaging in alarm business activities
defined in this article, within 30 days of the effective date of this
section, shall apply for an alarm business permit. Such application
shall be signed by the individual proprietor of such business or by a
partner or by the proper corporate officials as is appropriate for the
form of the business seeking the permit, shall contain such
information as the Chief of Police shall by regulation require as
necessary to administer and enforce this article and shall be
accompanied by the required fee.
(2) Permit fee. An annual fee as set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council shall be due and payable by January 1 of each
year. The initial fee shall be due with the application. There shall be
no prorating of the initial fee even though the permit has been
applied for after January 1. Under no circumstances shall fees be
refunded. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(3) Expiration date. An alarm business permit shall automatically
terminate and expire on December 31 next following issuance of
the permit but shall be automatically renewed upon payment of the
permit fee if received prior to or on the expiration date. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Processing of applications.
(1) Time. Following completion of the application and payment of the
fee, the Chief of Police shall have 30 working days to investigate
the applicant, to process the application and to grant or deny a
permit.
(2) Grounds for denial. Permits to any applicant shall be denied if:
(a) The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with
the requirements of this article and rules and regulations
adopted and orders of the Chief of Police issued pursuant to
this article.
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:71
(b) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application or in
any report or record required to be filed with the Borough.
(c) The applicant has had a similar type of permit previously
revoked for good causes within a two-year period preceding
the filing of the application, provided that after two years a
permit may be issued where the applicant can show a material
change in the circumstances since the date of the revocation
demonstrating competency and ability to conduct business in
accordance with this article.
(3) Denial notices. When an application for a permit is denied, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the denial with the basis
thereof. If the reason(s) for denial are correctable, the applicant
shall be so advised with suggestions on how these corrections can
be made and what time limit has been set for making such
corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the applicant that
appeals may be made in the manner outlined in § 74-10.
(4) Applicability. Applicants already doing business in the Borough on
the effective date of this section may continue to do business while
their permit applications are being processed. An applicant not
previously doing business in the Borough on the effective date of
this section shall not commence doing business until his application
is approved.
C. Alarm business responsibilities.
(1) Alarm businesses shall be required to:
(a) Alarm agent identification cards. Issue to all alarm agents
connected with or in the employment of the business
identification cards containing as a minimum:
[1] The name of the business.
[2] The Borough alarm business permit number.
[3] The name of the alarm agent and a recent photograph of
the agent embossed on the identification card.
[4] The signature of an official of the business and agent
named.
(b) Identify existing alarm system. Within 30 days after the
effective date of this section or upon receipt of an alarm
business permit, whichever first occurs, supply the Columbia
Borough Police Department and Fire Department in
circumstances relating to the sale or installation of fire alarms
with a complete list of the names and addresses of all persons
within the Borough to whom or for whom alarm systems have
§ 74-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-5
1:72
been sold or installed and/or who are currently under contract
for service to such a system.
(c) Investigation of false alarms. At the direction of the Chief of
Police, investigate false alarms transmitted from any alarm
system they have installed or presently service where the
Police or Fire Department have been unable to determine the
cause of a recent false alarm, and thereafter submit a written
report of their findings within 15 days of being directed to
conduct the investigation unless the time to report has been
extended by the Chief of Police for good cause shown.
(2) Statistical data. In addition to any other information that may be
required to be supplied by the provisions of this article, the Chief of
Police may require an alarm business to furnish him with such
statistical data as may be reasonably available relative to specified
periods of operation.
(3) Furnish instructions to alarm users. Every alarm business selling,
leasing or furnishing to any alarm user an alarm system shall
furnish the user with written instructions that provide information
to enable the user to operate the alarm properly and to obtain
service for the alarm system at any time.
D. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
(1) In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation
of provisions of this article, an alarm business permit may be
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police for any of the following
reasons:
(a) The violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(b) The failure to comply with rules or regulations adopted and
orders of the Chief of Police issued pursuant to this article.
(c) Where the applicant or permit holder has knowingly made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the
application for a permit or in any report or record to be filed
with the Chief of Police.
(2) Alarm permits solely for fire alarm systems shall not be subject to
suspension or revocation.
E. Suspension or revocation procedure.
(1) Notice. Prior to the suspension or revocation of an alarm business
permit becoming effective, the Chief of Police shall notify the
permittee, in writing, of the suspension or revocation, the reasons
therefor and his right to a hearing before the Chief of Police, if
desired, and that unless a request for a hearing before the Chief of
Police is filed, in writing, within 15 days of the date of the notice of
suspension or revocation, the suspension or revocation shall then
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:73
§ 74-6. Regulations and standards.
§ 74-7. Alarm user permits; fees.
become effective without further action. Such notice shall be
served upon the permittee by delivering the same personally or
by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the
permittee in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion.
In the event that the permittee cannot be found and the service
of the notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein
provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, registered mail,
postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his or her
place of business or residence as shown on the permit application.
(2) Hearing. If a hearing is requested before the Chief of Police, it shall
be conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee within 10 days
of the request and shall be conducted in accordance with the Local
Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105). If following the hearing the
suspension or revocation is upheld, the reasons therefor shall be
set forth, in writing, and delivered to the permittee by ordinary
mail. A decision upholding or sustaining the suspension or
revocation shall result in such suspension or revocation becoming
effective and not subject to further stay except upon order of court.
A. Discontinue automatic dialing devices. Within 90 days after the
effective date of this section, all automatic dialing devices that have
been programmed to automatically transmit a request for emergency
response directly to the communications center or any other Columbia
Borough Police Department or Fire Department telephone number shall
be disconnected.
B. Local alarm systems. Local alarm systems shall be equipped with a
timing mechanism that shall disengage the audible and/or visual alarm
after a maximum period of 30 minutes. Audible alarms without such a
time mechanism, other than fire alarms, shall be unlawful in the
Borough and shall be disconnected by the user within 60 days from the
effective date of this section.
C. Inspections. Every premises upon which an alarm system is installed
shall be subject to inspection at reasonable times by authorized
personnel of the Columbia Borough Police Department or Fire
Department, such inspection to be limited to such areas as are
necessary to inspect the installation and operation of the alarm system.
A. Permit required. Any alarm user or any person desiring to use an alarm
system shall, within 60 days of the effective date of this section, file an
application for an alarm user permit for each system in use with the
Chief of Police; thereafter no person shall install or use an alarm system
without having applied for and been issued a current and valid alarm
user permit or special interim permit that has not been suspended or
§ 74-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-7
1:74
revoked. A separate permit shall be required for each protected
location.
B. Applications and annual fee.
(1) Required information. The alarm user permit application shall, in
addition to such information as is required by the Chief of Police to
administer and enforce this article, contain the following
information:
(a) The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
(b) The address of the residence or business in or upon which the
alarm system has been or shall be installed.
(c) The type of alarm system installed or to be installed and the
name of the primary manufacturer of the system or its major
components.
(d) The name, address and alarm business permit number of the
alarm business, seller, installer and/or alarm business who
shall service or monitor the alarm system.
(e) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
persons, three in the case of corporations, who are authorized
to respond to an emergency and gain access to the premises
where the alarm system is installed.
(2) Permit fee. An annual fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council shall be due and payable by January 1 of each
year. The initial fee shall be due with the application. There shall be
no prorating of the initial fee even though the permit has been
applied for after January 1. Under no circumstances shall fees be
refunded. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(3) Expiration date. An alarm business permit shall automatically
terminate and expire on December 31 next following issuance of
the permit but shall be automatically renewed upon payment of the
permit fee if received prior to or on the expiration date. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(4) Response assessment fee. A person that owns, uses or possesses an
alarm device or automatic dialing device may not, after causing or
permitting three false alarms to occur in a consecutive twelvemonth
period, cause or permit a subsequent false alarm to occur in
the same consecutive twelve-month period. A person that violates
this subsection commits a summary offense and shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300
pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726]
(5) Exemption from fees. The following persons are exempt from fees:
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-7
1:75
(a) Alarm users who are over the age of 65 and are the primary
residents of the residence; and where no business is conducted
in said residence.
(b) The United States government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, counties, municipal corporations, departments
thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from the
fees required in this article.
C. Processing of applications. Following completion of the application and
payment of the required fee, the Chief of Police shall have 15 working
days to investigate the applicant, to process the application and to
grant or deny a permit.
D. Denial of permits.
(1) Grounds for denial. Alarm user permits to any applicant shall be
denied if:
(a) The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with
the requirements of this article and rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this article.
(b) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in
any report or record required to be filed under this article.
(c) The applicant has had a similar type of permit previously
revoked for good cause in the past unless the applicant can
show a material change in the circumstance since the date of
revocation through acceptable conduct under a special interim
permit.
(2) Notice of denial. When an application for a permit is denied, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the denial with the basis
thereof. If the reason(s) for denial are correctable, the applicant
shall be so advised with suggestions on how these corrections can
be made and what time limit has been set for making such
corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the applicant that
appeals may be made in the manner outlined in § 74-10.
E. Display of permit. An alarm user permit, including a special interim
permit, shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located
and shall be produced and displayed to any police officer or member of
the Columbia Borough Fire Department upon request. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
F. Maintain current information. Applicants for business permits shall
agree, in writing, and as a condition for receiving and keeping permits
to notify the Police Department or Fire Department in circumstances
regarding fire alarms, in writing, within 10 days of any changes in the
§ 74-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-7
1:76
§ 74-8. Suspension or revocation of alarm user permits.
application currently on file, i.e., ownership, management or persons to
be notified in the event of an alarm activation.
A. Grounds.
(1) General. An alarm user permit may be suspended or revoked by the
Chief of Police for any of the following:
(a) The violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(b) The failure to comply with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this article.
(c) Where the applicant or permit holder has knowingly made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the
application for a permit or in any report or record to be filed
with the Chief of Police or Borough agency.
(d) Where the applicant or permit holder has had a similar type of
permit previously revoked for a good cause in the past unless
the applicant can show a material change in the circumstances
since the date of revocation through acceptable conduct under
a special interim permit.
(2) False alarms. Upon receipt of the fifth false alarm in a twelvemonth
period, the alarm user's permit shall be suspended for the
balance of the permit year. The user may apply for an interim
permit which may be issued by the Chief of Police or his designee,
after payment of an interim permit fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
(3) Intentional false alarms. An alarm user permit shall be revoked in
the event of the intentional activation of a knowingly false alarm by
the alarm user or by members of his family over 12 years of age, his
employees or agents. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(4) Automatic suspension and citation. After the 10th false alarm
response per permit year, the alarm user's permit will be revoked
and will be enforced by the issuance of a citation for violation of
compliance with this article. The user may apply for a permit
renewal for the next permit year, which shall begin January 1 of the
next calendar year.
(5) Nonpayment as grounds for suspension. Nonpayment by the permit
user of the fees assessed within 15 days of their receipt will
constitute a suspension or revocation of the alarm user permit.
(6) Newly installed APD's. On newly installed or recently modified
APD's, the Chief of Police may grant up to a thirty-day grace period
for user familiarization and/or adjustment of mechanical
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-8
1:77
malfunctions, during which time the false alarm activation will not
be counted and response assessment fees will not be changed.
(7) Alarm user permits solely for fire alarm systems shall not be
subject to suspension or revocation.
B. Procedure.
(1) Notice. Prior to the suspension or revocation of an alarm user
permit's becoming effective, the Chief of Police shall notify the
permittee, in writing, of the suspension or revocation, the reasons
therefor, including if action is being taken pursuant to Subsection
A(2) or (3) hereof, the dates of false alarms and the reasons they
are considered false alarms, his right to a hearing before the Chief
of Police, if desired, and that unless a request for a hearing before
the Chief of Police is filed, in writing, within 15 days of the date of
the notice of suspension or revocation, the suspension or
revocation shall then become effective without further action. Such
notice shall be served upon the permittee by delivering the same
personally or by leaving the notice at the place of business or
residence of the permittee in the custody of a person of suitable age
and discretion. In the event that the permittee cannot be found and
the service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner
herein provided, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, registered
mail, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his or her
place of business or residence as shown on the permit application.
(2) Hearing. If a hearing is requested before the Chief of Police, it shall
be conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee within 10 days
of the request and shall be conducted in accordance with the Local
Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105). If, following the hearing, the
suspension or revocation is upheld, the reasons therefor shall be
set forth, in writing, and delivered to the permittee by ordinary
mail. A decision upholding or sustaining the suspension or
revocation shall result in such suspension or revocation becoming
effective and not subject to further stay except under order of
court.
(3) Special provisions for false alarms. Any false alarm occurring while
suspension or revocation of an alarm user permit has been stayed
pending the expiration of the time permitted to request a hearing
before the Chief of Police or his designee, shall:
(a) In the event that the suspension or revocation is upheld, be
considered a violation of this article.
(b) In the event that the hearing results in reversing the initial
suspension or revocation notice, be counted as a false alarm
for purposes of Subsection A(2) hereof.
§ 74-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-8
1:78
§ 74-9. Special interim permit.
(4) Liability of Borough limited. Where the Chief of Police orders that
an APD be disconnected, no liability shall incur to the Borough or
its employees through such action.
A. General. A special interim permit may be issued to any alarm user who
has been given notice that his alarm user permit has been suspended or
revoked. The special interim permit may be applied for and issued even
though the notice of suspension or revocation is not yet final. The
special interim permit shall be issued upon compliance with the
following conditions:
(1) Application. An application shall be filed containing such
information as shall be required by the Chief of Police.
(2) Fee and report. The application shall be accompanied by:
(a) A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
(b) A report detailing the steps the applicant has taken and shall
take to reduce and eliminate false alarms.
(3) Review by Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall determine that
the alarm system to be used has been properly installed and
serviced and deficiencies therein corrected and is satisfied that the
steps outlined by the applicant in his report shall tend to reduce or
eliminate false alarms.
B. Term of permit. A special interim permit shall be valid for a period of six
months from the date of issuance and shall only be subject to renewal
upon refiling of an application therefor and compliance with Subsection
A(1) through (3) hereof; provided, however, that if during the term of
the special interim permit no false alarms are received from the alarm
system subject to the permit, the alarm user shall be eligible to reapply
for an alarm user permit.
C. False alarms. In the event of a false alarm from any alarm system that
occurs during the term of a special interim permit, the alarm user shall:
(1) False alarm fee: Pay a false alarm fee of not more than $300
pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7511. False alarm fees shall be payable
within 15 days of an alarm user being invoiced for such fee by the
Chief of Police or his designee. (All fees shall be deposited in the
Borough general fund.) [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(2) Report required: Submit a written report to the Chief of Police
within 15 days of the false alarm setting forth the cause for the
false alarm and the corrective steps taken to prevent recurrence.
§ 74-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-9
1:79
§ 74-10. Appeals.
§ 74-11. Regulations.
The Chief of Police may promulgate such regulations as are necessary
for the administration and enforcement of this article. Before becoming
(3) Bar to obtaining alarm user permit: Be ineligible to reapply for an
alarm user permit upon the expiration of the special interim permit
term but shall be required to renew the special interim permit.
D. Renewal limitation. A special interim permit may not be renewed for
more than three consecutive terms, except that there shall be no
limitation for alarm users who are required by law to have and maintain
alarm systems. Any alarm user who becomes ineligible for renewal of a
special interim permit shall be required to cease use of the alarm
system; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit an alarm
user from converting the alarm system to and using it as a proprietary
alarm.
A. Time and manner; appeal fee. Within 30 days after denial of an
application for or renewal of any permit by the Chief of Police or action
by the Chief of Police suspending or revoking a permit becoming final,
any person so affected may appeal such action to the Board of Appeals
by filing a notice of appeal, in writing, with the Chief of Police setting
forth the specific grounds upon which the appeal is based, together
with an appeal fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
B. Hearing and decision. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Chief of Police
shall set a time and place for hearing before the Board of Appeals and
shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be set within 30
days of the filing of the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the requirements of the Local Agency Law (2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 105). The appellant and any other interested party shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the
determination of the Chief of Police should not be upheld. In all cases
the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was
no substantial evidence to support the decision of the Chief of Police.
The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall state
the reasons therefor.
C. Appeal not a stay. The filing of an appeal hereunder shall not operate to
stay the action or decision of the Chief of Police which is the subject of
the appeal.
D. Board of Appeals. The Board, for the purposes of this article, shall be
the Building Board of Housing Appeals and Revisions of the Borough,
which Board shall have full authority to carry out the duties of the
Board of Appeals as set forth in this article.
§ 74-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-11
1:80
effective, any such regulations shall be approved by resolution of the
Council and thereafter shall be available for public inspection.
§ 74-12. Confidentiality of records.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be
confidential in character and shall not be disclosed except in accordance
with law or order of court or if required in connection with the
administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 74-13. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Columbia Borough Police Department
and Fire Department acting through the Chief of Police or his designated
representative.
§ 74-14. Violations and penalties.
A. General. Except as specifically provided above, whoever violates any
provision of this article or of the regulations promulgated hereunder
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each and every offense, plus
costs of prosecution, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day during which any
person violates any provision of this article shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Payment of fees no bar to prosecution. The payment of any fees
required shall not be a bar against prosecution for any violation under
this article.
C. No limitation of remedies. Institution of a prosecution for the imposition
of the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the
right of the Borough to such equitable or other remedies as may be
allowed by law.
D. Written notice of false alarm and response assessment fees. A written
notice, in ticket form, advising of said false alarm and indicating an
appropriate response assessment fee due shall be issued in the name of
and served upon the permittee or any person connected with the alarm
system.
§ 74-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-14
1:81

ARTICLE II
Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 891]
§ 74-15. Key lock box required.
The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near
the main entrance or such other location required by the Fire Chief of the
Borough of Columbia:
§ 74-16. Time period for installation.
All newly constructed structures subject to this article shall have the key
lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy
permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of this article and
subject to this article shall have one year from the effective date of this
article to have a key lock box installed and operational.
§ 74-17. Designation of key lock box system.
The Fire Chief of the Borough of Columbia shall designate the type of key
lock box system to be implemented within the Borough of Columbia and
shall have the authority to require all structures subject to this article to use
the designated system.
§ 74-18. Location of key.
The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall,
at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to the
structure by the Fire Chief, and emergency fire personnel, Police Chief of
the Borough of Columbia, and police personnel.
§ 74-19. Rules and regulations to be implemented.
The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for
the use of the key lock box system, which rules and regulations shall be
posted on the website of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 74-20. Type and size. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 917]
The Fire Chief will determine the type of key and size of the key lock box.
A. Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system or automatic suppression system, or such other structures that
are constructed in a manner that restricts access during an emergency
as shall be determined from time to time by the Fire Chief.
B. Multifamily residential structures that have a common entrance for two
or more rental units. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 917]
C. Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
§ 74-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-21
1:83
§ 74-21. Installation location. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 917]
The key lock box shall be installed at a location designated by the Fire Chief
and shall be identified in a manner described by the Fire Chief, or in the
alternative, designated and identified by the Fire Chief’s designee.
§ 74-22. (Reserved).20
§ 74-23. Documents to be updated. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 917]
The owner or operator of the facility shall update the appropriate
documents within the key lock box on an annual basis or more frequently
when deemed necessary by the Fire Chief and/or Code Official and shall
send the Fire Chief all of the updated material, including an updated copy
of the emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form, which shall
be placed in the key lock box as well as disseminated among the Codes
Department and emergency response personnel, including members of the
Police Department.
§ 74-24. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this article regarding key lock box
requirements shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced for each violation to pay a fine of not more than $600,
together with costs of prosecution for each violation, and, in default of
the payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this article, and
each day that such violation shall exist, shall constitute a separate
violation and offense.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article may have their
permit to use an outdoor fire device suspended or revoked by Columbia
Borough Council, in the Council's sole discretion.
20.Editor’s Note: Former § 74-22, Required dimensions, was repealed 8-13-2019 by Ord. No.
917.
§ 74-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 74-24
1:84
Chapter 77
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough property — See Ch. 90. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 74-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-24
1:85

ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 1-12-1981 by Ord. No. 565 (Ch. 2, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 77-1. Definitions.
§ 77-2. Consumption in public prohibited.
It shall be unlawful within the Borough of Columbia for any person to drink
liquor or malt or brewed beverages upon any public street, public municipal
parking lot, private parking lot open to public use or public park or in any
vehicle being operated or parked thereon.
§ 77-3. Possession in public prohibited. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
It shall be unlawful within the Borough of Columbia for any person to
have in such person's possession with intent to consume or in a vehicle
under such person's control any open container containing liquor or malt
or brewed beverages upon any public street, public municipal parking lot,
private parking lot open to public use or public park.
A. "Liquor" and "malt or brewed beverages" and "container" and "official
seal" shall mean the same as those words and phrases are defined in the
Liquor Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.21
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:[Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
OPEN — When used in connection with a container, any container
which has been perforated in the case of a can or similar container or a
container in which the cap has been loosened or the cork displaced and
the official seal torn or mutilated.
POSSESSION — Exercise of dominion over the container or
beverage.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(1) Drinking from the container.
(2) Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
(3) Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on
any public lands without permission.
(4)
21.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:87
§ 77-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice and upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days.
§ 77-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 77-4
1:88
ARTICLE II
Bring Your Own Bottle (BYOB) Clubs
[Adopted 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 879]
§ 77-5. Purpose.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania hereby declares that the purpose of this article is to regulate
the operation of BYOB clubs, as defined herein, in order to preserve the
character of neighborhoods, to protect the rights of its residents to the
quiet enjoyment of their property and to protect the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Borough of Columbia. It is the express purpose
and intent of this article to legislate a balance between the constitutional
rights of BYOB club owners and patrons and the constitutional rights of the
residents of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 77-6. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this article, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101, et seq.
BYOB CLUB (otherwise known as BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE CLUB) —
Any business facility not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board,
wherein patrons 21 years of age or older may, after payment of a fee (which
includes, but is not limited to, any fee for setup, merchandise or other
charge which is required to be paid upon entry into the BYOB club), cover
charge or other temporary entry fee, consume alcoholic beverages which
said patrons have carried in, into or onto the BYOB club premises.
CAPACITY — The number of people allowed on the premises as determined
by the Borough pursuant to: NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, Place of Assembly.
CLUB PERMIT — The permit issued by the Borough of Columbia to an
individual or entity pursuant to the provisions hereof for the operation of a
BYOB club.
LICENSE OFFICER — That individual or individuals assigned the duties
hereunder by the Borough Manager.
RESIDENCE — A building or structure wholly or partially used for living
and sleeping space by human occupants.
§ 77-7. BYOB club requirements; rules; regulations.
The owner or operator of a BYOB club must:
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-7
1:89
§ 77-8. Prohibited actions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, firm or association who or which owns, operates, leases,
manages or controls a BYOB club to:
A. Obtain, carry and maintain in effect throughout the period covered by
the club permit broad form general liability coverage in the amount of
$1,000,000 single limit per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed
with the License Officer.
B. Possess and maintain a valid certificate of occupancy for the premises
upon or in which the BYOB club is operated.
C. Annually obtain a valid club permit pursuant to this article and
prominently display the same as required herein.
D. Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons of the BYOB club are sufficiently apprised of the
same.
A. Transact any business at the BYOB club without possessing and
prominently displaying on or in the premises of the BYOB club a valid
club permit issued in accordance with the provisions hereof.
B. Transact any business at the BYOB club between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m. each day.
C. Allow any patrons of the BYOB club to be present on or in the premises
of the BYOB club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each
day.
D. Transact any business at the BYOB club without possessing and
prominently displaying on or in the premises of the BYOB club a valid
certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry and the Borough of Columbia.
E. Transact any business at the BYOB club without obtaining and
prominently displaying on or in the premises of the BYOB club all other
permits or licenses required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the Borough of Columbia, including, without limitation, the club permit
issued pursuant hereto.
F. Transact any business at the BYOB club without conspicuously
displaying in or upon the premises of the BYOB club the hours of
operation of the BYOB club such that patrons thereof are sufficiently
apprised of the same.
G. Allow any person under the age of 21 to be present or in the premises
when alcohol is being consumed on the premises, unless accompanied
by a parent, or legal guardian.
§ 77-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 77-8
1:90
§ 77-9. Hours of operation; age limits.
§ 77-10. Unlawful activities.
§ 77-11. Application for permit.
Any person, persons, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts,
firms or associations desiring to operate or continue to operate as a BYOB
club shall annually file with the License Officer of the Borough of Columbia
prior to December 31 of each year an application for a club permit, which
application shall include the following information:
H. Fail to comply with any other state or federal law, rule or regulation for
the operation of BYOB clubs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any patron of a BYOB club to be present on or in
the premises of a BYOB club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. each day.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to be present on
or in the premises when alcohol is being consumed on the premises,
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
A. In the event that any of the unlawful activities specified herein are
conducted by or in the name of a corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, firm or association, in addition to (corporate) entity
liability, the officers, agents and/or principals of said corporation,
partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association shall be deemed in
violation hereof, as well as the person or persons who engaged in
unlawful activities.
B. The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
A. The name and address of the BYOB club.
B. A statement whether the business premises upon or in which the BYOB
club is to be located is leased or owned by the applicant. If leased, an
executed copy of the lease must be provided.
C. The name and address of the lessor of such premises (if applicable).
D. The nature of the applicant's ownership of such premises (if applicable).
E. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm
or association, the names, addresses and phone numbers of all persons
or entities who or which own any interest in such corporation,
partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association, along with names,
addresses and phone numbers of all officers and/or agents of such
corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association.
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-11
1:91
§ 77-12. Issuance or denial of permit.
§ 77-13. Application fee.
Any application for a club permit shall be submitted along with a
nonrefundable application fee of $25 to cover the Borough of Columbia's
costs in processing such application. An application fee will be assessed
only once during a calendar year for a temporary permit, regardless of the
number of temporary permits obtained during the year, provided that the
applicant and location of the temporary club are the same.
§ 77-14. Administrative fee.
The owner or agent of the owner of any BYOB club which obtains a club
permit shall pay an annual administrative fee of:
F. A notarized affidavit signed by the applicant testifying to and verifying
that the applicant has obtained all appropriate licenses and/or permits,
has paid all applicable taxes and fees for operating a BYOB club, has
paid all municipal claims owed by that applicant to the Borough of
Columbia, and that all of the information set forth in the application for
permit is true and accurate.
A. Within 10 days of the date of receipt of an application for a club permit,
the License Officer of the Borough of Columbia shall determine whether
the applicant, application and/or BYOB club, fully and completely
complies with all of the provisions and requirements hereof. If the
License Officer of the Borough of Columbia determines that the
applicant and/or the BYOB club fully and completely complies with the
provisions hereof, such License Officer shall issue a club permit to the
applicant. The permit issued shall be valid from December 31 until
December 31 of the following calendar year. If the License Officer of the
Borough of Columbia determines that the applicant and/or the BYOB
club does not fully and completely comply with the provisions hereof,
such License Officer shall deny the issuance of a club permit and shall
furnish written evidence of the same to the applicant together with the
reason(s) for the denial.
B. The License Officer of the Borough of Columbia shall inspect, or cause
the inspection of, the BYOB club prior to the issuance of the club permit
to confirm that the BYOB club is in compliance with all applicable
building and/or property maintenance code ordinances and regulations
of the Borough of Columbia. The License Officer may elect not to issue
the club permit if the BYOB club is not in such compliance.
A. Capacity up to 100 patrons: $100.
B. Capacity from 101 to 200 patrons: $150.
C. Capacity of 201 or more patrons: $200.
§ 77-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 77-15
1:92
§ 77-15. Temporary permit.
Any person, persons, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts,
firms or associations desiring to operate a temporary BYOB club, upon
payment of a fee of $10 may obtain a temporary permit to operate a BYOB
club, as defined herein, valid for one day, and subject to all other provisions
of this article.
§ 77-16. Revocation of permit.
The License Officer reserves the right to revoke a club permit upon failure
of the BYOB club owner or agent to completely and fully comply with the
provisions hereof and any other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Columbia.
§ 77-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 77-18. Appeals.
A. Any person, persons, or entity violating the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine not exceeding
$300 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both.
B. In addition to and notwithstanding any penalties assessed pursuant to
Subsection A hereof, the License Officer, upon conviction for a violation
hereof, may suspend or terminate the club permit to which such
violation relates.
A. The Board of Health, for the administration of the Public Health Code
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Columbia (the "Board") shall
hear all appeals from the decisions of the License Officer of the
Borough of Columbia disapproving an application for a club permit or
suspending or terminating a club permit.
B. Before the Board acts upon any appeal from the action of the License
Officer to deny an application for a club permit or to terminate or
suspend a club permit, the License Officer shall notify the person or
entity making such appeal, by certified mail addressed to such
appellant, of his/her/its right to a hearing before the Board. The
appellant shall have a period of 30 days from the date of service of such
notice, which shall be the date of mailing, to request a hearing before
the Board, which hearing shall, if requested, be fixed upon not less than
10 written days' notice to such appellant. If no hearing before the Board
is requested, the Board shall take action upon the appeal without
necessity for further proceedings.
C. The Board shall have full power to carry out the duties of the Board as
set forth in this article. The Board shall hear and/or decide all appeals
from persons or entities aggrieved by a decision of the License Officer
of the Borough of Columbia rendered pursuant to the provisions of this
article, except a decision to file summary enforcement proceedings with
§ 77-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-18
1:93
a District Justice, when it is alleged that the decision or order
complained of is not authorized by this article or directs a method
of compliance which imposes an unreasonable burden upon the club
permit holder, applicant or appellant without good cause. The Board
shall have the authority, in a proper case, to change, modify or rescind
any decision or order of the License Officer or to extend the time for
compliance. All appeals to the Board from decisions or orders of the
License Officer issued pursuant to this article shall be filed with the
License Officer of the Borough of Columbia within 30 days of the date of
the decision or order complained of. The appeal shall be in writing, shall
be signed by the person or entity making such appeal, shall specify the
grounds therefor and the relief requested, and shall be accompanied
by an appeal fee of $50. If a request for a hearing before the Board is
submitted with the appeal, a hearing shall be held not less than 10 days
after written notice to the appellant and not more than 30 days from
the date of receipt of the appeal. If no request for a hearing is filed with
the appeal, the provisions of Subsection B hereof shall apply.
§ 77-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 77-18
1:94
Chapter 80
AMUSEMENTS
§ 77-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-18
1:95

ARTICLE I
Video Gaming Terminals
[Adopted 7-23-2019 by Res. No. 2019-13]
§ 80-1. Prohibition
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, adopts this article in accordance with Section 502(a) of Title
53, Municipalities Generally, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as
added by Act 63 signed by Governor Wolf on July 2, 2019, to prohibit the
location and operation of an establishment licensee within the boundaries
of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, and, therefore, to prohibit
VGTs within the boundaries of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:97
Chapter 82
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126. Noise — See Ch. 149.
§ 80-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 80-1
1:98
ARTICLE I
Sale of Baby Fowl or Rabbits
[Adopted 8-10-1964 by Ord. No. 379 (Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 82-1. Prohibited sales.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale, barter or give
away baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three weeks of age or
rabbits under two months of age.
§ 82-2. Sale of artificially colored animals prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale, barter or give
away or display living baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits
which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them
an artificial color.
§ 82-3. Sales excepted.
This article shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of natural
baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other fowl in proper brooder facilities by
hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling them for purposes of
commercial breeding and raising.
§ 82-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding
the sum of $600 for each and every offense, plus costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:99

ARTICLE II
Care and Control of Animals
[Adopted 12-9-1974 by Ord. No. 517 (Ch. 7, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 82-5. Running at large prohibited.
No vicious, dangerous, ferocious dog, cat or other animal or such animal
sick with or liable to communicate hydrophobia or other contagious or
infectious disease shall be permitted to run at large in the Borough of
Columbia. It shall be unlawful to permit any pig, hog, swine, sheep, goat,
cow, horse, pony, fowl, poultry or pigeon or other such animal to run at large
in the Borough. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae
in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from
the Chief of Police.
§ 82-6. Seizure of animals running at large. [Amended 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 726]
Any police officer, peace officer or code enforcement officer of the Borough
of Columbia is hereby authorized and empowered, in his discretion, to seize
and detain any dog, cat or other animal found running at large.
§ 82-7. Detention and redemption of unlicensed animals.
Any unlicensed dog, cat or other animal so seized and detained shall be
properly kept in a place designated by the Borough Council and fed for a
period of 48 hours. Any person who shall within said period of time prove to
the satisfaction of the Borough authorities his ownership or right to custody
of said dog, cat or other animal shall, upon payment of a sum, as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, for each day or part
thereof for the care of said dog, cat or other animal detained, be entitled to
have his dog, cat or other animal returned to him, but shall be subject to
arrest and fine as provided herein.
§ 82-8. Detention and redemption of licensed animals.
Any licensed dog, cat or other animal so seized and detained shall be
properly fed and properly kept in a place designated by the Borough Council
as a pound. Immediately upon said seizure and detention, notice, either
personal or by registered mail, shall be given to the person in whose name
the license was procured, or his agent, to claim such dog, cat or other
animal within 10 days. The owner of the dog, cat or other animal so detained
shall be entitled to have his dog, cat or other animal returned to him upon
the payment of an amount, as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, for each day or part thereof for the care of said dog, cat or
other animal while detained, but shall be subject to arrest and fine as herein
provided.
§ 82-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-9
1:101
§ 82-9. Destruction of unclaimed animals. [Amended 6-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 827; 2-25-2013 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 82-10. Restraint of dogs required. [Amended 10-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 581]
All dogs shall be kept under restraint, either by a leash or by being kept
in an enclosure. An animal shall be deemed to be under restraint if on the
premises of its owner or if on a leash and accompanied by a responsible
person and under that person's control.
§ 82-11. Keeping of certain animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain, within the Borough of Columbia,
any pig, hog or swine. The keeping or maintaining of any such pig, hog
or swine within the Borough of Columbia is hereby found and determined
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia to constitute a public
nuisance.22
A. Any unlicensed dog, cat or other animal not claimed within five days
after seizure shall:
(1) Be destroyed;
(2) Be released to the SPCA of Lancaster County, Humane League of
Lancaster County, Columbia Animal Hospital, Inc. or such other
veterinarian or animal care service provider as the Borough of
Columbia may contract for the care of animals; or
(3) Provided such animal is a cat which has been neutered or spayed,
be released back to the place where captured.
B. Any licensed dog, cat or other animal not claimed within 10 days after
notice of its seizure, as herein provided, may be released to the SPCA of
Lancaster County, Humane League of Lancaster County, Columbia
Animal Hospital, Inc. or other such veterinarian or animal care service
provider as the Borough of Columbia may contract for the care of
animals, or destroyed.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough of Columbia may contract
with appropriate animal care or veterinarian service providers such as
Columbia Animal Hospital, Inc. to allow them the option of euthanizing
unclaimed dogs after the five- or ten-day period referenced above has
expired or turning custody of such animals over to an appropriate
individual or organization that will provide care and/or adopt the dogs
at no cost to the Borough of Columbia, Columbia Animal Hospital, Inc.
or other similar appropriate animal care or veterinarian service
providers.
22.Editor's Note: Former § 7-4.4, Housing of animals, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 82-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 82-12
1:102
§ 82-12. Control and treatment of animals.
§ 82-13. Nuisances. [Amended 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 737]
§ 82-14. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and
control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public
nuisance. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking or noise making,
smell, mischief, molesting of passersby, chasing of vehicles, habitual
attacks on other domestic animals or trespassing upon private property
in such manner as to damage property shall be deemed a nuisance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or custodian to fail to provide
animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper
shelter and protection from the weather, and veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering and to fail to provide them with humane
care and treatment. It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or
custodian to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or
otherwise abuse any animal or to cause or permit any dogfight,
cockfight or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans.
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any owner, keeper or custodian
of any dog or cat to permit his or her dog or cat to discharge such
animal's excreta upon any public or private property, other than the
property of the owner of such dog or cat, within the Borough if such
owner, keeper or custodian does not immediately thereafter remove
and clean up such animal's excreta from the public or private property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or custodian to have under his
or her control or custody any dog or cat while on any public or private
sidewalk, parkway, walkway, street, public park, public way, public
grassy area or any other public areas, or upon private premises owned
by any person, firm, or corporation other than the owner, keeper or
custodian of such dog or cat, without having on his or her person a
device which would be capable of removing any offal, feces or excreta
of such dog or cat, which device shall not include the hands or feet of
the owner, keeper or custodian.
A. Each day of violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a
separate violation hereof. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not more than $600 for
each offense, plus costs of prosecution, to be collected as fines or
penalties are recoverable by law, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
B. In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, such violation
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Borough by
seeking appropriate equitable relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 82-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-14
1:103

ARTICLE III
Feeding of Wild Animals
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 701]
§ 82-15. Feeding wild animals prohibited. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
No person shall provide feed, food or any other type of edible substance
to any wild animal on property owned, leased, maintained or managed by
the Borough of Columbia. Leaving refuse on Borough property shall not
constitute feeding wild animals. If, however, the same constitutes littering
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, anyone so leaving
such refuse may be subject to fines as set forth in the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 82-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WILD ANIMAL —
§ 82-17. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 82-18. Posting of signs.
Upon motion of the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia,
appropriate officials of the Borough of Columbia may erect signs on
property owned, leased, maintained or managed by the Borough of
Columbia directing that no person shall provide feed, food, or any other type
of edible substance to any wild animal on such property or be subject to the
penalty provisions of this article.
That which is not of a species customarily used or kept as an ordinary
household pet;
A.
One which ordinarily would be confined to a zoo, or one which would
ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this country;
B.
Includes any animals prohibited from being owned as domestic pets
under the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania.
C.
A. Any person violating any provisions of this article, in a summary
proceeding before any District Justice, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
B. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department
of the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania.
§ 82-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-18
1:105
Chapter 86
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A two-wheeled vehicle propelled solely by human power.
§ 86-2. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle upon any
street or public place within the Borough unless said bicycle shall first have
been properly registered and tagged as hereinafter provided.
§ 86-3. Registration procedure. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No.
555]
Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the Borough shall, within
10 days of the acquisition of ownership of such bicycle, file with the Chief
of Police a complete description of such bicycle upon a blank form to be
provided for that purpose, which filing shall constitute a registration of such
bicycle. All registrations shall be serially numbered and shall be kept on file
by the Chief of Police in his office as a public record. Bicycles operated for
hire shall be registered in the name of the owner.
§ 86-4. Identification tag; fee. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555]
Upon registration of a bicycle in accordance with this chapter, the Chief of
Police or someone in his office designated by him shall affix to such bicycle
an identification tag, serially numbered to correspond with the registration
of such bicycle. Such tag shall thereafter remain affixed to such bicycle
unless removed by the Chief of Police or someone in his office designated
by him for cause or for replacement with another tag upon reregistration. A
charge as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council shall
be made for the registration or tagging of any bicycle under the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 86-5. Duration of registration. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No.
555]
The registration of each bicycle pursuant to this chapter shall be permanent
and need not be renewed, except that if the bicycle is sold or transferred
to a new owner, it shall be the duty of the new owner to have the bicycle
§ 82-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 86-5
1:106
registered in his or her name and to have a new identification tag issued
therefor or if the original identification tag as been mutilated or destroyed
so as to be unreadable or has been lost, the owner thereof shall obtain a
new identification tag and a registration therefor.
§ 86-6. Evidence of ownership. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555]
The owner of each bicycle, at the time of registration or reregistration, shall
present the Chief of Police evidence of ownership of the bicycle satisfactory
to the Chief of Police.
§ 86-7. Registration refusal or suspension for unsafe condition.
[Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 277; 7-7-1979 by Ord. No. 555]
§ 86-8. Restoration of registration. [Added 7-9-1979 by Ord. No.
555]
Registration suspended pursuant to this chapter shall be restored upon
application of the owner of such bicycle and a showing satisfactory to the
Chief of Police or someone in his office designated by him that such bicycle
has been restored to a condition of safety and shall again comply with the
provisions of this chapter pertaining to equipment. The fee for restoration
of registration of each bicycle upon such circumstances shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, which shall be paid at the
time the identification tag is issued.
§ 86-9. Nontransferability; change of ownership. [Amended
7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555]
All registrations and identification tags issued hereunder are
nonassignable. Within 10 days after any bicycle shall have changed
ownership or been dismantled and taken out of operation, such information
shall be reported to the Chief of Police by the former owner or person
in whose name the bicycle has been registered, and the new owner shall
register the bicycle and receive a new identification tag therefor.
§ 86-10. Improper identification tag; penalty. [Amended 11-23-1954
by Ord. No. 277; 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555]
Any person who shall operate any bicycle not properly registered or not
carrying a proper identification tag as required herein upon any street or
A. The Chief of Police or someone in his office designated by him shall
have the authority to refuse to register any such bicycle presented for
registration and found by him to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
B. The Chief of Police or someone in his office designated by him shall
have authority to suspend the registration and remove the identification
tag from any bicycle operated upon any street or public place in the
Borough in an unsafe condition or lacking any of the equipment
required by this chapter.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-10
1:107
public place in the Borough shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalty provided in § 86-13 hereof.
§ 86-11. Regulations for riding bicycles. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord.
No. 555; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk, park, schoolyard or
other public place so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic or endanger another
person's safety. No person shall park or let a bicycle stand upon any
sidewalk, park, path or any public place where it is an obstruction to
pedestrian traffic. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk.
§ 86-12. Unlawful actions. [Amended 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555;
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 86-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No.
277; 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 555; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice of the Borough, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of such fines and costs, to imprisonment for not more than three
days. The bicycle operated by any person in violation of this chapter may
be impounded by the Chief of Police at his discretion, until such bicycle is
registered as herein provided.
Chapter 88
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126.
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle to operate the same
in violation of 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3501 et seq. of the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, as amended from time to time.
B. It shall be unlawful for the rider of any bicycle to operate the same in
violation of § 86-11 of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a bicycle to fail to comply with
the equipment and operational requirements for bicycles as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3501 et seq., as amended
from time to time.23
23.Editor's Note: Former § 12-13, Brakes, warning devices and lamps required, as amended,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 86-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-1
1:108
§ 88-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Borough of Columbia
Tattoo and Body Piercing Ordinance."
§ 88-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by regulating individuals and establishments providing
tattooing and body piercing services and by providing a uniform set of
guidelines for the provision of those services and the operation of those
establishments.
§ 88-3. Word usage; definitions.
In the administration of this chapter, words in the present tense include
the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular; the masculine includes the feminine; the words "shall" and "will"
are mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. The following words,
unless otherwise indicated, shall have the following meanings, while words
not defined in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in Mosby's
Medical and Nursing Dictionary, Environmental Engineering and
Sanitation, Fourth Edition, and/or the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary, whichever shall be applicable to such term:
AFTERCARE — Written and verbal instructions given to the client, specific
to the body art procedure(s) rendered, on caring for the body art and its
surrounding area.
ANTISEPTIC — An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on
human skin or mucosa.
APPRENTICE — An individual being taught a trade.
ARTIST/OPERATOR/TECHNICIAN/PRACTITIONER — Any person who
controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a
body art establishment. The term includes technicians and apprentices who
work under the operator and perform body art activities.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization, utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS — Standard OSHA Guidelines as defined in 29
CFR 1910.1030, Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Columbia.
BODY ART — The practice of body piercing and tattooing.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY — Any space where body
piercing or tattooing is conducted.
BODY PIERCING — The perforation of human tissue, excluding ear
piercing, for a nonmedical purpose.
§ 88-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:109
CLIENT — A person who requests a body art procedure at a body art
establishment.
CLIENT RECORD — A file for the client maintaining information regarding
the client and the body art procedures provided to the client.
CONTAMINATED WASTE/BIOHAZARD/BIOLOGICAL WASTE — Any liquid
or semiliquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated
items that would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in
a liquid or semiliquid state if compressed; items that are caked with dried
blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing
these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood
and other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 1910.1030 (latest edition), known as "Occupational
Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens" and/or 105 CMR 480.000, Storage and
Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Permanent cosmetics and/or micro-pigment
implantation. (See "tattooing.")
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the
ear using a pre-sterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing system
following manufacturers' instructions.
EQUIPMENT/FURNITURE — All machinery, including fixtures, containers,
vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas,
sinks and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with
the operation of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — Any event where there is an eye, mouth or other mucus
membrane or non-intact skin contact with the blood or body fluids of
another person or contact of eye, mouth or other mucus membrane, nonintact
skin with other potentially infectious matter and/or an occurrence
whereby an individual is exposed to medical waste.
GLOVES — Disposable protective coverings for the hands.
HANDSINK — A lavatory equipped with tempered hot and cold running
water under pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other
portions of the body.
HEALTH OFFICER — That individual designated as a Health Officer in
accordance with Chapter 126 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia,
Health and Sanitation.
HOT WATER — Water at a temperature greater than or equal to 110° F. but
not greater than 125° F.
§ 88-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-3
1:110
INFECTIOUS WASTE —
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, sharps,
needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's
body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
INVASIVE — Entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an
instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area.
LICENSE — The written approval by the Borough of Columbia to operate
a body art establishment and/or to provide body art services. This license
is separate from any other licensing requirement that may exist within
communities or political subdivisions other than the Borough of Columbia.
LICENSEE — A person who holds a license to operate a body art
establishment or to provide body art services.
LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE — A disinfectant or sanitizer registered
with the Environmental Protection Agency or an approximate 1:100 dilution
of household chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray
bottle (500 ppm, 1/4 cup per gallon or two tablespoons per quart of tap
water).
MEDICAL WASTE —
MINOR — Any individual under the age of 18.
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other nongovernmental legal entity including but not limited to
a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, trust or
unincorporated organization.
A. Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed or
disturbed, may release liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
B.
C. Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other
biologically active materials in sufficient concentrations that exposure
to the waste directly or indirectly creates a significant risk of disease.
D.
A. Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed or
disturbed, may release liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
B.
C. Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other
biologically active materials in sufficient concentrations that exposure
to the waste directly or indirectly creates a significant risk of disease.
D.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:111
PHYSICIAN — A health professional who has earned a degree of Doctor of
Medicine (M.D.) after completing an approved course of study. A physician
is required to obtain a license from the state in which professional services
will be performed.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's skin during a body art procedure, skin preparation of the area
adjacent to and including the body art procedure or any associated work
area, which may require sanitizing.
RECORD/REGISTER — List.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE/SANITIZATION PROCEDURE — A process of reducing the
numbers of microorganisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a safe
level as judged by public health standards and which has been approved
by the Board of Health and/or by the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention.
SHARPS — Any object (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa including, but not limited
to, presterilized, single-use needles, scalpel blades and razor blades.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation and disposal and is labeled
with the International Biohazard Symbol.
SINGLE USE — Products or items that are intended for one-time, oneperson
use and are disposed of after use on each client including, but not
limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic
cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades,
stencils, ink cups and gloves.
STERILIZATION — A process approved by the Board of Health resulting
in the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly resistant
bacterial spores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — One or more of the following:
TATTOOIST — Any person who applies a tattoo to the body of another
person.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises
operating at a fixed location where an operator performs body art
An indelible mark made upon the body of another person by the
insertion of pigment under the skin.
A.
An indelible design made upon the body of another person by
production of scars other than by branding.
B.
C. The above include all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
§ 88-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-3
1:112
procedures for no more than 14 days consecutively in conjunction with a
single event or celebration.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BODY ART — The form of body art consisting of or
requiring the placement, injection or insertion of an object, device or other
thing made of material such as steel, titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass
or any other material, beneath the surface of the skin of a person.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "guidelines for
prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis
B virus to health-care and public-safety workers" in Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as
"recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive
procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of
infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all
human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV
and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving,
personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and
disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body-fluidcontaminated
products.
VARIANCE — A written document issued by the Health Officer with the
consent of the Board which authorizes a modification or waiver of one or
more of the requirements of this chapter if, in the opinion of the Health
Officer and Board, a health hazard or nuisance will not result from the
modification or waiver.
§ 88-4. License required.
§ 88-5. License fees; penalties.
A. No person shall operate a body art establishment without first having
obtained a license from the Borough of Columbia. A license application
may be refused and a license may be revoked or suspended summarily
by a Health Officer, but such action shall be subject to review by the
Board.
B. No person shall perform body piercing or tattooing in the Borough of
Columbia without first having obtained a license from the Borough's
Health Officer. A license application may be refused and a license may
be revoked or suspended summarily by a Health Officer, but such action
shall be subject to review by the Board.
A. No body art establishment shall be operated in the Borough of
Columbia unless such establishment's owner, or manager or designated
agent has obtained the annual license required by this chapter. The fee
for such an annual license is $100.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-5
1:113
§ 88-6. Application for license; revocation; inspections of premises.
B. No person shall perform body piercing or tattooing in the Borough of
Columbia unless such person has obtained the annual license required
by this chapter. The fee for such annual license is $25.
C. Any person failing to obtain or renew an annual license as required
hereunder on or before the due date shall pay a penalty of 5%, in
addition to being subject to any other fines, penalties and enforcement
procedures set forth in this chapter.
D. The fees set forth in this § 88-5 may be changed from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County.
A. Any person wishing to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter (whether initially or for renewal thereof) shall submit the
applications required from time to time by the Borough of Columbia.
For body art establishments, the applications will require, inter alia, the
following information: name of the body art establishment, names of all
operators working there having licenses, and their home address and
phone number, address of the body art establishment, proof of liability
insurance in amounts established from time to time by the Board, phone
number of the establishment, method of sterilization to be utilized at
the establishment, a site plan of the establishment drawn to scale, and a
description of all body art procedures performed at the establishment.
For body piercing and tattooing licenses, the application will require,
inter alia, the following information: the name, address, home phone
number and business phone number of the applicant, the address and
phone number of the body art establishment where the applicant will be
providing body art services, proof of vaccination (copy) of the applicant
for hepatitis B, the applicant's criminal history, a description of the
applicant's experience in the field of body art, information regarding
the applicant's completion of a blood-borne pathogen-training program
and proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable.
C. Any person obtaining a license hereunder, by submitting an application
for license, agrees to permit the inspection of the body art
establishment or work area of the body art operator and to comply with
the requirements, rules and regulations of this chapter. All body art
establishments shall be inspected at least twice annually, which
inspections may be unannounced. All license holders shall at all times
post conspicuously at their body art establishment their licenses and
the results of the most recent inspection.
D. A Health Officer and/or the Board may revoke the license of any person
who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who willfully
or continuously ignores or fails to comply with any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant hereto within 10 days after the licensee has been
§ 88-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-6
1:114
§ 88-7. Posting of documents.
The holder of a license for operating a body art establishment shall ensure
that the following documents are posted in each such licensed body art
establishment in a conspicuous and prominent place:
§ 88-8. Regulations.
All body art establishments and operators providing body piercing and
tattooing services shall comply with the following regulations, which
regulations may be modified from time to time by resolution of the Board:
notified, in writing, by a Health Officer or the Board of his delinquency
in accordance with the provisions of § 88-9 hereof. All licenses may
be suspended immediately if in the discretion of the Health Officer
continued operation poses a serious health risk to operators, employees
or clients. In such case, the license holder shall, within 24 hours of the
revocation, be given written notice of the revocation, the reason for the
revocation and the means by which the license may be reinstated.
E. No person shall hinder, impede or prevent any Health Officer from
entering and/or inspecting any body art establishment or from
performing any duty authorized by this chapter.
A. A copy of the most recent inspection sheet (results);
B. Pamphlets or literature explaining body art aftercare;
C. The name, address and phone number of the Health Officers;
D. An emergency plan including:
(1) A plan for the purpose of contacting the police, fire or emergency
medical services in the event of an emergency;
(2) A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers; and
(3) A plan for exiting the building in case of fire or other disaster.
E. An occupancy permit issued by the appropriate municipal official for
the body art establishment; and
F. The license for such establishment and the licensees for each operator
performing body art procedures at the establishment.
A. In order for the operator to properly assess the client's condition for
receiving body art procedures and not violate the client's rights or
confidential medical information, the operator must obtain and
maintain a client record containing the following information regarding
each client:
(1) Name, address, date of birth and ID [driver's license, passport,
State (ID) of client];
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:115
(2) Any known allergies; and
(3) Any condition that may affect/hamper the healing process.
B. In addition to the information collected from the client, the client
record must include:
(1) The name of the artist who performed the procedure;
(2) The date of the procedure;
(3) The location of the procedure on the client's body;
(4) A description of the type of procedure provided;
(5) Consent of the parent or legal guardian for all persons under the
age of 18; and
(6) Signed statement by client acknowledging that he or she may be
temporarily prohibited from donating blood under rules and
regulations of the Red Cross.
C. The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the
following records are kept and retained and shall be made available to
the Health Officer upon request:
(1) Identification of each operator;
(2) Client records, which must be maintained in a confidential manner,
for four years; and
(3) Consent forms for persons under the age of 18, which must be kept
for four years.
D. The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the
establishment is well lighted, well ventilated and kept in a clean,
orderly, sanitary condition at all times and free of infestation by insects
or vermin and must assure that there is a telephone in good working
order easily available and accessible to all operators, employees and
clients during all hours of operation.
E. All body art establishments shall conform with the following
requirements:
(1) Light with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20
footcandles three feet off the floor, except that light sources
equivalent to at least 100 footcandles shall be provided at the level
where body art procedures are being performed, and where
instruments and sharps are assembled.
(2) All walls, floors and all procedure surfaces in rooms or areas where
body art procedures are performed must be smooth, nonporous,
washable, and in good repair. Floors shall be cleaned daily.
Cleaning shall not occur while procedures are being performed.
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:116
(3) All body art establishments must have a dedicated physical
address.
(4) All body art establishments must have:
(a) An entrance leading directly into the establishment;
(b) No direct opening between the establishment and any building
or portion of a building used as living or sleeping quarters or as
a food, liquor, or tobacco establishment; and
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, body art establishments
located in a nail salon or cosmetology salon may share an
entrance into the establishment. However, the body art
establishment must be separated by wall extending from floor
to ceiling.
(5) Each establishment shall have an area that will be screened from
public view for customers requesting privacy or for all genitalia
body art procedures. Dividers, curtains or partitions, at a minimum,
shall separate multiple body art stations.
(6) A consistent fresh air supply must be provided to the
establishment. Furnace or air conditioners shall be maintained to
allow for airflow. Filters shall be cleaned or replaced annually or
more frequently if necessary.
(7) No domestic or wild animals of any kind shall be present in a body
art establishment except service animals used by persons with
disabilities. Fish aquariums shall be allowed in nonprocedural
areas.
(8) The doors to the establishment shall be self-closing and kept closed
to prevent entrance by vermin and foreign particles.
(9) The establishment must at all times have a supply of hot and cold
running water in sufficient quantities to conduct the facility in a
sanitary manner. Further, the body art establishment shall be
protected by a testable reduced backflow preventer installed in
accordance with Pennsylvania codes. All wastewater must be
disposed of through a system that carries it away from buildings
and to a public sewer connection.
(10) The establishment must be maintained in a safe condition. It must
have:
(a) Floors, floor coverings, walls, woodwork, ceilings, furniture,
fixtures and equipment that are clean, smooth, washable and
in good repair;
(b) Floors that are free of unsafe objects and slippery or uneven
surfaces;
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:117
(c) Doors, stairways, passageways, aisles or other means of exit
providing safe and adequate access and, where applicable,
exits marked for easy escape;
(d) Electrical appliances or apparatus must be clean and have no
worn or bare wiring to avoid fires, shocks and electrocution,
and all electrical outlets in operator areas, cleaning areas and
bathroom facilities must be equipped with ground fault (GF)
protected receptacles; and
(e) Water or product spills on the floor shall be removed
immediately and the floor dried to avoid falls.
(11) The body art establishment must have the following equipment, all
of which shall be in good repair, easily cleanable and kept in a
sanitary manner at all times:
(a) Hand-wash sink, which is kept clean and includes:
[1] Hot and cold running water, preferably with wrist or footoperated
controls;
[2] Liquid pump soap;
[3] Single-use paper towels; and
[4] Waste container.
(b) Sharps container. Contaminated sharps must be disposed of in
an approved sharps container to prevent cross-contamination
in accordance with 105 CMR 480.00, Storage and Disposal or
Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code Chapter. It will be the
responsibility of the owner of the body art establishment to be
in possession of the most recent regulations and copies of
OSHA Chapter 4.
(c) Equipment sink for employees use only which is easily
cleanable and includes:
[1] Hot and cold running water, preferably with wrist or footoperated
controls;
[2] Liquid pump soap;
[3] Single-use paper towels; and
[4] Waste container.
(d) Autoclave(s). The autoclave shall be used, cleaned and
maintained according to the manufacturer's instructions. A
copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for the
operation of the autoclave must be available for inspection by
the Health Officer. Autoclaves, while running, shall be
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:118
positioned away from workstations or areas available to the
public as space permits. Cleaning and logbooks are to be
available for inspection. Each owner of the body art
establishment shall demonstrate that the autoclave is capable
of attaining sterilization by monthly spore tests. These tests
shall be verified through an independent laboratory. These
records shall be kept by the owner for three years and made
available to the Health Officer upon request.
(e) Waste receptacles. Each workstation shall have a waste
receptacle, which is covered and lined with a disposable bag.
(f) Work counters. All work counters shall be smooth, nonporous
and easily cleanable. All work areas shall have a germicidal
cleaner marked as such.
(g) Disposable ink caps. Ink caps are required if providing
tattooing and permanent color technology procedures. Ink cap
holders shall be smooth, nonporous and disposable.
(h) First aid kit. Body art establishments are required to have a
complete first aid kit.
(i) Chairs. All chairs for operators, as well as clients, shall be
made of smooth, cleanable materials. Cloth is not permitted.
(j) Cabinets or containers for storage. All cabinets and containers
shall be maintained and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
manner.
(k) Requirements for single-use items including inks, dyes and
pigments:
[1] Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client
for any reason. After use, single-use sharps shall be
immediately disposed of in approved sharps container
pursuant to 105 CMR 480.000.
[2] All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to
body art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be
single use and appropriately disposed of.
[3] Hollow-bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be
reused but rather properly disposed of.
[4] All inks, dyes, pigments, solid-core needles, and
equipment shall be specifically manufactured for
performing body art procedures and shall be used
according to manufacturer's instructions.
[5] Inks, dyes, or pigments may be mixed and may only be
diluted with water from an approved potable source.
Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:119
dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and
placed into single-use paper cups or plastic cups. Upon
completion of the tattoo, these single-use cups or caps and
their contents shall be discarded.
(l) Toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall be offered and
conveniently located during all business hours for all
operators, employees and clients. A hand-wash sink shall be
offered and signage shall be visible reminding employees to
wash their hands.
(12) The holder of the body art establishment license shall maintain all
the furniture and equipment in the establishment in good working
order and keep it in a clean and sanitary manner.
(13) The holder of the body art establishment license must ensure that
storage within the establishment and body artists comply with the
following requirements:
(a) Flammable and combustible chemicals shall be stored away
from potential sources of ignition such as an open flame or an
electrical device.
(b) All chemicals shall be stored in closed bottles or containers and
clearly labeled.
(c) No cleaning/sterilizing products shall be stored:
[1] Where food is kept;
[2] In the rest room, unless in a locked cabinet; or
[3] With single use supplies.
(d) Storage units. All cabinets, drawers, and containers used for
storage of supplies, instruments and towels shall be kept clean:
(e) Supplies.
[1] Unused supplies shall be stored in a clean, enclosed
container or drawer;
[2] Used/soiled disposable supplies shall be discarded
immediately in a clean, closed waste receptacle with a
plastic liner; and
[3] Shall be labeled accordingly.
(f) Instrument storage.
[1] Instruments that have been used on a client or soiled in
any manner shall be placed in a properly labeled covered
receptacle until sterilized;
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:120
[2] Sterilized instruments shall be individually packed and
stored in a clean, closed container or drawer until used
and are to be stored six to 12 inches off the floor, dated
with an expiration date not to exceed six months; and
[3] Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has
been breached or after the expiration date without first resterilizing.
(g) Contaminated sharps must be stored and disposed of in
approved sharps container to prevent cross-contamination.
(h) Infectious waste must be:
[1] Handled and stored so that human exposure is prevented;
[2] Discarded in double-lined plastic bags in a covered waste
receptacle or in an approved "red" bag marked with the
international biohazard symbol and stored safely until
transported by a licensed infectious waste hauler to an
appropriate treatment or disposal facility; and
[3] Records of infectious waste disposed of shall be retained
for one year.
(14) The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the
use of towels/linens in the establishment meets the following
requirements and that body artists working therein comply with
the following requirements:
(a) Cloth linens, after use, shall be disposed of in a labeled
receptacle that has a cover;
(b) Used cloth linens shall not be used again until they are
laundered and sanitized;
(c) Only single-use towels are to be used for body art procedures
and must be discarded in a labeled receptacle that has a cover,
with a disposable plastic liner, immediately following each
body art procedure; and
(d) Linens to be laundered shall be laundered either by a
commercial washer which includes immersion in laundry
detergent and either chlorine bleach or water at 160° F., for
not less than 15 minutes during the washing and rinsing
operation. Linen service from a source approved by the Health
Officer or the Board may be substituted as an alternative
method.
(15) The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the
use of products in the establishment meet the following
requirements and that all body artists providing services therein
comply with the following requirements:
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:121
(a) All liquids, cosmetics, creams, gels, pastes, powders, and other
products are kept in clean, closed containers;
(b) Original product bottles and containers have an original
manufacturer label;
(c) When only a portion of the product is to be used on a client, the
product shall be removed from the container by a spatula,
scoop, spoon, or dropper so that the product does not come in
direct contact with the client and to assure that the remaining
product is not contaminated;
(d) If a product is poured into another container, such as a shaker,
dispenser pump container, or spray container, the container is
labeled to identify the product;
(e) Supplies and implements which come in direct contact with a
client and cannot be disinfected, such as cotton pads, cotton
balls, pads, "Q-tips," sponges, bandages, tapes, surgical
dressing and other similar items, shall be disposed of in a
covered waste receptacle, with a plastic liner, or, if
contaminated with body fluids, in a hazardous waste container,
immediately after use;
(f) All products applied to the skin, including stencils, must be
single use and disposable. Acetate stencils will not be allowed
for reuse if sanitization procedures are not performed between
uses. Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the
application of stencils must be dispensed and applied on the
area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent
contamination; and
(g) Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National
Formulary shall be applied to the area to be tattooed, and it
shall be in a collapsible metal or plastic tube. The application
may be spread by the use of sterile gauze but not directly with
the fingers, unless both hands are covered with gloves. The
stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be
thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an approved germicidal
solution for at least 20 minutes, and shall be dried with sterile
gauze or in the air before each use.
(16) All license holders must ensure that after use by each operator and/
or a client, all nondisposable instruments and procedure work
surfaces are cleaned and sterilized with a sanitizer that has a
demonstrated antimicrobial activity, as indicated by the product
label and that the following requirements are complied with:
(a) Jewelry used for new body piercing must be sterilized with an
autoclave or chem-clave. Acrylic jewelry cannot be used for a
new piercing. Jewelry used in healed body piercing does not
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:122
have to be sterilized, but must be used according to product
label;
(b) Clippers must be disinfected with a liquid chemical sterilizer
after each use;
(c) All nondisposable instruments used for body art must be
cleansed and sterilized after each use. Autoclave or chem-clave
sterilization must be conducted for the cycle of time and
corresponding operating pressure recommended by the
manufacturer of the autoclave. Sanitizers used in the cleaning
process must have demonstrated anti microbial activity, as
indicated by the product label and be registered with the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency;
(d) Instruments that are to be autoclaved within the facility must
be packed in a single-use autoclave bag with the date of
sterilization. The expiration date must not exceed six months
from the date autoclaved;
(e) All sterilized instruments must remain stored in sterilized
packages until just prior to performing a body art procedure.
Where several instruments are sterilized at the same time in
the same package, such as in a single-use setup, once the
container is opened, any instrument not used immediately in a
procedure must be re-sterilized;
(f) Every batch of sterilized equipment must be monitored for
sterilization by use of a heat-sensitive indicator that is capable
of indicating approximate time and temperature achieved;
(g) Only jewelry meeting the requirements hereunder which is
free of nicks, scratches or irregular surfaces and which has
been properly sterilized prior to use may be inserted into a
newly pierced area; and
(h) All instruments must be disposed of and no longer used after
the manufacturer's expiration date for each such instrument.
(17) Each body art establishment is to be equipped with an autoclave
which is a design, style or model that has received clearance by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration for conformance with Section
510(k) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Alternate
sterilizing equipment may only be used when specifically approved
in writing by the Department. After each use and before use on
another customer, all needle bars, grips and tubes and needles
shall be cleaned and packaged in a self-sealing autoclave bag which
is dated with an expiration date not to exceed six months, and
arranged in an autoclave which is operated in strict accordance
with the autoclave manufacturer's recommendations. As the
operation time of the autoclave may vary with the type of
instrument, the packaging of that item and the arrangement of
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:123
items in the autoclave, it is critical that the manufacturer's
operation manual be followed. This will assure that each item
placed in the autoclave achieves the proper temperature for
sterilization. Temperature-sensitive autoclave tape, autoclave bags
with a chemical color indicator on the bag or any other
temperature-sensitive medium approved for autoclaves by the
Department must be applied to each load every time the autoclave
is used. To further confirm that the autoclave is operated in a
manner to assure sterility of the processed instruments, it must
be tested monthly using a biological indicator such as spore strips
or spore suspensions which are processed by a laboratory. The
operator must maintain records documenting such testing for three
years. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for
the operation of the autoclave is to be available for inspection
by the Department. An autoclave, which has received a positive
spore test, must be immediately removed from service and all
instruments allegedly sterilized by that autoclave shall not be
utilized on any client. Prior to using, the operator must ensure
that there is evidence of one negative spore test. If the autoclave
requires repair work, it cannot be utilized until it has received
two negative spore tests. Autoclaves must be cleaned and serviced
at the frequency recommended by the manufacturer. A copy of
the manufacturer's cleaning and servicing instructions must be
maintained in the body art establishment.
(18) Pigments, colors and dyes used from stock solutions for each client
must be placed in a single-use receptacle and the receptacle and
remaining solution must be discarded and disposed of after each
use.
(a) All dyes, inks and pigments shall be from a source of supply
which complies with applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration regulations when available. Dyes, inks and
pigments are to be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
directions and are not to be adulterated with any substance not
recommended by the manufacturer.
(b) A client must not receive body art procedures on areas which
are irritated/inflamed or have moles, rash, broken skin,
infection or any other evidence of an unhealthy condition such
as TB, influenza, HIV, impetigo, syphilis, mumps, hepatitis,
sclera, jaundice or rubella.
(c) Licensees and operators must be able to demonstrate
knowledge in anatomy and skin diseases, infections, disease
control and universal precautions.
(19) Every body artist must wash his/her hands thoroughly with liquid
antibacterial soap and water and dry them with single-use
disposable towels, before and after serving each client and at any
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:124
time during the procedure when the hands may become
contaminated.
(20) The owner of a body art establishment must ensure that each
licensee wears gloves and each operator shall wear gloves in
accordance with the following:
(a) When performing body art procedures, the operator must wash
his/her hands prior to gloving;
(b) Gloves must be disposed of after the completion of each
procedure on each client; and
(c) If gloves become torn, punctured or otherwise contaminated,
operators must remove and dispose of the gloves, wash his/her
hands with liquid soap and water, and dry with a disposable
towel, and then put on a new pair of gloves before resuming
the body art procedure.
(21) Single-use items must not be used on more than one client. After
use, all single-use needles, razors, razor blades and other sharps
must be immediately disposed of in an approved sharps disposal
container in accordance with 105 CMR 480.00.
(22)No body art procedure shall be performed until the following
inspections, shavings and preparations of the body art area have
occurred:
(a) No body piercing shall be done on skin surfaces which have
any rash, pimples, boils, infections or any other evidence of an
unhealthy condition;
(b) If the skin is to be shaved, the skin surface must first be
washed with soap and warm water. Disposable razors, for each
client, shall be used for preparation of the areas to be pierced;
(c) Prior to piercing, the area to be pierced shall be gently
scrubbed with an approved surgical scrub material or a sterile
gauze pad soaked in a germicidal preparation registered with
the Environmental Protection Agency and applied in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations;
(d) Only medical-grade markers or ink and sterile toothpicks are
to used to identify the areas to be pierced. Gentian violet may
be utilized for marking oral piercings; and
(e) The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptic to
check the flow of blood is prohibited.
(23) All license holders must ensure that the body art establishment,
operators and employees use disinfectant solution in accordance
with the manufacturer's directions. Body artists must comply with
the following requirements:
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-8
1:125
(a) Label the disinfectant solution;
(b) Keep the disinfectant solution covered at all times; and
(c) Change the disinfectant solution whenever visibly cloudy or
dirty.
(24) While in the body art establishment, license holders must not
engage in or allow any other person to engage in any of the
following activities:
(a) Consuming food or beverages in any area where body art is
performed (beverages of a nonalcoholic type can be consumed
or given to clients for the reason of dehydration,
lightheadedness and general comfort and small snacks may be
given to diabetics whose sugar may have dropped);
(b) Storing food in the same area where chemical supplies are
used or stored;
(c) Using, consuming, serving, or in any manner possessing or
distributing intoxicating beverages or controlled substances
upon its premises during the hours the facility is open to the
public and/or any body art procedures are being performed;
and
(d) Performing body art when she/he is under the influence of
alcohol, narcotic drugs, stimulants, or depressants or on any
person who appears to be under the influence of alcohol,
narcotic drugs, stimulants, or depressants.
(25) All external threaded jewelry to be used in body art procedures is
to be made from one of the following grades: 316LVM and/or
surgical implant-grade stainless steel ASTF 138; solid yellow or
white gold which is 14K or 18K; titanium meeting ASTM TiA4V ELI,
F136; niobium; platinum; high-density, low-porosity nontoxic
plastics meeting FDA standards where applicable (Tygon and
PTFE); and autoclavable borosilicate glass (Pyrex®). Certification
of the quality of the jewelry is to be obtained from the
manufacturer/supplier and made available for inspection.
Substandard jewelry such as that which is damaged, scratched,
intended for earlobes or not expressly designed for body piercing,
jewelry made of silver, gold-plated or filled or other corrosive metal
or any internal threaded jewelry shall not be used. When stored in a
closed clean, dry container, jewelry stored in paper autoclave bags
may be stored up to three months and up to six months when a full
plastic autoclave bag is used.
(26)No person may perform a body art procedure on or to any person
under 18 years of age without prior written consent of the parent or
court-appointed guardian of such person. The person giving
consent must be present during the procedure.
§ 88-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 88-8
1:126
§ 88-9. Violations and penalties.
(a) The person providing the body art procedure must retain a
copy of the consent for four years.
(b) Artists have the right to refuse to perform body art procedures
on a person less than 18 years of age.
(27) All recipients of a body art procedure shall receive from the body
artist and/or the body art establishment both written and verbal
after care which shall include, inter alia, circumstances under
which the client should seek medical treatment.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with this chapter or any
section or provision hereof or any regulation made under its authority
and any person who hinders, obstructs or interferes with a Health
Officer of any of his assistants in the discharge of their duties shall, on
conviction, be fined not less than $50 or more than $300 plus the costs
of their prosecution for the first offense and not less than $200 and not
more than $1,000 plus the costs of prosecution for all succeeding
offenses and in default of payment of such fines and costs, shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
B. If the violation shall be by a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association or other legal entity, the directors of such
corporations, partners of such partnership, or members of such limited
liability companies or associations, its agents and employees, with
guilty knowledge of the violation, shall also be guilty of an offense and
on conviction hereof shall be punished as aforesaid.
C. All fees and fines imposed or collected under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid to the Borough of Columbia for use by the
Borough.
D. Failure to observe any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
correct and cure any violations within 60 days of notice are grounds for
revocation of a license or denial of a renewal of a license. Unless a
license is being temporarily and immediately revoked for health
reasons in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
revocation or denial of renewal, the Borough shall give 10 days written
notice to the licensee of his violation of or his failure to observe a
general condition as set forth herein. If the licensee requests a hearing
prior to the expiration of that ten-day notice period, the Board shall
have a hearing to determine if the revocation or renewal denial should
occur. In order to request a hearing, the licensee must do so in writing
and include with his or her written request for a hearing the sum of $50
made payable to the Borough of Columbia as the fee for such hearing.
The licensee may present evidence in his behalf at such hearing. The
Board shall render a written decision within 45 days of the hearing. If
the licensee fails to request such a hearing, the revocation or renewal
denial shall be effective upon the expiration of the ten-day period or
§ 88-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-9
1:127
§ 88-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2009.
Chapter 90
BOROUGH PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH PROPERTY —
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
association, and any servant, agent, assistant, employee or representative
thereof.
upon expiration of the term of the existing license, as will be set forth
in the written notice.
E. Any person convicted of two violations of the provisions of this chapter
within any twelve-month period shall have his license suspended for
one full year and shall not be eligible for another license until the
expiration of one full year.
F. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the Borough of Columbia or any person to such
equitable or other remedies as may be otherwise available with or
without process of law.
Property owned by, leased to, or used by Columbia Borough and
devoted to recreational activities, including but not limited to public
parks, parkways, playgrounds, play fields, swimming pools,
recreational centers and gymnasiums. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
A.
Property owned by, leased to or used by Columbia Borough for the
purposes of providing municipal services, including but not limited to
the Municipal Building, Borough sheds, sewer plant and parking lots.
B.
All other property wheresoever located, owned by, leased to or used by
Columbia Borough.
C.
§ 88-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 90-2
1:128
§ 90-2. Prohibited acts.
Within the limits of any Borough property, it shall be unlawful for any person
to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts:
§ 90-3. Hours of operation.
§ 90-4. Permits. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
It is within the discretion of the Borough Council to permit the use of
Borough property during regular hours of operation or other times by
individuals, entities or groups. Any person wishing to use any Borough
property to the exclusion of other members of the public during regular
hours of operation or hours other than the normal hours of operation shall
apply to the Borough Council for a permit for such use. Any person to
A. Drink or be under the influence of malt or brewed beverages, spirituous
liquors or wine.
B. Carry or possess any malt or brewed beverages, spirituous liquors or
wine.
C. Injure, deface, destroy, tamper with, displace or remove any signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or property or any appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
D. Smoke in areas where forbidden by signs.
E. Throw or deposit cans, bottles, broken glass, paper or rubbish of any
description except in containers provided for the same.
F. Discard any refuse or offensive matter or substance of any kind.
G. Commit any public nuisance.
A. Unless otherwise determined and posted by Borough Council, Borough
property devoted to recreational activities shall be closed between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Any such property or any section or
part of such property may be declared closed to the public by the
Borough Council or by the custodian of such property at any time and
for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated
intervals. No person, other than authorized supervisors, police, guards,
or similar personnel, shall occupy, frequent or use such property
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or during such other
hours when such property may be closed to the public, except when
such property is being used for a special event for which a permit has
been issued by the Borough Council. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726]
B. Other Borough property shall be open to the public during such hours
and at such times as are posted upon such property by order of the
Borough Council.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:129
whom such a permit may be granted shall be liable for any loss, damage or
injury sustained by any person for the reason of negligence of the person or
persons to whom such permit may be granted, their agents or employees.
§ 90-5. Rules and regulations.
The Borough Council may make and promulgate such rules and regulations
as may be necessary for the supervision, maintenance and regulation of
Borough property and shall enforce this chapter and all rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No.
861]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, or any regulations made hereunder, or with any sign or regulation
posted on Borough property in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000 for each
offense, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fines
and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days.
Chapter 97
CONTRACTORS
§ 90-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 90-6
1:130
ARTICLE I
Restoration Services Providers
[Adopted 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 891]
§ 97-1. Solicitation prohibited.
No person or restoration company shall engage in solicitation at a fire
scene, or appear and remain at a fire scene, unless summoned by the owner,
tenant, occupier or other person in control of the property or a police officer
of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 97-2. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the prohibitions above, nothing in this section shall
prohibit the owner, occupier or other person in control of the real property
which is the subject of the fire scene from utilizing a restoration service
company chosen by the owner, tenant, occupier, or other person of the
real property after the property has been secured by appropriate Borough
officials, including those in the Fire and Police Departments.
§ 97-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of these provisions shall, upon conviction in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to pay a fine of not
more than $600, together with cost of prosecution for each violation, and, in
default of the payment of such fines and costs, to undergo imprisonment for
not more than 30 days. Each violation hereof that shall exist will constitute
a separate violation and offense.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:131
Chapter 101
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough property — See Ch. 90.
§ 101-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the Borough of Columbia "Curfew
Ordinance."
§ 101-2. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, recognizing the problem
of crimes committed by and committed against juveniles during the
nighttime and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively by
regulating the hours during which minors less than 18 years of age may
remain in public places and certain establishments without adult
supervision and by defining more clearly certain duties and responsibilities
upon those who have the custody and responsibility for the care of such
minors, hereby enacts this chapter for the purpose of promoting the general
welfare and protecting the general public through reduction of juvenile
violence and crime within the Borough of Columbia, promoting the safety
and welfare of the Borough citizens under the age of 18 years whose youth
and inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming the
participants in criminal activity and in being victimized by perpetrators of
crime, and fostering and strengthening parental responsibility for children.
§ 101-3. Definitions and word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
definitions shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AFTER HOURS and/or CURFEW HOURS — The period of time between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday nights and
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
with administrative offices located at 308 Locust Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania 17512.
BOROUGH OF COLUMBIA POLICE DEPARTMENT — Shall refer to the
Police Department Headquarters located at 308 Locust Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania 17512, or any officially designated precinct of said
Department.
§ 97-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 101-3
1:132
EMERGENCY — Refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or
condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life,
limb or property; the term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural
disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
MINOR or JUVENILE — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
other entity owning, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing penalties for violations of this
chapter, "operator" shall include the members, partners, officers, and
managers of any such firm, association, partnership, corporation or other
entity.
PARENT — The biological or adoptive parent of a minor; a legal guardian;
or an adult person 21 years of age or older and who is authorized by a
minor's parent or legal guardian to be responsible, either temporarily or
permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the control of such
minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, highways, streets,
alleys, parks, playgrounds, vacant lots, public buildings or grounds, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily, to loiter,
idle, wander, stroll, to congregate in groups totaling two or more persons in
which any minor involved would not be using the public place for purposes
accepted pursuant to § 101-5 hereof or to fail to leave the public place
when requested to do so by a police officer or the operator or other
person in control of the public place. To implement this thought with
additional precision and precaution, numerous exemptions and exceptions
are expressly set forth in § 101-5 so that this is not a mere prohibitory or
presence type chapter.
TIME or HOUR OF THE DAY — That time generally observed at that hour
in the Borough administrative offices and Police Department.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as 17th, to (but not
including the day of) the next, making it clear that 17 or fewer years of age
is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under the age of 18 years,"
unless specifically defined differently herein.
§ 101-4. Unlawful conduct.
A. Unlawful conduct of minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be and/
or remain in or upon any establishment or public place within the
Borough of Columbia during the curfew hours, except as otherwise set
forth in § 101-5 hereof. It shall further be unlawful for any minor to
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:133
§ 101-5. Exceptions and exemptions.
falsify any documents which said minor is required to carry or present
hereunder.
B. Unlawful conduct of parent. It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor
to knowingly permit or to allow any minor to whom he or she is deemed
a parent to be and/or remain in or upon any establishment or public
place within the Borough of Columbia under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this
chapter. It shall further be unlawful for any parent to falsify any
documents required to be carried by or presented by said minor
hereunder. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a
minor in that parent's custody. This provision is intended to continue to
keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community
standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be
no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of such minor child.
C. Unlawful conduct of operator. It shall be unlawful for any operator of an
establishment within the Borough of Columbia to permit any minor to
remain, absent a valid exception or exception pursuant to § 101-5
hereof, upon the premises of such establishment during the curfew
hours.
A. The following shall constitute valid exceptions/exemptions to the
operation of this chapter and shall be deemed valid defenses to any
prosecution hereunder:
(1) The minor is accompanied by said minor's parent;
(2) The minor is on an errand directed by the minor's parent without
any detour or stop, provided that the minor has on his or her
possession written identification and dated evidence of such
parental direction, including a statement of the applicable date and
time;
(3) The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or
terminating in the Borough of Columbia, provided that said minor
has on his or her possession written identification and dated
evidence of such parental consent, including a statement of the
applicable date and time;
(4) The minor is engaged in employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or
stop, provided that said minor has on his or her possession written
identification and dated evidence of such employment activity,
including a statement of the applicable date and time;
(5) The minor is on the property of or on the sidewalk abutting a place
where he or she resides with a parent or abutting the residence of a
§ 101-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 101-5
1:134
§ 101-6. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police of the Police Department is hereby authorized from time
to time to promulgate such rules and regulations, including the extension
of the curfew hours for special occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be
necessary or useful in the enforcement of this chapter, provided, however,
that any such rules and regulations shall be first approved by the Council of
the Borough of Columbia.
next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police
Department about the minor's presence;
(6) The minor is attending or returning from, without any detour or
stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a public organization or
agency, or by another similar organization or entity;
(7) The minor is involved in an emergency;
(8) In the case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor's
parent has communicated to the Police Department personnel the
facts establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified
establishments or public places at a designated time for a
described purpose including place of origin and destination; a copy
of such communication, or the police record thereof, duly certified
by the Chief of Police to be correct, an appropriate notation of the
time it was received and of the names and addresses of such parent
and minor shall constitute evidence of qualification under this
exception;
(9) The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech and the right of assembly; said minor shall
evidence the bona fides of such exercise and provide notice to
Borough of Columbia officials by first delivering to the Police
Department a written communication, signed by such minor, with
his/her home address and telephone number, addressed to the
Mayor of the Borough of Columbia specifying when, where and in
what manner said minor will be in or upon a public place or
establishment during the curfew hours exercising such First
Amendment rights;
(10) As to an operator, if an operator promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the public
place or establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave
upon request to do so by said operator, or his or her agents,
representatives or employees; and
B. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations, such as
provisions for notice and documentation, are severable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 101-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-7
1:135
§ 101-7. Enforcement procedures.
§ 101-8. Violations and penalties.
A. A police officer of the Borough of Columbia who has probable cause to
believe that a minor is in violation of this chapter shall:
(1) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place; the officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that
an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no exception set forth in § 101-5 hereof applies;
(2) If the police officer ascertains that no violation has occurred, he
shall direct the minor to go promptly home by a direct route; and
(3) In the instance that a violation has occurred, unless the minor is
taken into custody, order the minor to go promptly home by a direct
route.
B. Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter for the
first time may be issued a citation. The minor may be taken into
temporary custody in which his or her parents or other appropriate
person shall be notified and the minor shall be released into the custody
of the appropriate parent or parents of the minor or to a brother or
sister 18 years of age or older. If no such person is available after
reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the
minor shall be released to such agencies or institutions as are
established for juvenile welfare. When the parent or siblings arrive, he
or she shall be given a copy of this chapter.
C. In the case of a violation as noted above by a minor, the Chief of Police
shall, by certified mail, send to the minor and the minor's parent written
notice of said violation. Said notice shall be sent to the minor's parent at
his or her last known address and evidence of its mailing shall
constitute sufficient notice of the minor's violation.
D. In the case of a violation as noted in Subsection A hereof by a minor, the
Chief of Police shall, by certified mail, send to the minor and the minor's
parent written notice of said violation. Said notice shall be sent to the
minor's parent at his or her last known address and evidence of its
mailing shall constitute sufficient notice of the minor's violation.
A. Any minor or parent who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, which conviction
shall not occur unless appropriate warning has been made pursuant to
§ 101-7D hereof, shall be fined $100 for the first conviction and be
subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Any minor or parent
convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the second time
shall be fined $200, and/or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Any minor or parent convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter
§ 101-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 101-8
1:136
§ 101-9. Construction and severability.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this
chapter. If any provision, including inter alia, any exception, part, phrase or
term or the application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby
and the validity of this chapter in any and all other respects shall not be
affected thereby. The Council of the Borough of Columbia does not intend a
result that is absurd, impossible to execute or unreasonable. It is intended
that this chapter be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, and where
its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is
intended and shall be given. The Council of the Borough of Columbia does
not intend to violate the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or the Constitution of the United States of America.
§ 101-10. Notice of curfew.
The Borough Secretary/Treasurer shall provide notice of this chapter and
of the curfew regulations established by it by having copies of this chapter
posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public places as may be
determined by the Mayor, the Borough Council and Police Department in
order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this
chapter and its amendments and regulations.
§ 101-11. Annual review.
This chapter and the need for it shall be reviewed annually. By November 1,
2003, and each year thereafter, the Committee on Public Safety shall review
this chapter and report and make recommendations to the Council of the
Borough of Columbia considering the effectiveness of and the continuing
need for this chapter. This report shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
for the third time shall be fined $250 and/or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed 90 days. Any minor or parent convicted of violating the
provisions of this chapter for the fourth or subsequent time shall be
fined $300 and/or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days.
B. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the
first time shall be fined $100, and/or imprisoned for a term not to
exceed 90 days. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of
this chapter for the second or subsequent time shall be fined $300 and/
or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. The practicality of enforcing the chapter and any problems with
enforcement identified by the Police Department for the Borough of
Columbia;
§ 101-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-11
1:137
§ 101-12. Provisions to be cumulative.
This chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other laws in force.
Chapter 105
DEMOLITION PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 105-1. Permit required; exception.
It shall be unlawful to wreck, demolish, raise or remove (hereinafter
collectively referred to as "demolish") any building, structure, vegetative
screenings or impervious surface within the Borough of Columbia without
first securing a permit therefor. It shall not be necessary to obtain a
demolition permit for the demolition of any building, structure or vegetative
screening used primarily for accessory residential use.
§ 105-2. Application procedures.
An application for a permit to demolish any building, structure, vegetative
screening, or impervious surface within the Borough of Columbia shall be
made in writing to the Borough Manager or his designated agent, who,
within 10 days of receipt thereof, shall provide a copy to the Planning
Commission. Such application shall give the location of the building,
structure, vegetative screening or impervious surface which is intended to
be removed and shall specify all buildings, structures, vegetative screening
or impervious surfaces within 200 feet in any and all directions of the
building, structure, vegetative screening or impervious surface to be
demolished. A plot plan showing property boundaries, street and avenue
location and intended lot changes and future lot uses shall be submitted
along with the formal application. Included in the application shall be
the date of projected demolition and the company or entity performing
the demolition. Upon approval and issuance of a demolition permit the
B. The impact of this chapter and support programs on juvenile crime
statistics;
C. The number of juveniles taken into custody for curfew violations; and
D. The number of official citizen complaints filed regarding the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 101-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 105-2
1:138
applicant shall submit a certificate of worker's compensation insurance
coverage.
§ 105-3. Notification of utilities and landowners.
§ 105-4. Deposit to ensure restoration of site.
A. Prior to a building, structure, vegetative screening or impervious
surface being demolished, the applicant shall notify in writing all
utilities having service connections within, on, or with the structure,
building, vegetative screened area, or impervious surface, including but
not limited to the water, gas, sewer, and electric utilities. A permit to
demolish a building, structure, vegetative screening or impervious
surface shall not be issued until a release is obtained from each such
utility and submitted to the Borough Manager or his designated agent
who shall provide a copy to the Planning Commission. Such releases
shall state that the utility's service connections and appurtenant
equipment, such as meters, transformers, regulators, and telephone/
electric poles, have been removed, sealed and plugged in a safe
manner.
B. A permit to demolish a building, structure, vegetative screening or
impervious surface shall not be granted until the applicant submits to
the Borough Manager or his designated agent a copy of a written notice
sent from the applicant to the owners of adjoining buildings and lots, as
well as owners of buildings, lots, facilities and appurtenances wired and
connected for power and communication where the temporary removal
of such infrastructure is necessitated by the proposed demolition. Such
notices shall be by certified mail (restricted delivery) with "return
receipt request." Copies of such written notice shall be made available
to the Planning Commission. Applicant shall submit copies of the mail
receipt to the Borough Manager or his designated agent along with the
written notice. Said notices shall direct that any and all such comments
be directed to the Planning Commission within 30 days. The Planning
Commission shall consider all such comments prior to making its
recommendation on the application. [Amended 12-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 920]
A. Before a permit may be issued, the applicant shall deposit with the
Borough Secretary/Treasurer the following sums to insure that the
property is in a proper and safe condition after such demolition:
(1) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces not exceeding 3,000 square feet: $1,000.
(2) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces not exceeding 10,000 square feet: $1,500.
(3) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces not exceeding 20,000 square feet: $2,000.
§ 105-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:139
§ 105-5. Liability insurance.
A certificate showing that public liability insurance in the following amounts
has been obtained by the applicant shall accompany any such application:
(4) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces not exceeding 50,000 square feet: $3,000.
(5) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces not exceeding 100,000 square feet: $4,000.
(6) For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious
surfaces exceeding 100,000 square feet, plus an additional $1,000
for each additional 100,000 square feet: $4,000.
B. By "proper and safe condition," it is meant that all debris resulting from
the demolition has been removed from the site; excavated areas such as
trenches and basements have been backfilled with "clean fill" as that
same is defined by ordinary and customary use in the industry; in the
case of future construction over excavated areas, such areas will be
surrounded by a non-climbable (site tight) fence at least six feet in
height; and all excavated and disturbed areas will be regraded and
seeded with grass seed and graded so that the site will be mowable,
such final grading and seeding to be accomplished within 90 days of the
date of completion of the demolition. [Amended 12-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 920]
C. If the Planning Commission or its authorized inspection agent finds that
such property has been put into the proper condition as provided for in
this section and § 105-7 hereof, then it shall instruct the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer to return the deposit to the applicant. If the site is
not cleared, or put into a safe condition, or put into a condition in
compliance with § 105-7 hereof, or work is not commenced to do so
within 10 days of the demolition, the Borough may proceed with the
work, and the cost of such work shall be deducted from the deposit. If
any amount is left from such deposit after the Borough has performed
the work, such balance shall be returned to the applicant. If the
Borough's cost of completing the work exceeds the deposit, the
applicant shall be responsible for payment of same, plus any reasonable
costs, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough in collecting
same from the applicant.
A. For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious surfaces
not exceeding 3,000 square feet: $100,000.
B. For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious surfaces
not exceeding 10,000 square feet: $200,000.
C. For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious surfaces
not exceeding 20,000 square feet: $300,000.
§ 105-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 105-5
1:140
§ 105-6. Inspection.
Before any such permit shall be granted, the Planning Commission shall
direct an authorized agent to inspect the premises where the demolition
work is to take place, and ascertain that provision for proper care has been
made so as not to endanger any sewer or water systems. Any such costs of
inspection shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 105-7. Plan requirements.
D. For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious surfaces
not exceeding 50,000 square feet: $400,000.
E. For buildings, structures, vegetative screening, or impervious surfaces
exceeding 50,000 square feet: $500,000.
A. Plan submission.
(1) Along with the application, the applicant shall submit a plan
detailing the maintenance of the property upon completion of the
demolition work. The contents of that plan are dependent upon the
intended use of the property:
(a) Intent: vacant lot. Applicant's plan must identify the manner in
which it will maintain the property. Vacant lots will be required
to have topsoil applied and seeded with grass. Coniferous and
deciduous trees must be planted in order to form buffer areas
in accordance with Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(b) Intent: construction or use of land subject to Chapter 190,
Subdivision and Land Development. Applicant must submit a
plan in conformity with the procedures of Chapter 190,
Subdivision and Land Development. The granting of a permit
shall be authorized by the Planning Commission for the
demolition within 90 days of submission, providing that the
Planning Commission believes that adequate measures have
been addressed in the plan for maintenance of the property
subsequent to the demolition and prior to approval of the plan
by the Planning Commission.
(c) Intent: use not subject to Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land
Development. The plan must contain adequate measures for
maintenance of the property subsequent to completion of the
demolition and prior to implementation of the subsequent use.
Any measures for maintenance of the property subsequent to
completion of the demolition must be enacted within five days
following any such demolition.
(2) As part of its plan, the applicant must agree to abide by all
applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, without
limitation: Chapter 112, Existing Structures, Property Maintenance
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-7
1:141
§ 105-8. Issuance or denial of permit. [Amended 12-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 920]
The Planning Commission shall, within 90 days after receipt of a properly
submitted application, make a recommendation whether Council should
approve or disapprove the application for a permit. The Planning
Commission shall issue to applicant and Council a written recommendation
setting forth its reasons. If an application is incomplete or is inconsistent
with the standards set forth herein, the Borough Manager shall neither
accept the application nor forward same to the Planning Commission for
consideration.
§ 105-9. Permit fees.
The fee schedule for the issuance of a demolition permit is as follows:
and Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, and
in particular any provisions dealing with stagnant water, sanitation,
insect and rat control, public areas, weeds, rubbish, garbage and
extermination; Chapter 181, Solid Waste, of the Borough Code,
provisions dealing with accumulation of garbage and refuse;
Chapter 220 of the Borough Code, dealing with zoning; and
Chapter 190 of the Borough Code, dealing with subdivision and
land development. The plan shall state with particularity how the
applicant intends to comply with said provisions and the time frame
for doing so. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. The Planning Commission shall review the plan to determine whether
the plan provides for compliance with all applicable local, state and
federal regulations regarding property maintenance, including, but not
limited to, those cited in Subsection A of this section. The Planning
Commission shall furnish a recommendation to Borough Council
whether the demolition permit should be approved, and Borough
Council shall consider the Planning Commission's recommendation at
the next regularly scheduled meeting of Council, provided that the
meeting occurs at least five days following the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, and shall grant or deny the permit. [Amended
12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 920]
A. For buildings, structures, vegetative screenings or impervious surfaces
not exceeding:
(1) Three thousand square feet: $100.
(2) Ten thousand square feet: $200.
(3) Twenty thousand square feet: $400.
(4) Fifty thousand square feet: $500.
(5) One hundred thousand square feet: $1,000.
§ 105-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 105-9
1:142
§ 105-10. Performance and safety standards.
All work on such demolition shall be performed in a workmanlike manner
and with control of dust and noise, as much as possible. No work shall
be performed before 6:00 a.m. nor after 7:00 p.m. except with special
permission from the Borough Zoning Officer or his agent. Care shall be
taken to protect neighboring structures, buildings, vegetative screenings
and impervious surfaces from destruction. Adequate shoring, fencing and
other construction industry methods shall be utilized to protect same. Signs
stating "WRECKING AND DEMOLITION WORK GOING ON -- NO
TRESPASSING" shall be erected on each side of the building, structure,
vegetative screening or impervious surface that faces on a public street
or alley. Adequate protection shall be provided to prevent injury to any
Borough or public utility or appurtenances. Adequate protection shall also
be provided to prevent injury to any pedestrian. It shall be the duty of all
persons working on or responsible for such demolition to see to it that
children are warned away from such premises and are not permitted to play
in, on, near nor frequent such buildings, structures, vegetative screenings
or impervious surfaces demolition sites.
§ 105-11. Supervision; costs.
§ 105-12. Violations and penalties.
B. For buildings, structures, vegetative screenings or impervious surfaces
exceeding 100,000 square feet: $50 per 1,000 square feet for each
1,000 square feet over 100,000 square feet. The base fee of $1,000 per
100,000 square feet is also applicable.
A. The Borough Manager or his designated agent may supervise such
demolition and may, at its option and in its discretion, inspect such
premises during such demolitions at such times as he deems
appropriate.
B. Inspections by the designated Borough Engineer or other hired agents
of the Borough will be billed to the applicant on an hourly basis. Such
billing shall not exceed the standard hourly rate of the Engineer or
other hired Borough agents plus 15% for normal overhead and
administration cost.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter,
upon conviction thereof, shall pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each
violation, at the discretion of the court. All fines collected for such
violations shall be paid over to the Borough of Columbia and deposited
in the general fund of the Borough.
B. In addition to the aforesaid criminal penalties, any person, firm or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined by the
Borough not more than $500 for each violation, and a separate violation
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
§ 105-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-12
1:143
§ 105-13. Waiver of requirements. [Amended 12-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 920]
occurs or continues. All such fines collected by the Borough shall be
deposited in the general fund of the Borough.
C. In addition to the above penalties and fines, in the event of violation, the
Borough of Columbia may also initiate appropriate legal proceedings in
law or equity before any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the
demolition of any building, structure, vegetative screening, or
impervious surface, and for additional purposes, including but not
limited to requiring compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, including the requirement of submitting the plans in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Failure to timely restore the property as provided in § 105-4B above
within 90 days of the completion of demolition shall be deemed a
violation of the chapter and each day thereafter that the property has
not been finally graded and seeded, with a grade suitable for mowing,
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. [Added
12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 920]
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as a minimum standard for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. If the literal
compliance with any mandatory provision hereof is shown by the
applicant, to the satisfaction of a majority of the members of the
Borough Council present at a scheduled meeting, to be unreasonable or
to cause undue hardship as it applies to a particular building, structure,
vegetative screening, or impervious surface, or if the applicant shows
that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results, the
Borough Council may grant a waiver from such mandatory provision, so
that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured
while permitting the reasonable demolition of the building, structure,
vegetative screening, or impervious structure. The granting of such a
waiver, however, shall not have the effect of making null and void the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
B. In granting waivers, the Borough Council may impose such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
C. A request for waiver shall be submitted along with the application for
permit. All such requests shall be in writing and shall identify the
specific provision of this chapter which is requested to be waived;
provisions proposed as an alternative to the requirements; and
justification for the waiver. The Borough Council shall review the
request to determine if compliance with the provisions of the chapter
creates an undue hardship or appears to be unreasonable as it applies
to that particular building, structure, vegetative screening, or
impervious surface; or if the applicant demonstrates that an alternative
proposal will allow for equal or better results, and take such action as it
§ 105-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 105-13
1:144
§ 105-14. Records.
The Planning Commission shall keep an accurate public record of its
findings, decisions and recommendations relevant to all applications
submitted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 105-15. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
This chapter is to work in conjunction with and as a supplement to Chapter
190, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 220, Zoning. If any
provision hereof or action taken pursuant hereto shall be in conflict with or
in violation of same, Chapters 190 and 220 are to control.
§ 105-16. More stringent requirement to control.
Wherever there is a difference between the minimum applicable standards
specified herein and those included in other applicable municipal
regulations, whether local, state or federal, the more stringent requirement
shall apply.
§ 105-17. Decision. [Amended 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 920]
After considering the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Borough Council shall accept, reject, or modify the recommendation by
a recorded vote. The findings and reasons for the disposition of the
application shall be stated on the record and a copy shall be given to the
applicant and the Planning Commission.
§ 105-18. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and referred to as the "Borough of Columbia
Demolition Permit Act."24
Chapter 108
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77. Noise — See Ch. 149.
shall deem necessary or advisable in the public interest. If the request
is denied, such denial shall be in writing and shall include the
justification for the denial.
24.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Application for Consideration of Building Permit, and Appendix
B, Permit Approval Checklist, which accompanied this ordinance, are on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk.
§ 105-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-1
1:145
§ 108-1. Disorderly practices prohibited.
Any person who shall commit or cause to be committed any act, word or
conduct causing a breach of the peace and good order of the Borough of
Columbia shall be guilty of disorderly practices in violation of this chapter
if that person:
§ 108-2. Sounds.
The sounds in § 108-1 above are any sound and may typically include,
but are not limited to, such things as motor vehicles and motor vehicle
accessories, domestic power tools, motorized lawn and garden equipment,
loading and unloading vehicles, powered model vehicles, street sales, motor
vehicle repairs and testing, unnecessary horn blowing, sound trucks, public
address systems, radios, televisions, stereos and CD players and musical
instruments.
A. Causes any danger, discomfort or unreasonable annoyance to any of the
inhabitants of the Borough of Columbia or users of the Borough of
Columbia thoroughfares or public areas, including, but not limited to,
anyone who shall willfully make any loud, boisterous or unseeming
noise or disturbance; or
B. Fights or quarrels or incites others to fight or quarrel; or
C. Congregates with others upon any of the Borough of Columbia
thoroughfares or other public areas of the Borough of Columbia to the
reasonable annoyance of peaceable residents nearby or users of any
Borough of Columbia thoroughfares or public areas by the use of
obscene or other offensive language or by threatening conduct; or
D. Loiters near or in the entrances to commercial establishments, whether
on public or private property, or any place of public resort, whether
public or private, or upon any private property within the Borough of
Columbia without the consent of the owners thereof, whereby the
public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public is reasonably
annoyed by obscene or other offensive language, by loud or boisterous
noise, by threatening conduct, or by blocking entrance to such an
establishment; or
E. At any time makes any sound which reasonably annoys or disturbs
humans or which reasonably causes an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on humans in a manner that the sound is heard
across property lines or through tenant walls or between one dwelling
unit and another, or in a manner that the sound is heard in excess of 50
feet from the source of the sound; or
F. Discharging a firearm, air rifle or bow and arrow anywhere within the
Borough of Columbia. [Added 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 807]
§ 108-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 108-3
1:146
§ 108-3. Hours when uses prohibited.
The use of domestic powers tools, powered model vehicles, motor vehicle
repairs and testing, radios, televisions, stereos and CD players and musical
instruments or any other sound which has the effect described in § 108-1
above outside the confines of a dwelling or commercial structure, the use
of motorized lawn and garden equipment, sound trucks or public address
systems or street sales, unnecessary horn blowing or unnecessary idling or
revving of motorcycles or truck tractors are prohibited between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 108-4. Exemptions.
The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Amplified and nonamplified activities approved by the Borough
Manager or his designee, which may include, but not be limited to,
athletic events, concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
publicly or privately operated events.
B. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work or by the
ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
C. Sounds resulting from the repair/management or replacement of any
municipal or utility installation in or about a public right-of-way.
D. Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously for three
minutes or less, except in the event of an actual emergency, the time
limit shall not apply.
E. Where unusual or extreme weather conditions, such as heat, cold,
pollen advisories, rain, snow, or other conditions that would affect the
health and safety of persons working therein, restrict the ability of
persons to work between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., upon
application to and permission from the Borough Manager, such persons
may engage in activities between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. that may
cause sound otherwise prohibited.
F. Sounds caused by the collection and transportation of refuse and
recyclable materials in accordance with the ordinances of the Borough
of Columbia.
G. The discharge of a firearm at a military funeral or other similar
ceremony shall not constitute a violation of this chapter, provided that
the party organizing such funerals or ceremonies has obtained a permit
from the Chief of Police. For these ceremonies and funerals, the Chief of
Police may issue a permit for the organizing party that covers all such
funerals or ceremonies to be conducted by such party, whether then
contemplated or not, and such permit shall remain in force until
repealed by the Chief of Police. [Added 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 807]
§ 108-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-4
1:147
§ 108-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution or to imprisonment for not less
than 30 days, as amended by law.
§ 108-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police officers.
§ 108-7. Effect on Noise Control Ordinance.
The enactment of this chapter shall not, in any way, constitute a repeal of
any provisions of Chapter 149 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 108-8. Definitions. [Added 10-11-2010 by Ord. No. 807]
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR RIFLE — Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, or
any implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet of any kind with
a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm.
ARROW — A missile shot from a bow or crossbow, having a slender shaft
with a fletching or vanes at the butt and a pointed head without any
explosive, chemical or poison in the head or shaft and used solely with a
bow or crossbow.
BOW — A weapon which propels an arrow, is handheld, hand-drawn, held
in the drawn position by hand or by a handheld mechanical device and
released by hand. The term shall include what is commonly known as a
"crossbow."
DISCHARGE — The expulsion of a projectile from a firearm, air rifle or bow
and arrow or the operation of a firearm, air rifle or bow and arrow in such
a manner so as to lead one to reasonably conclude by sight or sound, that
a projectile was expelled from a firearm, air rifle or bow and arrow. If the
firearm, air rifle or bow and arrow used is capable of the expulsion of a
projectile, its firing alone shall be sufficient to constitute a discharge and no
further proof of the expulsion of a projectile shall be necessary.
FIREARM — Any device which is designed and intended to expel a projectile
by action of gun powder, any other explosive, compressed air, compressed
gas or mechanical device including, any device which, when discharged,
would by sound or otherwise: lead another to reasonably conclude by sight
or sound that the device expelled a projectile; or give the appearance
H. The discharge of a firearm, air rifle or bow and arrow under
circumstances which would constitute justification as that term is
defined in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code. [Added 10-11-2010 by Ord.
No. 807]
§ 108-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 108-8
1:148
of the expulsion of a projectile even though no expulsion of a projectile
occurred. By way of example and not limitation, items that are to be
considered firearms under this chapter include guns, pistols, rifles and
shotguns. The definition of "firearm" shall not be deemed to include items
that are traditionally considered to be children's toys when used in the
manner for which they were designed. The definition of "firearm" shall
not include starter pistols when used in the manner in which they were
intended; i.e., to signify the start of a race or other similar event.
Chapter 112
EXISTING STRUCTURES, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enforcement of certain ordinances — See Ch.
1, Art. II
Demolition permits — See Ch. 105.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126.
Noise — See Ch. 149.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 108-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-8
1:149

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 112-1. Title; purpose; construal of provisions; workmanship.
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Existing Structures,
Property Maintenance and Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of
Columbia," hereinafter referred to as the "Existing Structures Code" or
"this code." [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Scopes. This code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in
all existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on all
existing premises as hereinafter provided, by:
(1) Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all structures
and premises for basic equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for
space, use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of
all structures and premises now in existence.
(2) Establishing minimum requirements for all existing buildings and
structures for means of egress, fire protection systems and other
equipment and devices necessary for safety from fire.
(3) Providing for rehabilitation and reuse of existing structures and
allowing differences between the application of the code
requirements to new construction and the application of the code
requirements to alterations and repairs.
(4) Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures.
(5) Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
C. Intent. This code shall be construed liberally and justly to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
use and maintenance of structures and premises.
D. Adoption of codes. There is hereby adopted by the Borough of Columbia
the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code and all codes and
standards referenced and incorporated therein, all for the purpose of
describing specifications and regulations to ensure the structural safety
of buildings, structures and housing existing or constructed for use
within the Borough, as therein and herein provided, save and except
those provisions as are deleted, modified or amended by this or other
ordinances of the Borough of Columbia, together with such provisions
as may be hereinafter adopted by the Borough of Columbia, except such
provisions which are in conflict with state law. The aforesaid 2018
International Property Maintenance Code and the incorporated
standards and codes are hereby adopted and are incorporated by
reference as if set out at length. Copies of the above-referenced codes
and standards are on file in the Office of the Borough Secretary and
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:151
Borough Code Official where they are available for public examination
and use. The provisions set forth in this chapter of the Existing
Structures, Property Maintenance and Fire Prevention Code of the
Borough of Columbia shall be controlling within the limits of the
Borough of Columbia. The Borough of Columbia further adopts and
incorporates the Uniform Construction Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and any regulations, standards or requirements
promulgated thereunder. To the extent that said code or any of its
regulations, rules or requirements are inconsistent with the provisions
of any of the codes referenced above, said Uniform Construction Code
and its rules, regulations and promulgations shall control. The
International Property Maintenance Code of 2018, as adopted hereby,
is amended as follows: [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 677;
8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681; 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722; 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 726; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 801; 12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 894]
(1) Section 101.1, Title, be and hereby is revised to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"International Property Maintenance Code and/or Existing
Structures, Property Maintenance and Fire Prevention Code of the
Borough of Columbia," herein referred to as "the code."
(2) Section 103.5, Fees, of the code be and hereby is amended to read
as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by
the Department in carrying out its responsibilities under the code
shall be as set forth on the Borough of Columbia Fee Schedule,
adopted from time to time by resolution of Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia.
(3) Section 112.4, Failure to comply, of the code be and hereby is
amended to read as follows:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000.
(4) Section 302.4, Weeds, of the code be and hereby is amended to
read as follows:
§ 112-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-1
1:152
302.4 Weeds. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds or growth in excess of 11 inches. Noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual
plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, that this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property
to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation,
they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section
106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon
failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized
employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction
shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and
cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the cost of such
removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property.
(5) Section 304.14, Insect screens, of the code be and hereby is
amended to read as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from January 1 to
December 31, every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per
25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have
a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed.
(6) Section 602.3, Heat supply, of the code be and hereby is amended
to read as follows:
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping
units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall apply heat during the period from October
1 to May 30 to maintain a minimum temperature of 68° F. (20° C.)
in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the
minimum room temperature shall not be required, provided
that the heating system is operating at its full designed
capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the
International Plumbing Code.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1
1:153
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30° F. (-1° C.), a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall
be maintained.
(7) Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, of the code be and hereby
is amended to read as follows:
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces
shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to
May 30 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.)
during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling
or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
(8) To the extent that Section 111 of the code is inconsistent with
§ 112-10 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, § 112-10 of the
Code of the Borough of Columbia shall control. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, both § 112-10 of the Code of the Borough of
Columbia and Section 111 of the code shall be read together and
interpreted as each being in force to the extent that they are not
inconsistent with one another.
(9) Any battery-only smoke alarm that is either (1) inoperable or (2)
more than 10 years old must be replaced with a smoke alarm
powered by a ten-year sealed-in battery that meets with the
approval of the Codes Compliance Department. [Added
7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 916]
E. Application of other codes. Any alterations or repairs to a structure or
change of use therein which are caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this code which are undertaken otherwise after passage
of this code shall be done in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of the building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes
listed and set forth in Chapter 8 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code and, or where appropriate, with the Uniform
Construction Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania adopted by
the Borough of Columbia as set forth in this Chapter 112. Alterations or
repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or
adversely affect the performance of the structure. Alterations or repairs
to any structure shall conform to that required of a new structure
without requiring the existing structure to comply with all the
requirements of the code for the new construction, provided that such
work conforms to that required by this code. [Amended 8-15-1991 by
Ord. No. 634; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 894]
F. Existing remedies. The provisions of this code shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the Borough or its officers or
§ 112-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-1
1:154
§ 112-2. Effect on violations of prior provisions.
This code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation
shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of
the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 112-3. Minimum requirements established.
As provided in § 112-1, this code establishes minimum requirements for
the initial and continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises
and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by
ordinance which are additional or more stringent for the construction,
repair, alteration or use of structures, equipment or facilities.
§ 112-4. Construction in accordance with approval required;
modifications; used or alternative materials and equipment.
[Amended 8-15-1991 by Ord. No. 634]
agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which
are dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
G. Workmanship. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are required for compliance with this code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as
to secure the results intended by this code.
A. Approved materials and equipment. At all times through the process of
construction, reconstruction, renovation, remodeling and/or repairing,
the code official has the right to investigate the materials or equipment
being used and the procedures performed toward completion of any
project. The code official has the right to prohibit the use of any
material, equipment or procedure which is judged, in good faith, to
create a risk to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Modifications. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the structural or mechanical provisions of this code, the owner or
his representative is obligated to report the difficulty. The code official
shall be permitted to vary or modify such provisions upon application of
the owner or of the owner's representative, provided that the spirit or
intent of this code shall be observed and public safety and welfare is
assured. The code official may render a decision immediately when
possible or after appropriate research and/or consultation.
C. Records. Applications for modifications and final decision of the code
official shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in the records
of the code official. Any modification permitted by the code official shall
be in writing with an explanation and copies of any reference material
used to assist in that decision. The record of modifications shall be read
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-4
1:155
and signed and dated by the owner or his representative and the code
official.
D. Alternative materials and equipment.
(1) The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of
any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed
by this code, provided that any such construction shall be approved
when the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory
and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code and that
the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended,
at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality,
strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
(2) Research and investigations. The code official may require that
sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed
use of any material or assembly; and, if it is determined that the
evidence submitted is satisfactory proof of performance for the use
intended, the code official shall approve its use subject to the
requirements of this code. The costs of all tests, reports and
investigations required under these provisions shall be paid by the
applicant.
§ 112-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-4
1:156
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 112-5. Enforcement authority; official records.
§ 112-6. Powers and duties of code official. [Amended 8-15-1991 by
Ord. No. 634; 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 677; 7-14-2003 by Ord. No.
721; 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722; 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 758; 3-23-2010
by Ord. No. 801]
A. Officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the code official to
enforce the provisions of this code as herein provided. The Code
Enforcement Officer is hereby designated to be the code official under
this chapter. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
B. Relief from personal liability. Any code official, officer or employee who
acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of duties of
enforcement of this code is relieved of all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or
alleged failure to act. Further, the code official shall not be held liable
for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted by the
code official in the enforcement of this code. If any of these actions, the
official or employee shall be defended or represented by the Borough
Solicitor until the final termination of the proceedings.
C. Official records. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the code official specified in the provisions of this code.
A. General. The code official or his delegate or representative shall
enforce the provisions of this code.
B. Notices and orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices
and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to ensure compliance
with this code's requirements for the safety, health and general welfare
of the public. He shall also issue licenses under this code.
C. Inspections. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the
public, the code official is authorized to enter any structure or premises
in the Borough of Columbia at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making inspections or performing duties under this code. Additionally,
the code official shall make or cause other authorized inspectors, as
identified in the following subsection, to make the following
inspections:
(1) Certificate of occupancy. Whenever a single-family dwelling or
commercial property is placed on the market for sale which has not
been issued a certificate of occupancy within the previous threeyear
period for compliance with the structural, fire, safety and
sanitation requirements of this Code, the Code Official must be
notified by the seller or his or her agent so that the Code Official
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:157
can conduct an inspection. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
812; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878; 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 884]
(a) If the inspection reveals no violations, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
(b) If the inspection reveals at least one violation, but none of the
violations pose a threat to health, safety or property, the Code
Official shall issue a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(c) If the inspection reveals that at least one of the violations
involve a threat to health, safety or property, the Code Official
shall note such violations on the inspection report and shall
issue a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(d) Temporary certificates of occupancy shall be valid for a period
of 12 months from the date of purchase or the date the
certificate was issued, whichever is first.
(e) If any violations have been found, at the expiration of the 12
months, or at an earlier time at the request of the property
owner, the Code Official shall reinspect the property; if no
violations are found, an unrestricted certificate of occupancy
shall be issued. if violations that do not pose a threat to health,
safety or property are found, a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for the time remaining on the
original temporary certificate of occupancy.
(2) Rental properties. All dwelling units, apartments, rooming houses
and hotels or other residential rental units as defined in Subsection
D, Residential rental unit regulation, of this § 112-6 which are let
for occupancy shall be subject to all inspections authorized and
required by Subsection D of this section, to random inspections by
the Code Enforcement Official, and to inspections if the Code
Enforcement Official reasonably determines that an inspection is
necessary. Every three years, the owner, operator or manager of
the property shall obtain a new certificate of occupancy for the
property from the code official by making request on forms
provided by the Borough to have the code official inspect the
property and by submitting the appropriate administration fee.
Upon a finding by the code official that the property is free of
deficiencies, the code official shall issue a certificate of occupancy
to the owner, operator or manager of the property verifying that the
property is compliant with this code, and said certificate shall be
valid for a three-year period from the date of issuance, unless
revoked by the code official for just cause. [Amended 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 812; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878]
(3) Fire inspections. The code official or his designee shall perform all
inspections of commercial and industrial properties required by the
Fire Prevention Code, including: assembly occupation inspections,
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:158
business occupancy inspections, educational occupancy
inspections, factory and industrial occupancy inspections, highhazard
occupancies, institutional occupancy inspections,
mercantile occupancy inspections, storage occupancy inspections,
utility occupancy inspections, solid fuel appliance inspections,
automobile alarm system inspections, and fire protection system
inspections.
D. Residential rental unit regulation.
(1) Purpose and scope. The purpose of this Subsection D and the policy
of the Borough of Columbia shall be to protect and promote the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights
and obligations of owners and occupants relating to residential
rental units in the Borough and to encourage owners and
occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing
within the Borough. As a means to these ends, this Subsection D
provides for a systematic inspection program, registration and
licensing of residential rental units and penalties. In considering
the adoption of this Subsection D, the Borough makes the following
findings:
(a) There is a growing concern in the Borough with the failure of
some landowners to properly maintain residential units.
(b) Borough records indicate there is a greater incidence of
problems with the maintenance and upkeep of residential
properties which are not owner-occupied as compared to those
that are owner-occupied.
(c) Borough records indicate there are a greater number of
disturbances at residential rental units than owner-occupied
units. Borough records indicate that violations of the
Borough's ordinances are generally less severe at owneroccupied
units as compared to residential rental units.
(2) Definitions and word usage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following terms shall, for the purpose of this Subsection D, have the
meanings indicated as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — A person designated by
Borough Council to enforce this Subsection D, including
performance of inspections, issuance of residential rental licenses
and issuance of citations.
CODES — Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted
or in effect in and for the Borough including, but not limited to,
the Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code, codified
as Chapter 112 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:159
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any act by an occupant of a residential
rental unit or by a person present at a residential rental unit
involving public drunkenness; consumption of an alcoholic
beverage in public; public urination or defecation; the unlawful
depositor of trash or litter on public or private property; damage
to or destruction of public or private property; the obstruction
of public roads, streets, highways or sidewalks; interference with
emergency or police services; unreasonable noise as defined by
Chapter 149, Noise, and/or the appropriate ordinances of the
Borough of Columbia dealing with noise violations, and Chapter
220, Zoning, and/or the appropriate ordinances of the Borough
of Columbia dealing with zoning regulations; use of profane or
obscene language or gestures; indecent exposure; fighting or
quarreling; or any other act defined as "disorderly conduct" in the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code or any act prohibited by the ordinances
of the Borough or which otherwise injures the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the Borough residing in the
neighborhood or vicinity of the gathering. It is not necessary that
such conduct, action, incident or behavior constitute a criminal
offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any person in
order for said person to have perpetrated, caused or permitted the
commission of disruptive conduct will be deemed to have occurred
unless a Code Enforcement Official or a police officer shall
investigate and make a determination that such did occur, and
keep written records, including a disruptive conduct report, of
such occurrences. Provided, however, that a victim of domestic
violence with a protection from abuse order shall not be subject
to a disruptive conduct report if the police officer determines,
after investigation, that the behavior complained of is a result of
domestic violence. The occupant and the owner and, if applicable,
the manager shall be notified of any such occurrences in
writing.[Amended 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 838]
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive
conduct to be completed by a police officer or a Code Enforcement
Official who actually investigates an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement
Official.
HOTEL UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a hotel
or motel forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used
for living and sleeping only on a transient basis for a period of less
than 30 days.
MANAGER — A person retained by an owner to be responsible for
one or more residential rental units within the Borough.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age living and sleeping
in a residential rental unit or having actual possession of said
residential rental unit.
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:160
OWNER — The person who holds record tide and/or the equitable
owner under an agreement of sale of a property upon which a
residential rental unit is erected or maintained. If more than one
person owns the residential rental unit as joint tenants, tenants
in common, tenants by the entireties, or tenants in copartnership,
each such person shall be considered an owner and shall have all
of the duties of an owner under this Subsection D.
PERSON — A natural individual, unincorporated association,
partnership, corporation, estate, trust or any other legally
recognized entity, and the members of such partnership and the
officers of such corporation.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real estate within the Borough,
including the land and all buildings and appurtenant structures, on
which one or more residential rental units are located.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The Existing Structures and
Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Columbia enacted
as Chapter 112 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, as it may be amended from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE — A document issued by the
Code Enforcement Official to the owner of a residential rental unit.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A rooming unit; or a dwelling unit
let for rent; or a residential unit occupied by any persons other
than one occupied solely by the owner and members of the owner's
family. Each individual townhouse dwelling, each individual
apartment unit, each individual unit in a multifamily building, and
each rooming unit shall be considered a separate residential rental
unit. If a structure contains a rooming unit or if any portion of
the structure is let for rent, it shall be considered a residential
rental unit whether or not the owner or a relative of the owner also
resides in the structure. A residential rental unit shall not include
a hotel unit or a hospital room utilized for medical services A
residential rental unit includes dwelling units under lease-purchase
agreements or long-term (greater than six months) agreements of
sale.
ROOMING UNIT — A portion of a dwelling unit including any room
or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes.
Granting of permission to use shared or common cooking facilities
may be associated with the leasing of a rooming unit.
(3) Duties of owners and managers of residential rental units.
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner to:
[1] Keep and maintain all residential rental units in
compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and
provisions of all applicable state laws and regulations,
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:161
including but not limited to Chapter 220, Zoning, and the
Property Maintenance Code.
[2] Keep and maintain all premises in good and safe condition,
and maintain a current and valid certificate of occupancy.
[3] Be aware of, and to act to eliminate, disruptive conduct in
all residential rental units.
[4] Employ policies to and actually manage the residential
rental units under his/her control in compliance with the
provisions of this Subsection D, Borough ordinances and
applicable state laws.
[5] Pay or ensure payment of all real estate taxes, sewer rates,
and trash collection fees to insure that such vital utilities
are provided.
[6] Obtain and maintain a residential rental license for each
residential rental unit.
[7] Provide the Borough within 30 days of occupancy with the
names, physical address and mailing address, if different,
of all tenants of the residential rental unit and notify the
Borough of changes in the occupancy of the residential
rental unit within 30 days thereof.
[8] Provide trash and recyclable collection and disposal
services and instruct tenants of the method of trash and
recyclable collection (e.g., curbside or dumpster) and, if
applicable, the day of week of trash and recyclable pickup.
[9] Provide each tenant with a disclosure statement
containing the requirements of this Subsection D,
including the provisions relating to disruptive conduct.
Provision of a copy of this Subsection D to each tenant will
satisfy this requirement.
[10] Take all actions necessary to ensure that each residential
rental unit is occupied by only one family. For the purposes
of this subsection, a family shall be considered to be a
"family" as that term is defined in Chapter 220, Zoning.
[11] Require a written rental agreement for each residential
rental unit which shall include the names of all permitted
occupants.
[12] Retain a manager when this Subsection D requires that a
manager be designated.
[13] Advise the Borough Manager in writing of every court
hearing, whether before a Magisterial District Judge, a
Court of Common Pleas, or other tribunal pursuant to
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:162
which the owner and/or manager is evicting a tenant in
accordance with § 112-6D(5); said notice to be provided to
the Borough Manager at least 10 days prior to the hearing
date. The Borough of Columbia may, in its discretion, send
appropriate officials to such hearing for purposes of
providing any proof requested by the court regarding the
issuance of disruptive conduct reports. [Added
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 818; amended 10-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 820]
[14] Provide the Borough Manager or the Borough Manager's
designee with notification of the vacancy of a residential
rental unit promptly upon the occurrence of a vacancy.
[Added 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 88225]
[15] Schedule an occupancy inspection with the Code
Enforcement Official of the Borough of Columbia prior to a
change in occupancy of a residential rental unit. [Added
3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 88226]
(b) If the owner has appointed a manager, the manager shall be
jointly responsible to fulfill all of the obligations set forth in
Subsection D(3)(a) hereof. No owner may relieve himself of the
responsibility to perform the duties set forth in Subsection
D(3)(a) by appointing a manager.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or
cause to be rented either as owner or manager any residential
rental unit within the Borough without having a residential
rental license as required by this Subsection D.
(d) The owner and, if applicable, the manager shall include the
amendment attached hereto as Exhibit A, identified as
"Addendum to Residential Rental Agreement," in each lease of
a residential rental unit taking effect on or after January 1,
2004.27
(e) It shall be the responsibility of every owner and every manager
to display the residential rental license in the residential rental
unit. The residential rental license shall include the following
information:
[1] The name, mailing address and telephone number of the
owner or manager.
[2] The evenings on which garbage and recycling are to be
placed curbside for collection.
25.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 6-30-2017.
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 6-30-2017.
27.Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:163
[3] The telephone number to call to register complaints
regarding the physical condition of the residential rental
unit.
[4] The telephone number for emergency police, fire and
medical services.
[5] The date of expiration of the residential rental license.
[6] A summary of the owner's and occupant's duties under this
Subsection D.
(f) No residential rental license shall be issued to any owner
residing more than 30 miles from the municipal limits of the
Borough unless the owner provides the Code Enforcement
Official with the name, mailing address and telephone number
of a manager residing or working within 30 miles of the
municipal limits of the Borough, authorized to accept service of
process on behalf of the owner. For the purpose of this
subsection, a post office box is not acceptable for the
manager's address. This designation shall not be valid unless
signed by the owner and the manager designated to act on
behalf of the owner. The owner shall notify the Code
Enforcement Official within 30 days of any change in manager.
(4) Duties of occupants of residential rental units. Each occupant of a
residential unit shall have the following duties:
(a) Comply with all obligations of this Subsection D and all
applicable codes and Borough ordinances, as well as all state
laws and regulations.
(b) Conduct himself/herself and require other persons, including,
but not limited to, guests on the premises and within their
residential rental unit with their consent, to conduct
themselves in a manner that will not disturb the peaceful
enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by people
occupying the same.
(c) Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on the premises
to cause damage to the residential rental unit or engage in
disruptive conduct, or other violations of this Subsection D,
codes, Borough ordinances, or applicable state laws.
(d) Use the trash and recyclable collection services provided by
the owner.
(e) Use the residential rental unit for no purpose other than as a
residence.
(f) Maintain the residential rental unit in a manner meeting all
requirements for occupants of structures set forth in the
Property Maintenance Code.
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:164
(g) Allow the Code Enforcement Official to inspect the residential
rental unit in accordance with this Subsection D at reasonable
times.
(h) Not allow persons other than those identified on the lease to
reside in the residential rental unit.
(i) Not allow the residential rental unit to be occupied by more
than one family. For the purposes of this subsection, a family
shall be considered to be a "family" as that term is defined in
Chapter 220, Zoning. That definition is repeated here for
clarity: "One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or
marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping
unit, or a number of persons living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption
or marriage."
(j) Not permit the possession of, serving to or consumption of
alcohol by underage persons.
(5) Disruptive conduct.
(a) Police officers or Code Enforcement Officials shall investigate
alleged incidents of disruptive conduct. The police officer or
Code Enforcement Official conducting the investigation shall
complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding that the
reported incident constitutes disruptive conduct. The
information filed in the disruptive conduct report shall include,
if possible, the identity of the alleged perpetrator(s) of the
disruptive conduct and the factual basis for the disruptive
conduct described in the disruptive conduct report. A copy of
the disruptive conduct report shall be given or mailed to the
occupant and mailed to the owner and, if applicable, the
manager within 10 working days of the occurrence of the
alleged disruptive conduct.
(b) The occupant or the owner and, if applicable, the manager
shall have 10 working days from the date of a disruptive
conduct report to appeal the disruptive conduct report. The
appeal shall be made in writing and submitted to the Code
Enforcement Official.
(c) After three disruptive conduct incidents in any twelve-month
period by an occupant documented by disruptive conduct
reports, the owner and, if applicable, the manager shall have
10 working days from the date of the third disruptive conduct
report to begin eviction proceedings against the occupants.
Owner/manager must submit a copy of the document
indicating eviction process has begun. Failure to take such
action will result in the immediate revocation of the residential
rental license. The residential rental unit involved shall not
have its residential rental license reinstated until the
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:165
reinstatement fee is paid and the disruptive occupants have
been evicted, the District Justice has ruled in the occupant's
favor, the District Justice has ruled in the owner's favor but has
not ordered the eviction of the occupant(s), or the occupants
have filed an appeal to a higher court or declared bankruptcy,
thereby preventing their eviction. The disruptive occupants,
upon eviction, shall not reoccupy any residential rental unit
on the same premises involved for a period of at least one
year from the date of eviction. This subsection is not intended
to limit or inhibit the owner and, if applicable, the manager's
right to initiate eviction actions prior to the issuance of the
third disruptive conduct report in a twelve-month period.
(d) The disruptive conduct report shall count against all occupants
of the residential rental unit. The Code Enforcement Official
shall maintain a list of the names of all occupants evicted as a
result of Subsection D(5)(c) hereof. The names shall remain on
the list for a period of three years. [Amended 12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 874]
(6) Residential rental unit licensing.
(a) By July 1, 2010, the owner and, if applicable, the manager of
each residential rental unit shall apply for a residential rental
license with the Code Enforcement Official which shall be valid
until July 30, 2011. By July 1 of each year after July, 2011, the
owner and, if applicable, the manager or each residential
rental unit shall continue to apply for an annual residential
rental license which shall be valid from July 1 until June 30 of
the following calendar year.
(b) The Code Enforcement Official shall issue a residential rental
license if the owner provides the name, address and phone
number of a manager (if applicable), pays the registration fee,
submits a complete and accurate occupant listing for the
residential rental units by July 1 of each year and is current on
real estate taxes, sewer fees and trash collection fees for the
residential rental unit, and submits a current and valid
certificate of occupancy for the property.
(c) The Code Enforcement Official shall deny and shall revoke a
residential rental license if the owner does not provide the
name, address and phone number of a manager (if applicable),
does not pay the annual registration fee, is not current on real
estate taxes, sewer fees or trash collection fees for the
residential rental unit, does not correct a code violation within
the time frame cited by the Code Enforcement Official, has not
complied with the disruptive conduct provisions of this
Subsection D, and/or fails to submit a current and valid
certificate of occupancy for the property [§ 112-6C(2)].
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:166
(d) The Code Enforcement Official shall deny and shall revoke a
residential rental license if the following occur within the
licensed residential rental unit or on the premises:
[1] Failure to abate any violation of the Property Maintenance
Code within the time specified in the notice of violation
unless an appeal is pending.
[2] Failure to take action to evict occupants of a residential
rental unit when the disruptive conduct provisions of this
Subsection D require such action.
[3] Occurrence of three violations of this Subsection D and/or
of any other Borough codes or ordinances that apply to the
residential rental unit or premises during the term of the
license. Before an occurrence may be considered a
violation there must be either a summary conviction, or
the Code Enforcement Official must send the owner a
written notice of the violation within 30 days of the
incident and the period for the owner to file an appeal from
the determination of the Code Enforcement Official must
have expired.
(e) The Code Enforcement Official shall forward written notice to
the owner if the Code Enforcement Official will deny, refuse to
renew or revoke a residential rental license. The notification
shall:
[1] Identify the residential rental unit;
[2] Identify the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or
revocation, including the factual circumstances and the
section of this Subsection D supporting such
determination; and
[3] Inform the owner of the right to appeal the denial,
nonrenewal or revocation of the residential rental license
to Borough Council under this Subsection D.
(f) The Code Enforcement Official may reinstate a residential
rental license if the owner or manager corrects the reason for
the revocation of the residential rental license and has paid the
residential rental license reinstatement fee.
(7) Inspection of residential rental units.
(a) Prior to initial occupancy of newly constructed residential
rental units, newly created residential rental units, or
substantially rehabilitated residential rental units (as
documented by a certificate of occupancy), the owner or
manager shall register with and make written application to
the Code Enforcement Official for a residential rental license
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:167
as herein provided, and must also submit a copy of a current
and valid certificate of occupancy for the property.
(b) The Code Enforcement Official shall inspect, or cause the
inspection of, all other residential rental units in accordance
with a systematic program. The Code Enforcement Official
shall also inspect residential rental units prior to any change in
occupancy of the residential rental unit, and may inspect
residential rental units upon receipt of complaints, upon the
occurrence of disruptive conduct at such residential rental
unit, or for any other reasonable cause. [Amended 8-10-2015
by Ord. No. 862]
(c) If the Code Enforcement Official, upon completion of the
inspection, finds that the applicable codes have not been met,
the Code Enforcement Official shall issue notices and, if
appropriate, commence enforcement actions under the
procedures set forth in the code which has been violated.
Notice provided to a manager shall be deemed notice provided
to the owner. The following notices shall be issued to the owner
of the residential rental unit or the manager:
[1] If the Code Enforcement Official finds violations
warranting condemnation of the residential rental unit
under the Property Maintenance Code, in addition to the
remedies under the Property Maintenance Code, the Code
Enforcement Official shall:
[a] Issue a notice of violation; and
[b] If, after 72 hours from the issuance of the notice of
violation, a reinspection reveals that the violations are
not corrected and arrangements satisfactory to the
Code Enforcement Official have not been made, the
residential rental license for the residential rental unit
shall be revoked and the property vacated, and if the
residential rental unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant.
[2] If the Code Enforcement Official finds violations not
warranting condemnation of the residential rental unit
under the Property Maintenance Code, the Code
Enforcement Official shall issue a thirty-day notice of
violation.
[a] If, after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day notice
of violation, the first reinspection reveals that all
violations have not been corrected, a thirty-day legal
action warning shall be issued.
[b] If, after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day legal
action warning, the second reinspection reveals that
all violations have not been corrected, the Code
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:168
Enforcement Official shall revoke the residential
rental license for the residential rental unit, and if the
residential rental unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant.
[c] A fee will be charged for each reinspection. The Code
Enforcement Official shall maintain a list of all
residential rental units and their ownership that have
been the subject of prosecutions during the preceding
five years.
(8) Sale or transfer of residential rental units. A residential rental
license shall not be transferred. In the case of licensed residential
rental units that are sold or transferred, the new owner shall seek a
residential rental license for each residential rental unit and have
each residential rental unit inspected. Failure to seek a residential
rental license for each residential rental unit within 60 days of the
date of sale or transfer of ownership shall result in the revocation
of the residential rental license.
(9) Appeals.
(a) Other than appeals of disruptive conduct reports or the
revocation of a residential rental license, an appeal from any
decision of the Code Enforcement Official shall be taken to
Borough Council or its designee. Such appeal shall be made in
writing within 10 working days after such decision has been
made. The appeal shall be verified by an affidavit, shall state
the grounds therefor and shall be filed with the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer. The appeal shall be accompanied by the
appeal fee which shall be established from time to time by this
chapter or by resolution of Borough Council. The appellant or
his representative shall have the right to appear and be heard,
if such right is requested in the written appeal. Borough
Council or its designee shall make a prompt decision on such
appeal. Borough Council shall render a written decision, copies
of which shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Official
and the appellant.
(b) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a police officer or Code
Enforcement Official in regard to a disruptive conduct report
or the revocation of a residential rental license shall appeal to
the Borough Manager of the Borough of Columbia, or his
designated agent, in the same manner and with the same
procedures as set forth for other appeals under and pursuant
to Subsection D(9)(a) above. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 10 working days from the date of the disruptive
conduct report or notice of revocation. The appellant or his
representative shall have the right to appear and be heard, if
such right is requested in the written appeal. The Borough
Manager or his designated agent shall make a prompt decision
on such appeal, which decision shall be in writing and which
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:169
shall be provided to both the Code Enforcement Official and
the appellant. Any party aggrieved with the decision of the
Borough Manager may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with applicable
provisions of Pennsylvania law.
(10) Violations and penalties.
(a) Violations. It shall be a violation of this Subsection D to commit
or to permit any other person to commit any of the following
acts:
[1] To lease, let, or allow the occupancy of a residential rental
unit without obtaining a residential rental license where
required by this Subsection D.
[2] To refuse to permit inspections required under this
Subsection D for a residential rental unit.
[3] To fail to perform the duties established by Subsection
D(3) if such person is an owner or a manager of a
residential rental unit.
[4] To fail to perform the duties established by Subsection
D(4) if such person is an occupant of a residential rental
unit.
[5] To place false information on to or omit relevant
information from an application for a residential rental
license.
[6] Failure to seek a residential rental license. The owner or
manager shall be sent a Thirty-Day Notice of Violation,
warning them of their failure to comply with the terms of
this Subsection D. If they do not comply at the end of 30
days, there shall be a fine of not less than $500 per
residential rental unit for each month the violation exists.
Each month the violation exists constitutes a separate
violation.
[7] Whoever violates any other provision of this Subsection D
shall upon a first offense be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
[8] In addition to prosecution of persons violating this
Subsection D, the Code Enforcement Official or any duly
authorized agent of the Borough may take such civil or
equitable remedies in any court of record of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any person or
property, real or personal, to effect the provisions of this
Subsection D.
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-6
1:170
[9] The provisions of this section and the provisions of this
Subsection D governing revocation, suspension or
nonrenewal of residential rental licenses shall be
independent, non-mutually exclusive, separate remedies,
all of which shall be available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate. The remedies and procedures in this
Subsection D are not intended to supplant or replace, to
any degree, the remedies provided to the Borough in the
Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 220, Zoning, or any
other Code.
E. Residential building registration fees. The first time an owner registers
a residential rental property with the code official pursuant to
Subsection D of this section, such owner shall pay a registration fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Thereafter,
each owner shall pay an annual fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council, which fee shall be payable with the
owner's registration of the property.
F. Inspection fees.
(1) Whenever a property in the Borough of Columbia is inspected by
the code official, the property owner shall be assessed an
inspection fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council for the following types of property:
(a) Residential rental properties less than four stories high.
(b) Residential rental properties four stories or higher.
(c) Non-rental residential properties.
(d) Properties zoned commercial.
(e) Properties zoned industrial.
(2) Additionally, anytime the code official condemns a building, the
owner shall pay a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council, which fee shall be in addition to any fee charged
for inspections of the property. Should an inspection be requested
for purposes of removing a condemnation notice from a property,
the property owner shall pay a fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council for such inspection. In addition
to any other remedies available to the Borough of Columbia to
collect unpaid inspection fees, the Borough may assess such fees as
a municipal lien against the property inspected in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims Act. Borough Council may
amend the fees set forth in this Subsection F by resolution.
G. Credentials. If requested, the code official or the code official's
authorized representative shall disclose proper credentials of their
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:171
§ 112-7. Violations and penalties; equitable relief. [Amended
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 674; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 698; 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726; 10-11-2004 by Ord. No. 742; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.
801]
respective offices for the purpose of inspecting any and all structures
and premises in the performance of duties under this code.
H. Rule-making authority. The code official shall have power as may be
necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement
the provisions of this code to secure the intent thereof; but such rules
shall not have the effect of waiving working stresses or fire protection
requirements specifically provided in this code or violating approved
practice involving public safety.
I. Annual report. At least annually, the code official shall submit to the
Borough Council a written statement of operations in the form and
content as shall be prescribed by the Borough."
A. Unlawful acts.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, extend,
repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure, premises or
equipment regulated by this code or cause the same to be done
contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of this code.
(2) Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure or premises who has received a
compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation or
condemnation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of the dwelling unit, structure or premises to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation or condemnation have been complied with or until such
owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation or
condemnation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the
code official a signed statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance
order or notice of violation or condemnation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation or
condemnation.
B. Penalty.
(1) Fine or imprisonment; posting property of violator.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not less the $50 nor more than $1,000, or
§ 112-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-7
1:172
imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year, or both, at the
discretion of the court. Each day beyond the effective date of
any notice (or citation) that a violation continues after notice
(or a citation) has been served, in accordance with the terms
and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Any time after the code official of the Borough of Columbia
serves any person, firm or corporation with three notices
relating to the same violation of this chapter, the Code Official
and/or other authorized officials as designated by Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia may post on the subject
property a sign not to exceed three feet by three feet in size
stating the property owner's name and address and that the
property is in violation of this code. Moreover, the code official
or other officials designated by Borough Council may advertise
the same notice in local newspapers, newsletters and public
websites. All such signs, notices and publications may remain
posted and published until the violations are corrected.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878]
(2) Notwithstanding any requirement to serve a notice of violation, the
Code Enforcement Officer may commence a summary proceeding
by issuing or filing a citation without prior issuance of a notice of a
violation when the Code Enforcement Officer personally observes
violations of any of the following sections of the International
Property Maintenance Code:
(a) Section 302.4 or its successor dealing with maintenance of
property free from weeds;
(b) Section 302.8 or its successors dealing with maintenance of
unregistered and uninspected vehicles or vehicles in a state of
major disassembly;
(c) Section 308 or its successors dealing with the accumulation
and disposal of garbage and rubbish; and [Amended
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 894]
(d) Chapter 704 or their successors dealing with maintaining
operational smoke detectors. [Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 894]
(3) For purposes of enforcing these sections, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be deemed a law enforcement officer under and
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
C. Prosecution. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with,
the code official may request the Borough Solicitor to institute an
appropriate action or proceeding to exact the penalty provided in
Subsection B. Also, the code official may ask the Borough Solicitor to
proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the
violation for the purpose of ordering that person to:
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-7
1:173
§ 112-8. Condemnation.
(1) Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work or use of equipment.
(2) Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
premises, structure or use of equipment.
(3) Require the removal of work in violation.
(4) Prevent the occupation or use of the equipment, premises,
structure or part thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered
in violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of this code
or in violation of a plan or specification under which an approval,
permit or certificate was issued.
D. Liens. Should any owner, operator or manager fail to perform actions
required on a property under this Chapter 112 and should the Borough
perform any of such actions, the Borough shall be entitled to lien the
property for its costs and fees in accordance with the Municipal Claims
Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,28 applicable Pennsylvania
law, and the ordinances of the Borough of Columbia.
A. General. When a structure or part thereof is found by the code official
to be unsafe or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for
human occupancy or uses or is found unlawful, it shall be condemned
by the code official pursuant to the provisions of this code and shall be
placarded and vacated. It shall not be reoccupied without approval of
the code official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out of
service.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STRUCTURE UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY — A structure is unfit
for human occupancy or use whenever the code official finds that
it is unsafe or unlawful or because of the degree in which it lacks
maintenance or is in disrepair is unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by
this code or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants
or to the public.
UNLAWFUL STRUCTURE — A structure which is found to be occupied
by more persons than permitted under this code or which was erected,
altered or occupied contrary to law.
UNSAFE EQUIPMENT — Includes any boiler, heating equipment,
elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid
containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that it is a hazard to life,
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 112-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-8
1:174
health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
UNSAFE STRUCTURE — A structure in which all or part thereof is
found to:
Be dangerous to life, health, property or the safety of the public or
its occupants;
(1)
(2) Not provide minimum safeguards for protection from fire;
(3) Contain unsafe equipment; or
Be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such
faulty construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete
collapse is likely.
(4)
C. Condemnation process. When a premises or structure or part thereof is
found by the code official to contain unsafe equipment, to be unsafe, to
be unfit for human occupancy or to be unlawful, the code official shall
post a placard on the premises or structure or on the equipment, which
placard shall bear the word "condemned" and a statement of the
penalties provided for any occupancy or use or for removing the
placard.
(1) Notice of condemnation. When the code official has condemned a
premises or structure or equipment under Subsection C of this
code, the code official shall give notice to the owner or person
responsible and to the occupant of the premises, structure or
equipment in the manner prescribed below.
(2) Form and manner of notice. The notice required by Subsection C(1)
shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
(c) Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being
issued;
(d) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit,
structure or premises into compliance with the provisions of
this code;
(e) Set forth a reasonable time set by the code official within which
all occupants of the premises or structure must vacate the
premises; and
(f) Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek
modification or withdrawal of the notice to the review and
appeals board.
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-8
1:175
§ 112-9. Repairs or demolition.
(3) Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon
such owner, responsible person or occupant if a copy thereof is
delivered personally; or by leaving the notice at the usual place of
abode, in the presence of someone in the family of suitable age and
discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof; or by
certified or registered mail addressed to the owner, responsible
person or occupant at the last known address, with return receipt
requested; or, if the certified or registered letter is returned with a
receipt showing that it has not been delivered, by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure or premises
affected by such notice or on the equipment, and at least one
publication of such notice in a local newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough.
D. Vacating condemned properties. All occupants of a structure or
premises which shall have been condemned shall remove themselves
within the time set by the code official for vacation of the structure or
premises.
E. Closing of condemned properties. Upon condemnation of a structure or
premises, the code official may order the structure or premises closed.
Such order may require the owner of the structure or premises to make
every exterior window, door and basement or cellar door and hatchway
rodentproof and locked and reasonably weathertight and watertight.
Where such means have been insufficient to prevent unauthorized
entry, barricading or boarding-up of doors, windows or other exterior
openings in the structure or premises may be required. Upon failure of
the owner to close the structure or premises within the time specified in
the order, the code official may cause it to be closed through any
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private
persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure or premises is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.
F. Prohibited use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
structure or part thereof or shall use placarded equipment and any
owner or any person responsible for the structure, premises or
equipment who shall allow anyone to occupy a placarded premises or
structure or who shall allow anyone to use placarded equipment shall
be liable for the penalties provided by this code.
G. Removal of placard. The code official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placard action were based have been eliminated. Any person who
defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the
code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.29
29.Editor's Note: Former § 30-10, Emergency orders, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681.
§ 112-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-9
1:176
§ 112-10. Appeals.
A. General. The code official, when required by Section 110 of the
Property Maintenance Code, and in compliance therewith, shall enter
orders for demolition. [Amended 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681]
B. Unreasonable repairs. Whenever the code official, Borough Council and
necessary consultants determine that the cost of such repairs would
exceed 100% of the current value of such structure, such repairs shall
be presumed unreasonable and it shall be presumed for the purpose of
this section that such structure is a public nuisance which may be
ordered razed without option on the part of the owner to repair.
C. Order. The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply
therewith and shall specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the
owner of record or an agent where an agent is in charge of the building
and upon the holder of any encumbrance of record in the manner
provided for service of a summons by a court of record. If the owner or
a holder of an encumbrance of record cannot be found, the order shall
be served by posting it on the main entrance of the structure and by
publishing it once each week for three successive weeks in a local
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.30
D. Failure to comply. Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply
with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official
shall cause the structure or part thereof to be razed and removed,
either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such razing and
removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
A. Review and Appeals Board.
(1) Creation. There shall be and is hereby created a Review and
Appeals Board, referred to herein as the "Board."
(2) Membership. [Amended 8-15-1991 by Ord. No. 634; 8-23-1999
by Ord. No. 681;31 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 734; 8-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 900]
(a) The Board shall consist of three members who are qualified by
experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
property maintenance who shall serve staggered terms of five
years, as set forth in Subsection A(2)(b) below.
(b) Additionally, Borough Council may appoint up to two alternate
members of the Board who may be called by the Board
30.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Restraining actions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681.
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Vote; Subsection A(4), Financial interest; and
Subsection A(5), Rule-making authority, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681.
§ 112-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:177
chairman during the absence or disqualification of a member.
Alternate members shall possess the same qualifications
required for Board membership and shall be appointed for
five years or until a successor has been appointed. None of
the members of the Board are required to be residents of the
Borough of Columbia. No fee of more than $50 per meeting
per member of the Board shall be paid by the Borough to any
Board member. Said fee may be changed by resolution of the
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia from time to time.
The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve
as chairman. Members shall not hear an appeal in which that
member has a personal, professional or financial interest. The
chairman shall designate one member to serve as secretary
of the Board. The secretary shall keep detailed records of
all proceedings. The initial members of the Board shall be
appointed as follows: one for five years, one for four years, and
one for three years. Thereafter, each new member shall serve
for five years or until a successor has been appointed.
(3) Records. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
records of official actions.32
B. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within 10 days of
the filing of an appeal. Said hearing may be held during a stated
periodic meeting of the Board. All hearings before the Board shall be
open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Code Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. The Board shall adopt and make available to
the public through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing will
be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict
rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be
received. When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either
the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to
request a postponement of the hearing. The Board shall modify or
reverse the decision of the Code Official upon a concurring vote of three
members. The decision of the Board shall be by resolution. Certified
copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Official. The
Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the Board. [Amended 8-15-1991 by Ord. No. 634;
8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 68133; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 734]
C. If at any time the appeals process set forth herein or in the Code and/or
Act is undertaken by the Borough of Columbia jointly with one or more
municipalities, the required Board of Appeals shall be established and
operated by joint action of the participating municipalities in
32.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), Authority and powers, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 681.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted former Subsection C, Hearing, as amended,
which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 112-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-10
1:178
accordance with the terms of the Act and Code. [Added 6-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 734]
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:179

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 112-11. Word usage.
§ 112-12. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated in this article:
BOARD — The Review and Appeals Board described in § 112-10.35
ELECTRICAL FIXTURES — All switches, receptacles or devices which are
permanently or temporarily connected to the electrical system leading from
the electrical service panel.36
FAMILY — Shall not mean the functional equivalent of a biologically related
family, but shall mean:
A. Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
article and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes
listed in Appendix A,34 they shall have the same meanings ascribed to
them as in those codes.
C. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context shall imply.
D. Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "multifamily dwelling,"
"premises," "residential building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or
"structure" are used in this code, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
One individual occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a separate
housekeeping unit;
A.
Two or more persons related by blood or marriage and including
adopted or foster children occupying a dwelling unit and using common
cooking facilities; or
B.
Any number of persons living and cooking together as a single
housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage.37
[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
C.
34.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
35.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "approved" and "basement," which immediately
preceded this definition, and the former definitions of "cellar," "central heating," "code
official," and "dwelling unit," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
36.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "exterior property areas” and "extermination,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
§ 112-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:181
LICENSE — A document issued by the code official certifying that rental
residential property has been inspected and is in compliance with the
standards and criteria of this code. Its issuance gives permission to the
property holder to rent or let such property or part thereof to another for
occupancy.
MAINTENANCE — Acts to repair and other acts to prevent a decline in
the condition of grounds, structures and equipment such that the condition
does not fall below the standards established by this code and other
applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.
MOTEL — A hotel, as defined in this code.38
OCCUPANT — Any person living and/or sleeping in a regulated residential
property or having actual possession of a space within a regulated
residential property.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A structure containing one dwelling unit.39
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, firm, association, partnership or any
other group acting as a unit.
PLACARD — The action of the code official of affixing a sign or placard to a
structure, premises or equipment which clearly indicates the code official's
designation of condemnation.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code listed in Appendix A.40
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device which is either permanently
or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises
and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquidborne
waste materials or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage
Legal title to any structure, premises or equipment, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
A.
Charge, care or control of any structure, premises or equipment, as
owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if he were the owner.
B.
37.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "garbage," "habitable space," health care
occupancies," "hotel," "hot water," "infestation," and "let for occupancy or let," which
definitions immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
38.Editor's Note: The former definition of "multifamily dwelling," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
39.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "openable area" and "operator," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
40.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 112-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-12
1:182
system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection
and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises.41
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
REFUSE — All putrescible solids, except body waste of humans, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
REFUSE CONTAINER — A watertight container that is constructed of
an approved durable material impervious to rodents that is capable of
being serviced without creating unsanitary conditions. Openings into such
containers as covers or doors shall be tight-fitting.
REGULATED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — All forms of dwelling units, onefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, rooming units
and hotel units, whether the same are rental residential properties or
owner-occupied. In this code, it does not include those institutions that hold
currently valid licenses to operate as health care occupancies.
The physical condition or use of any premises, structure or equipment
regarded as a public nuisance at common law;
A.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or structure
or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
B.
Any premises or structure which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities;
C.
Any premises or structure designated as unsafe for human habitation
or use;
D.
Any premises or structure which is manifestly capable of being a fire
hazard or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or
property;
E.
Any premises or structure from which the plumbing, heating and/or
facilities required by this code have been removed or from which
utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective or the required precautions against trespassers have not
been provided;
F.
Any premises or structure which is unsanitary or which is littered with
rubbish or garbage or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
G.
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned;
damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter; in danger of
collapse or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
H.
41.Editor's Note: The former definition of "premises," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:183
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — All forms of dwelling units, onefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, rooming units
and hotel units let for occupancy or offered to let for occupancy.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building in which sleeping accommodations
or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities are provided; except
when classified as an institution under the building code listed in Appendix
A.42
ROOMING HOUSE — Any structure or any part thereof containing one or
more rooming units and which may include cooking facilities available to all
or some rooming units which are not within a particular rooming unit.43
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass crockery, materials from construction or reconstruction or
remodeling, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials and dust and other similar materials.
SPACE HEATER — A self-contained, heating appliance of either the
circulating type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only one
room.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including without
limitation because of enumeration buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings,
water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or
anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A structure containing two dwelling units.44
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this code, they shall mean that such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a structure
extending along the entire length of street or rear or interior lot line.45
42.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
43.Editor's Note: The former definition of "rooming unit," which immediately followed this
definition was repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
44.Editor's Note: The former definition of "ventilation," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 722.
45.Editor's Note: Former Arts. IV through X, as amended, which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 677.
§ 112-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-12
1:184
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Liens
[Added 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 678]
§ 112-13. Filing liens for cost of work performed.
Should the Borough of Columbia perform any work or provide any services
in conjunction with any of the provisions of this Chapter 112 of the Code of
the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania, the Borough may, in addition to any
other remedy provided by law or in the Code of the Borough of Columbia,
Pennsylvania, file municipal liens for the cost of such work performed in
accordance with the Municipal Claims Act and other appropriate laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 112-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-13
1:185

ARTICLE V
Uniform Construction Code
[Added 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 734]
§ 112-14. Ratification.
As set forth in Ord. No. 722, dated September 8, 2003, the Borough of
Columbia has elected to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and its
regulations and such election be and hereby is ratified and confirmed as the
Uniform Construction Code contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through
405, as amended from time to time (the "Code"). That election as set forth
in Ord. No. 722 of 2003 be and hereby is ratified and confirmed.
§ 112-15. Administration and enforcement.
A. Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of
Columbia shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the Borough Council from time to time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Columbia to
serve as the Municipal Code Official to act on behalf of the Borough
of Columbia;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Columbia;
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Code and the Act through an
intermunicipal agreement;
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Act on behalf of the Borough
of Columbia; or
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than the one-family or two-family dwelling units
and utility and miscellaneous-use structures.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough Code of the Borough of
Columbia sets forth that the Code Official and/or Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Columbia is authorized to enforce the Code
and such provisions be and hereby are ratified and confirmed. To the
extent necessary, this section authorizes the Code Enforcement officer/
Code Official of the Borough of Columbia to enforce the Code and Act.
§ 112-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-15
1:187
Chapter 116
FEES
§ 112-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 112-15
1:188
ARTICLE I
Attorney's Fees
[Adopted 8-9-2004 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 116-1. Authority to include fees.
In accordance with the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, Number 153),46 the
Borough of Columbia be and hereby is authorized to include as part of
any municipal claim authorized by the Act and by the ordinances of the
Borough of Columbia reasonable attorneys' fees for failure to promptly pay
the amounts so claimed.
§ 116-2. Schedule of fees.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia shall establish, by
resolution, which resolution may be amended from time to time by Borough
Council, a schedule of attorneys' fees for use by attorneys working on the
Borough's behalf to recover payments due and owing to the Borough of
Columbia which may in the future or already have become municipal claims
in accordance with the Act and in accordance with any and all appropriate
Borough of Columbia ordinances.
§ 116-3. Notice to property owner.
The assessment of attorneys' fees authorized by the Act of May 16, 1923
(P.L. 207, Number 153), will not and shall not occur until the Borough
of Columbia has given the notice to the property owner required by the
aforesaid Act, and the assessment shall be in accordance with all applicable
provisions of such Act.
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 7193.1 through 7193.5.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-3
1:189
Chapter 117
FIRES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 117-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
ADULT — A person 18 years old or older.
EXTINGUISHMENT AGENT — Continuous water source (example: garden
hose), fire extinguisher or a device approved by the Columbia Borough Fire
Chief or his/her designee.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste, including offal, carcasses, fat,
bone, swill and vegetables and all animal refuse resulting from storage,
handling, preparation and consumption of food.
REFUSE — Discarded articles or materials not including garbage, sewage
and liquid wastes, but including ashes, junk, building material and
combustible and noncombustible waste other than rubbish, as hereinafter
set forth.
RUBBISH — Combustible organic and inorganic material specifically
limited to dried leaves, tree branches, other plant material, and paper,
cardboard and like material.
§ 117-2. Fires on streets or public grounds prohibited.
§ 117-3. Burning garbage and rubbish prohibited.
No person or persons shall burn or attempt to burn any garbage or refuse or
any other material other than material approved by the Columbia Borough
Fire Chief or his designee.
A. No person or persons shall set or maintain any fire upon any of the
streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in the Borough of Columbia
or burn or cause to be burned thereon any rubbish or other material or
substance of any kind.
B. Fires on public property shall be permitted for special events with the
approval of the Columbia Borough Council and Columbia Borough Fire
Chief or his/her designee.
§ 116-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 117-4
1:190
§ 117-4. Fires on private property; restrictions.
Outdoor fires shall be permitted upon private property, provided that the
following regulations and restrictions are strictly adhered to:
§ 117-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Every resident wishing to burn an outdoor fire shall first make
application to the Borough of Columbia.
B. Applications shall be inspected and approved by the Columbia Borough
Fire Chief or his/her designee.
C. Once approved, the outdoor fire device shall not be relocated or
replaced without reapplication, inspection and approval.
D. Permits are valid for one year unless covered by Subsection C.
E. An application fee determined by Columbia Borough Council shall be
set by resolution and listed in the Columbia Borough Fee Schedule.47
F. Every outdoor fire shall be burned in, and confined to, a
noncombustible, ventilated container covered with a screen of 1/2 inch
or smaller mesh or with other noncombustible containers or
incinerators.
G. Every resident must have an approved extinguishment agent on-site
and operational at all times when the fire is burning.
H. No such fire shall be closer than 10 feet from any building or structure.
I. No fire is allowed to burn upon any day except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. EST.
J. No such fire shall be allowed to burn unless attended by an adult.
K. In addition to this chapter, outdoor fires shall be subject to the
conditions of the following ordinances:
(1) Chapter 126, Health and Sanitation, Article IX, Miscellaneous
Regulations, § 126-40, Nuisances.
(2) Chapter 181, Solid Waste, § 181-9, Illegal dumping and open
burning.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction in
a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to pay a fine of
not more than $600, together with costs of prosecution for each
violation, and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each violation of any
provision of this chapter, and each day that such violation shall exist,
shall constitute a separate violation and offense.
47.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 117-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:191
Chapter 118
FIREWORKS
§ 118-1. Prohibition.
As a result of the background paragraphs above,48 which are incorporated
herein, it is hereby ordained and enacted that no permission is granted by
the Borough to any person to ignite or discharge consumer fireworks on
the streets of the Borough of Columbia, the sidewalks of the Borough of
Columbia or any property owned by the Borough of Columbia, including,
without limitation, all of the Borough's parks and public buildings.
§ 118-2. Judicial notification.
The staff of the Borough of Columbia be and hereby are directed to provide
certified copies of this ordinance to all magisterial district judges within the
Borough of Columbia to provide judicial notice that no permission has been
granted by the Borough for any person to intentionally ignite or discharge
consumer fireworks on the Borough streets and sidewalks or on any real
estate owned by the Borough of Columbia.
Chapter 119
FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may have their
permit to use an outdoor fire devise suspended or revoked by Columbia
Borough Council, in the Council's sole discretion.
48.Editor's Note: The original ordinance containing said background paragraphs is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 117-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 118-2
1:192
ARTICLE I
Flood Insurance Coverage
[Adopted 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 489 (Ch. 41, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 119-1. Interest in securing coverage.
The Borough of Columbia hereby evidences a positive interest in securing
flood insurance coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program
because of a clear danger of flooding and the resultant damage to property
in the Borough of Columbia.
§ 119-2. Compliance with program regulations.
The Borough of Columbia will comply with the regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program:
A. To recognize and duly evaluate flood hazards and/or mudslide hazards
in all official actions relating to land use in the areas having special
flood hazards and/or mudslide hazards.
B. To take such other official action as may be reasonably necessary to
carry out the objectives of the program. Such actions must include, but
will not be limited to:
(1) Delineating or assisting the Administrator, at his request, in the
delineation of the limits of the floodplain having special flood
hazards and/or mudslide hazards on available local maps of
sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites.
(2) Providing such information as the Administrator may request
concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain and/or
mudslide areas.
(3) Maintaining for public inspection and furnishing, upon request,
with respect to each area having special flood hazards, information
on elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floors of
all new or substantially improved structures and, where there is a
basement, the distance between the first floor and the bottom of
the lowest opening where water flowing on the ground will enter.
(4) Cooperating with federal, state and local agencies and private
firms which undertake to study, survey, map and identify floodplain
or mudslide areas as well as cooperation with neighboring
jurisdictions with respect to management of adjoining floodplain or
mudslide areas in order to prevent aggravation of the flooding
problem.
C. To appoint or designate the Borough Secretary/Treasurer with the
responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitment made
herein and to submit, on each anniversary date of the community's
eligibility, an annual report to the Administrator on the progress made
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-2
1:193
during the past year within the community in the development and
implementation of floodplain and/or mudslide area management
measures.
§ 119-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 119-2
1:194
ARTICLE II
Implementation of Program Objectives
[Adopted 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. 490 (Ch. 41, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 119-3. Construction and improvement precautions.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, beginning September 11,
1972, shall do the following:
A. Require building permits for all proposed construction or other
improvements in the community.
B. Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is
in a location which has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction
or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile
homes) must:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
C. Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to
assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
D. Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so
as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during
flooding.
§ 119-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:195
Chapter 120
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood insurance program — See Ch. 119.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 119-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 119-3
1:196
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 120-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,49 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Columbia does hereby
order as follows.
49.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1
1:197

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 120-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 120-3. Applicability.
§ 120-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 120-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Columbia unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Columbia or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 120-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5
1:199
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 120-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-5
1:200
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 120-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 120-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 120-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations.
B. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
C. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Columbia Borough
Manager.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);50 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);51 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);52 and the United States
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-8
1:201
§ 120-9. Application procedures and requirements.
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event that the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Columbia. Such application shall contain the following:
§ 120-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-9
1:202
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(8) Any other information required of an applicant for a building
permit for construction outside of an identified floodplain area.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-9
1:203
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and Floodway Area (See § 120-17A.), when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 120-17B.) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
§ 120-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-9
1:204
§ 120-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 120-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have
been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 120-23F, Storage, and § 120-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 120-23F and 120-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 120-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-12
1:205
§ 120-12. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 120-13. Start of construction.
§ 120-14. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit, or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first,
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
§ 120-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-14
1:206
§ 120-15. Appeals.
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
Columbia Borough of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs of
prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are
hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.53
53.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 120-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-15
1:207

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 120-16. Identification.
§ 120-17. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Columbia, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated April 6,
2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by Borough of Columbia and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 120-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-17
1:209
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
E. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where the
Borough of Columbia has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
as delineated and adopted on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best
§ 120-17 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-17
1:210
§ 120-18. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 120-21B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 120-19. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Columbia and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 120-20. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
available topographic data and locally derived information such as
flood of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 120-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-20
1:211

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 120-21. General.
§ 120-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development, shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When the Borough of Columbia proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 120-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22
1:213
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 120-17C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy:
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 120-17C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
§ 120-22 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-22
1:214
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a net total
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
§ 120-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23
1:215
§ 120-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of storm water runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damages," and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
§ 120-23 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-23
1:216
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 120-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
§ 120-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-23
1:217
§ 120-24. Development which may endanger human life.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,54
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
54.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 120-23 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-24
1:218
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 120-21, 120-22 and 120-23.
C. New or substantially improved nonresidential structures.
(1) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in Subsection A, above, shall be built in accordance with
§§ 120-21, 120-22 and 120-23, including:
(a) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
§ 120-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-24
1:219
§ 120-25. Special requirements for subdivisions and developments.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 120-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 120-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
B. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
C. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit(s) installation.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
§ 120-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-27
1:220
(1) Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 120-26.
§ 120-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27
1:221

ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 120-28. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,55 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Borough of Columbia:
§ 120-29. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
55.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 120-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-29
1:223
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 120-29 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-29
1:224
§ 120-30. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Columbia, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
Article III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development."
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166; and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Columbia
Planning Commission and the Borough of Columbia engineer for review
and comment.
§ 120-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-30
1:225
§ 120-31. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of
Columbia shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect
the application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Columbia decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Columbia approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Columbia shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Columbia.
F. If the Borough of Columbia does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Columbia and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Columbia shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 120-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-31
1:226
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by Columbia Borough and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
§ 120-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-31
1:227

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 120-32. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 120-33 shall apply.
§ 120-33. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (See § 120-17A.), no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without Floodway (See § 120-17B.), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 120-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-33
1:229

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 120-34. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 120-35. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 120-16 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (or prohibited activities) (Article VI) or to development
which may endanger human life (§ 120-24).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, Columbia Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, Columbia Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, Columbia Borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
§ 120-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35
1:231
(3) That the granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
(b) Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances
and regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by Columbia Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to the
FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 120-35 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-35
1:232
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 120-36. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 120-37. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 120-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-37
1:233
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 120-37 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-37
1:234
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 120-16 and 120-17 for the specifies on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exit way requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the April 5, 2016, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after January 6,
1982, and before April 5, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 120-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-37
1:235
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 6,
1982, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — Is a structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
January 6, 1982, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to
be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 120-37 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-37
1:236
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 120-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-37
1:237
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 120-37 COLUMBIA CODE § 120-37
1:238
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 120-38. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on March 14, 2016, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 120-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-38
1:239
Chapter 122
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 122-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Garage and Yard Sale
Ordinance."
§ 122-2. Legislative intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia is adopting and
promulgating this chapter to control and restrict garage and yard sales in
order to protect the public health, safety and convenience and to restrict
such sales to casual and occasional occurrences only, in keeping with the
character of the neighborhoods where these types of activities are typically
carried on. The intent of this chapter is to eliminate perpetual, prolonged
and extended garage and yard sales.
§ 122-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — The sale or offering for sale of new, used, or
secondhand items of personal property at any one residential premises
at any one time. Included in this definition are all sales in residential
areas which may be entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "tag sale,"
"porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage sale,"
"flea market sale" or any similar casual sale of tangible personal
property.
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise, or other personal
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Columbia.
PERSON or PERSONS — Individuals, partnerships, family groups,
voluntary associations, limited-liability companies and corporations.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — All residential dwellings located within
any type of zone, zoned area, zoning district, whether or not said areas
or zones are residential, business, commercial or otherwise, within the
geographical boundaries of the Borough of Columbia.
B. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 120-38 COLUMBIA CODE § 122-4
1:240
§ 122-4. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be applicable to:
§ 122-5. Operational restrictions.
The person conducting the sale and the owner, tenant or occupant of
the premises where the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly or
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during the hours of such sale or activity. Additionally, the following
limitations on conduct of persons holding garage sales shall be complied
with:
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process or court of
competent jurisdiction;
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
C. Any persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement;
D. Any sale conducted by any legitimate business or commercial or
industrial establishment on properties owned under the zoning
regulations of the Borough of Columbia with or without the protection
of the nonconforming use section of the zoning laws, or any sale
conducted by any other vendor or dealer when the sale is conducted in
a properly zoned area and not otherwise prohibited by laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and ordinances of the Borough of
Columbia, including this chapter;
E. Any public auction having a duration of no more than two days and
conducted by an auctioneer, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and
F. Sales by a bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental
institution, civic group, service club, religious or fraternal society or
other tax-exempt organization; provided, however, that the burden of
proof to establish the exemption under this subsection shall be on the
organization or institution claiming such exemption.
A. No such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on such
premises or permit vehicles to impede the passage of the traffic on any
roads or streets in the area of the premises where the sale is being
conducted.
B. In the event of an emergency, all such persons shall obey reasonable
orders from any member of the Police Department or the Columbia
Borough Fire Department in order to maintain the public health, safety
and convenience. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:241
§ 122-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers, Zoning Officer, and
Code Officers of the Borough of Columbia and it shall be their duty to
investigate and prosecute, at their discretion, any violation of this chapter.
If a violation is found to exist, such officers may prosecute a complaint
before the District Justice pursuant to provisions of this chapter and/or may
take any such other action allowable by law.
§ 122-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600 plus court
costs and/or 30 days in jail. Prosecutions hereunder shall be commenced by
summary citation.
Chapter 126
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 33.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 112.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Market — See Ch. 145.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
C. Items to be sold at garage sales must belong solely to the household
where the sale is held. It shall be unlawful to bring in and sell goods
belonging to others or to purchase items specifically to sell at a garage
sale, with the exception of such sales conducted on behalf of charitable
or service organizations.
D. All such sales may be held only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
E. Only one four-square-foot sign shall be permitted advertising the sale.
Such sign shall be located upon the premises where the sale occurs and
shall be removed promptly upon the completion of the sale.
F. Garage sales shall be limited to two per calendar year per residence.
G. No garage sale shall extend beyond a two-day period.
§ 122-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 122-7
1:242
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 126-1. Short title; effective regulations.
These rules and regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Health
and Sanitation Code of the Borough of Columbia." The rules and regulations
of this Health and Sanitation Code of the Borough of Columbia are
supplemental to the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection, the Department of Health and the Department
of Agriculture of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, all relating to public
health and shall, as to matters to which they refer, supersede all local
ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted inconsistent therewith.
§ 126-2. Purpose.
The rules and regulations known as the "Health and Sanitation Code of the
Borough of Columbia" are adopted for the following purposes:
§ 126-3. Definitions and word usage.56
A. To prevent the introduction and/or spread of infectious or contagious
diseases by inspection and regulation of food-service establishments,
the regulation of infected places and the separation of infected persons
who have been exposed to infectious or contagious diseases.
B. To prevent the introduction and/or spread of infections or diseases by
the regulation of swimming and bathing places.
C. To prevent the introduction and/or spread of diseases by the regulation
of dogs and cats by prohibiting the running at large of such animals and
requiring vaccination against rabies.
D. To abate and remove nuisances prejudicial to public health; and
E. To provide uniform and comprehensive regulations for the protection of
the health of the residents of the Borough of Columbia.
A. The following words and terms used in this Health and Sanitation Code
of the Borough of Columbia shall have the following meanings, unless a
different meaning is plainly required by the context or a different
meaning is stated in any of the several articles hereof:
ADEQUATE — Suitable for the specific purpose and efficiently operated
or sufficiently furnished to accomplish acceptable results without
undue loss of time.
APPROVED — Accepted as satisfactory to the Health Officer of the
Borough of Columbia.
56.Editor's Note: See also §§ 126-6A through E, 126-13, 126-21, 126-28, 126-33 and 126-43.
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-3
1:243
APPROVED LABORATORY — A laboratory approved by the Secretary
of Health or the Secretary of Agriculture of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or both, where applicable, and which is properly
equipped and staffed.
BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough of Columbia.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
BULK FOOD — Unpackaged or unwrapped, processed or unprocessed
food in aggregate, containers from which quantities desired by the
consumer are withdrawn. This term shall include all salad bars and
buffets, but shall not include whole, clean, undamaged fresh fruits or
fresh vegetables and nuts in the shell. Bulk foods shall be deemed to
include drink not served by dispenser or otherwise packaged.
CATERER — The person or business entity, other than a food vendor,
providing for commercial gain food for human consumption not
prepared in a food-service establishment licensed by the Borough of
Columbia. A caterer normally provides food for an event or function at
a place of business, place of assembly, or private home.
DRINK — Any liquid substance, except a drug, used or intended to be
used for human consumption.
EATING AND DRINKING PLACE — Any establishment so defined in this
article.
EMPLOYEE — Any person so defined in this article; in addition, the
term "employee" shall include any person whose services are hired by
any employer in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages or
profits.
EMPLOYER — Any person who employs the services of any other
individual person.
FOOD — Any substance, except a drug, used or intended to be used for
human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER — Any person who handles food or drink during
storage, manufacture, preparation, handling, sale or serving in such
a manner that some portion of the clothing or body of such person
may come in contact with such food or drink or with utensils used in
connection therewith.
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment so defined in
this article.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Borough of Columbia or
his duly authorized agent. In the absence of the appointment of a health
officer by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Columbia, or his duly authorized
agent, shall be deemed the Health Officer.
§ 126-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-3
1:244
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, manufacturing or
otherwise, processing materials for sale or for use in connection with
the business of the establishment or as a service to the public.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
NUISANCE — A public nuisance prejudicial to public health which
includes but is not limited to the dumping, storing or accumulating of
used goods and materials on public or private property except when the
same are stored in closed containers. Used goods and materials shall
include but not be limited to tires, machinery and equipment, paper,
cans, garbage and trash.
OWNER — The owner or owners of any building or structure, whether
an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other legal
entity.
PERISHABLE FOOD — Raw fruits and vegetables, live seafood other
than soft-shell clams and mussels or any food or drink of such type or
in such condition as may spoil.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The Plumbing Inspector of the Borough
of Columbia or his duly authorized agent. In the absence of the
appointment of a plumbing inspector by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia, the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Columbia, or his duly authorized agent, shall be deemed the Plumbing
Inspector.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any food or drink which consists
in whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish,
shellfish, edible crustacea, or other ingredients, including synthetic
ingredients, in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive
growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms. The term does not
include clean, whole, uncracked, odor-free shell eggs, or foods or drinks
which have a pH level of 4.6 or below or a water activity (aw) value of
0.85 or less.
PUBLIC — All persons, including but not limited to business invitees,
licensees, guests, members and patrons, and public and private school
students.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building or group of buildings or a portion
of a building owned, leased, rented or occupied by any public agency,
which building is open to the public for the purpose of conducting
business of the agency or for public gatherings of any character.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any premises, building or establishment which is
freely accessible to a considerable number of persons, other than
employees of the place, for purposes of assembly, and includes, among
others, parks, playgrounds, public buildings, schools, colleges,
libraries, museums, exhibition buildings, lecture halls, assembly halls,
dance halls, theaters, bathhouses, stadiums, passenger stations,
bowling alleys, skating rinks, auditoriums, clubs and restaurants.
§ 126-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-3
1:245
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — That individual, agency, or authority
responsible for the approval of a food preparation or food-service
establishment.
SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE — The Secretary of Agriculture of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SECRETARY OF HEALTH — The Secretary of Health of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, and the
singular shall include the plural with respect to all terms set forth and
used herein.
§ 126-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-3
1:246
ARTICLE II
Communicable and Noncommunicable Diseases
§ 126-4. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which have been and are presently
on file in the office of the Health Officer of the Borough of Columbia
being marked and designated as "Title 28, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter
27, Communicable and Noncommunicable Diseases," issued under the
Administrative Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 2 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq., as amended from time to time, be and hereby is adopted as
part of this chapter for the control of communicable and noncommunicable
diseases in the Borough.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:247

ARTICLE III
Food Service Sanitation
§ 126-5. Adoption of additional standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which have been and are presently
on file in the office of the Health Officer of the Borough of Columbia
being marked and designated as "Food Code 2001," published by the Public
Health Service of the United States Food and Drug Administration of the
United States Department of Health and Human Services, or any
subsequent version thereof adopted by the Public Health Service of the
United States Food and Drug Administration of the United States
Department of Health and Human Services, be and hereby is adopted as
part of this chapter for the regulation and control of food service sanitation
within the Borough of Columbia and each and all of the regulations of
said Food Code 2001 or any subsequently adopted Food Code of the Public
Health Service of the United States Food and Drug Administration of the
United States Department of Health and Human Services, except as
provided in § 126-6 hereof are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set forth herein with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 126-6 of this article.
§ 126-6. Modifications to standards.
Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to the standards of the Food
Code 2001, as amended from time to time, are as follows:
A. "Food-service establishment" means any establishment or section of an
establishment where food is prepared, kept, stored, manufactured or
packaged or served, sold or offered for sale, with or without charge.
The term shall include eating and drinking places, food stores and food
vendors. The term shall not include food or beverage vending machines
or private homes where food is prepared and served for individual
family consumption.
B. "Eating and drinking place" shall mean any food-service establishment
where food is provided in individual portion service for consumption on
the premises. The term includes a restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria,
cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private club,
and the food preparation and dining areas of hospitals, industrial
plants, churches, schools and other educational institutions, including
day-care facilities. The term shall not include food stores or food
vendors.
C. "Food store" shall mean any food-service establishment where food and
food products are kept, prepared or offered to the customer and
intended for consumption off of the premises. The term includes a
supermarket, grocery, food-processing establishment, distributor,
commissary, take-out, bakery and candy store. The term shall not
include an eating and drinking place or food vendor.
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:249
D. "Food vendor" means any person, not a licensed caterer, who
transports, distributes or sells food using a mobile food unit, including a
push cart or hand-carried container, with the exception of the
transportation of food for delivery to licensed food-service
establishments, such as food store or eating and drinking places, and
the home delivery of milk and bakery products already under
inspection. The term includes food service delivery persons who deliver
restaurant take-out meals and/or prepared meals to the public.
E. "Milk and milk products" shall mean fluid milk and fluid milk products
used or serviced shall be pasteurized and shall meet the Grade A quality
standards as established by law. Dry milk and dry milk products shall be
made from pasteurized milk and milk products.
F. Section 1-201.10(B)(32) as amended from time to time, shall be
amended to include the following statement:
Food shall be in sound condition, free from spoilage, filth or other
contamination and shall be safe for human consumption. Food shall
be obtained from sources that comply with all laws relating to food
and food labeling. The use of food in hermetically sealed containers
that was not prepared in a food-processing establishment is prohibited.
Where food is processed outside the Borough of Columbia in a place or
establishment other than a food-processing establishment and used or
sold in the Borough of Columbia, written permission from the Health
Officer of the Borough of Columbia to inspect such establishment shall
be secured by the applicant. In lieu of such inspection, the Health
Officer of the Borough of Columbia may accept reports from a
responsible Health Officer of the processor's municipality. Food
prepared in a home shall not be used, served or offered for sale.
G. A new Section 3-202.10 shall be added which shall provide as follows:
All deliveries of food shall be made inside the establishment unless food
is stored in containers approved by the Health Officer of the Borough of
Columbia.
H. Section 3-305.14, as amended from time to time, shall be revised to
include the following statement:
No food preparation shall be allowed in any cellar, basement, or other
place below the natural surface of the ground except with the written
permission of the Board of Health of the Borough of Columbia.
I. Section 6-404.11, as amended from time to time, shall be amended to
state as follows:
Products that are held by the permit holder, such as unlabeled canned
goods and cans showing rust, leakage or evidence of internal pressure,
shall not be used, offered for sale or given away. Food items that are
spoiled or that are in damaged containers that may affect the product
and those items that have been returned to or are being detained by
§ 126-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-6
1:250
the food establishment because of spoilage, container damage or other
public health considerations shall be segregated and held in designated
areas that are separated from food, equipment, utensils, linens and
single-service and single-use articles, pending proper disposition unless
disposed of under the supervision of the regulatory authority.
J. A new Section 3-501.10 shall be inserted and shall provide as follows:
Potentially hazardous foods that are in a form to be consumed without
further cooking, such as salads, sandwiches, and filled pastry products
shall be prepared from chilled products.
K. A new Section 3-603.10 shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
When food sample demonstrations and food promotions are authorized
in a food establishment, the person in charge shall insure that such
activities comply with Chapter 2, Chapter 3, and Section 4-103 of this
Code.
L. Section 2-301.14, as amended from time to time, shall be amended to
include the following provision:
Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands and the exposed portion
of their arms with soap and water before starting work.
M. Section 4-601.11, as amended from time to time, shall be amended to
include the following provision:
Cutting surfaces subject to scratching and scoring shall be resurfaced
so as to be easily cleaned or shall be discarded when the surfaces can
no longer be effectively cleaned and sanitized.
N. Section 4-202.11(A), as amended from time to time, shall be amended
to include the following provision:
All wall-mounted equipment, including shelves and horizontal utility
lines, shall be located at least 1/2 inch from the wall, unless effectively
sealed in a manner acceptable to the Health Officer.
O. Section 4-301.12, as amended from time to time, shall be amended to
include the following provision:
Each compartment of the sink shall be supplied with hot and cold
potable running water.
P. Section 5-203.12, as amended from time to time, shall include the
following provision:
In any establishment where food is provided to patrons for consumption
on the premises, a toilet facility for men and a toilet facility for women
shall be provided. Toilets used by patrons shall be located so as not to
require the patrons to pass through any food preparation areas.
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:251
Q. Section 6-202.14, as amended from time to time, shall include the
following provision:
Louvers may be installed in doors, if necessary, for ventilation.
R. Section 5-203.11, as amended from time to time, shall include the
following provision:
At least one hand-washing sink and not fewer than the number of handwashing
sinks required by law shall be installed for patrons in all toilet
facilities.
S. A new Section 8-303.25, Mobile Food Units, shall be inserted which
shall provide as follows:
Mobile food units or push carts serving only food prepared, packaged
in individual servings, transported and stored under conditions meeting
the requirements of this Code or beverages that are not potentially
hazardous and are dispensed from covered urns or other protected
equipment need not comply with the requirements of this Code
pertaining to the necessity of water and sewage systems nor to those
requirements pertaining to the cleaning and sanitation of equipment
and utensils if the required equipment for cleaning and sanitation exists
at a food-processing establishment.
a. There shall be no preparation on a mobile food unit or push cart
except for those items approved at the time of application. All food
in the possession of a food vendor shall be prepared, wrapped and
sealed in individual containers at a commissary or food-processing
establishment. The food shall remain therein until received by the
consumer. Beverages, exclusive of milk and milk products, may be
dispensed in bulk from an approved container.
b. Sandwiches and other packaged food shall be kept under dry
refrigeration. Beverages may be stored in ice so long as drains are
provided which prevent the accumulation of water in the storage
compartment.
c. Garbage and refuse shall be stored in easily cleanable, insect-proof
containers with tight-fitting lids which shall be emptied at least
nightly. A trash container shall also be accessible to the public for
depositing wrappers and litter.
d. Section 8-303.25 shall be amended by adding a sentence at the end
of the paragraph which shall provide that "The name of the
establishment shall appear on both sides of any mobile food unit or
push cart in letters at least two inches high."
T. A new Section 8-302.15, Applications, Permits and Inspections, shall be
added which shall provide as follows:
A permit, license or certificate shall be granted for a period of one year
from the date of issuance. Application for renewal shall be made at
§ 126-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-6
1:252
least one-month prior to the expiration of the existing permit, license
or certificate. All food vendor permits shall expire on December 31
following their issuance. Application for renewal of a permit shall be
made prior to December 1 of each year for a further period of 12
months.
U. The following provisions shall be added and shall provide as follows:
a. An annual renewal/inspection fee shall be paid at the time of
application based upon the type of food-service establishment set
forth in the Borough schedule of fees as adopted and amended from
time to time by Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia.
b. An application for a permit, license or certificate shall expire by
limitation at the end of three months from the date of receipt unless
the Health Officer, upon written request of the applicant presented
prior to the expiration date, extends the period due to unusual
circumstances. When an application shall have expired by
limitation, the applicant, upon written request, shall be entitled to
receive a refund of an amount equal to 50% of the annual
inspection fee. No refund shall be made after six months following
the initial application.
c. Whenever an inspection of a food-service establishment is made,
the findings shall be recorded on an official inspection report form
of the Borough of Columbia. Inspection remarks shall be written to
reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state
the correction to be made; however, omission of such section
numbers shall not affect the validity of the inspection report. A copy
of the competed inspection report form shall be furnished to the
person in charge of the establishment.
V. Section 8-405.11, as amended from time to time, shall be amended to
include the following provision:
All violations involving sanitation or the presence of insects and rodents
shall be corrected within 24 hours or as noted on the inspection form. A
follow-up inspection shall be conducted by the Health Officer to confirm
correction.
W. A new Section 8-403.15, Inspection Report Form, shall be added to and
shall provide as follows:
The inspection report form shall be the current inspection form used by
the regulatory authority.
X. A new Section 8-201.20, Outdoor Dining, shall be added which shall
provide as follows:
a. An eating and drinking place or a food store required to be licensed
by the Borough of Columbia under this article may apply for an
addendum to that license for the consumption, but not the service,
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-6
1:253
of food and/or nonalcoholic drinks outside of an enclosed or
screened structure at the licensed premises, provided that it limits
the number of seats available for such purpose to 12. Such license
addendum shall be subject to the following:
1. Each application shall be accompanied by a floor plan drawn to
scale showing the location of tables and equipment,
composition of materials used and required setbacks.
2. Tables and chairs must not obstruct or interfere with the use of
alleyways, driveways, parking areas or sidewalks and must be
arranged to maintain free and unobstructed aisles and
exitways.
3. Surfaces of tables shall be smooth, durable, and sealed to
render them easily cleanable. Convenient and adequate trash
receptacles with self-closing lids shall be provided.
4. The license addendum shall only be granted to an
establishment which has not permitted health and sanitation
violations or permitted refuse, litter or trash on the licensed
premises to remain uncollected, which has not been issued
repetitive notices of the same or similar violations under this
article in the prior license year and which has not operated in
such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. The license
addendum, if granted, may be revoked should such conditions
occur.
5. Dining areas shall be located at least 20 feet away from the
curb line of abutting streets and, unless an approved barrier
with a minimum height of 2.5 feet is erected, at least 20 feet as
well, from vehicular traffic areas, such as alleys, active parking
lots, driveways and truck-loading zones. The Health Officer
may grant a waiver of the twenty-foot setback if the Public
Safety Committee of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Columbia determines that some lesser setback would still
provide an adequate safety zone for patrons.
6. For purposes of this subsection, up to three feet of linear
seating is the equivalent of one seat.
b. An eating and drinking place required to be licensed by the
Borough of Columbia under this article may apply for an addendum
to that license for the consumption and/or the service of food and/
or drinks outside of an enclosed or screened structure at the
licensed premises. Such license addendum shall be subject to the
requirements of Subsection a. above, such regulations as the Board
of Health shall promulgate and the following:
1. The facility shall provide additional parking for the outside
seating in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Columbia.57
§ 126-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-6
1:254
§ 126-7. Caterers.
2. Unless air curtains are installed at the entranceways to the
establishment, exterior tables shall be located at least five feet
away from such entranceways.
3. Floors shall be hard-surfaced, not retain standing water, and
shall be free of cracks greater than 1/16 of an inch.
4. An outdoor hose bib shall be provided and the area shall be
cleaned at the end of each business day. All food debris shall be
removed prior to washing down the area.
5. Food preparation, the dispensing of bulk food, buffets and
salad bars are prohibited outdoors. Foods on display must be in
individual servings and prepackaged. All potentially hazardous
foods must be held at the proper temperature using
mechanical refrigeration or approved hot-holding equipment.
6. Nonhazardous alcoholic beverages may be dispensed from
cupboard containers or from a service area with overhead
protection in conformance with this article.
7. Adequate personnel shall be specifically assigned to the
outdoor dining area and remove all leftover food items as soon
as the customer leaves.
8. Alcoholic beverages may be served outside by an
establishment licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for outside service, but only in conjunction with the service of
food and only to patrons seated at table.
A. No person shall operate as a caterer within the Borough of Columbia
without first having registered as such for the current calendar year
with the Health Officer. Each caterer shall be entitled to a permit for
operation in the Borough of Columbia upon submission of a properly
completed registration application supplied by the Borough of
Columbia, payment of the registration fee as set forth in the Borough
schedule of fees as adopted and amended from time to time by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, and compliance with all
other provisions of this chapter, including applicable inspections.
B. Documents required at time of registration.
(1) Copy of caterer's current food-service license issued by his or her
or its jurisdiction.
(2) Copies of last two inspection reports.
(3) Letter from licensing agency indicating that there are no
outstanding or uncorrected critical violations.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 126-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:255
(4) Authorization for Borough of Columbia to inspect caterer's facility.
(5) Evidence of satisfactory completion by caterer, or primary
individual if caterer is an entity rather than an individual, of a foodhandler's
training course acceptable to the commonwealth as of
the time of registration.
(6) Listing and cut-sheet specifications of equipment used to heat, cool
or hold foods at temperature and safely transport food at the
proper temperature. Such equipment must be NSF certified, or the
equivalent thereof.
C. The caterer shall be considered to be a catering establishment
operating in the Borough of Columbia if the caterer provides food
service that requires preparation on the premises, or at a location
within the Borough of Columbia, other than unwrapping and chilling or
reheating of the food. Furthermore, said establishment shall be
required to be licensed under the existing Code of the Borough of
Columbia.
D. If inspection by the Borough of Columbia reveals deficiencies at the
caterer's facility, the caterer shall be required to meet the sanitary
standards listed in this chapter of the Borough of Columbia. The
Borough of Columbia reserves the right not to issue, or, if issued, to
revoke a permit for any caterer whose facility (or vehicle) does not meet
these standards.
E. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees as
adopted and amended from time to time by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia.58
F. Caterers shall supply a copy of their Borough of Columbia permit to
their clients in the Borough of Columbia.
G. Caterers shall promptly report to the Columbia Board of Health any
food-borne illness, when made known to the caterer, which was caused
by consumption of food supplied by the caterer in the Borough.
58.Editor's Note: The schedule of fees is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 126-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-7
1:256
ARTICLE IV
Bulk Food
§ 126-8. Duration, renewal and class of licenses; inspection fees.
§ 126-9. Approval of plans and specifications.
No person shall undertake to install any equipment for bulk food without
first having submitted to the Health Officer for approval, plans and
specifications for such equipment and a listing of the foods to be served.
§ 126-10. Suspension of license; restriction of service; appeal.
Bulk-food licensees shall maintain proper sanitary controls as set forth
in the rules and regulations of the Board of Health pertaining to bulkfood
operations. The license may be suspended or service restricted by
order of the Health Officer if the rules and regulations pertaining to bulkfood
operations are violated by the establishment or due to handling by
customers. The proprietor of the establishment, when so ordered, shall
immediately comply with and obey such order and shall not further conduct
operations until permission is granted by the Health Officer. The proprietor
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Health, which shall afford a
hearing. As a result of the hearing, the Board of Health shall have the right
to stay or set aside the order, uphold the order, or permanently revoke the
license. Should the proprietor wish, the proprietor may appeal the decision
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a license from
the Board of Health of the Borough of Columbia to provide bulk food for
self-service by the customer. A bulk-food license, as an endorsement to
any existing food-service-facility license, shall be granted for a period of
one year from the date of issuance, but not beyond the expiration date
of the food-service-facility license. The Health Officer shall be
authorized to issue a temporary license when applicable.
B. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least one month
before expiration of the existing license. A license shall not be issued
until the Heath Officer has inspected and approved the bulk-food
operation. Licenses shall be issued for the most restrictive class of food
being served and shall not be transferable. Food shall be designated
into one of the following classes:
(1) Class 1: potentially hazardous food.
(2) Class 2: perishable food; and
(3) Class 3: non-potentially hazardous or nonperishable food.
C. Each applicant for a bulk-food license shall, at the time of application,
pay an annual inspection fee based upon the number of locations and
the number of items to be served, as set forth in the Borough schedule
of fees, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-10
1:257
of the Board of Health to the Court of Common Pleas in accordance with
the Local Agency Law59 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other
applicable laws.
§ 126-11. Equipment and product regulations; food protection;
sanitation.
In addition to the regulations contained in this article pertaining to
protection of food, facility construction and cleanliness, right of entry, food
samples, condemnation and embargo, and closure, the following guidelines
shall apply to the sale or service of bulk foods:
A. Equipment.
(1) Equipment not currently approved by the National Sanitation
Foundation (NSF) may be approved by the Health Officer on a trial
basis, providing that one of the following conditions are met:
(a) It meets or exceeds other acceptable guidelines such as those
recommended by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
(b) The proprietor of the establishment can provide to the
satisfaction of the Health Officer that the bulk-food-product
modules have operated satisfactorily in another location for a
period in excess of one year.
(c) Products will be offered only in dispensers of such design that
all components meet with applicable NSF standards and the
product, once dispensed, cannot be returned to the stock by
the customer.
(2) All tongs, ladles, spatulas or other service devices must be of such
design and construction that the grasping portion of the utensil
cannot come in contact with the product.
(3) Proper visual inspection for the customer must be posted, including
but not limited to:
(a) Washing of hands and clean attire.
(b) No smoking.
(c) Proper use of equipment.
(d) No tasting or sampling of product.
(e) The use of clean containers and only those provided by the
establishment.
(f) Identification of the responsible person on duty and the name
and address of the Board of Health in the event of an
unresolved complaint.
59.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
§ 126-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-11
1:258
B. Products.
(1) All liquid and semiliquid products or any product deemed to be a
nuisance by virtue of spillage, cleanability, insect or rodent
attraction, or prone to excessive handling or tasting may be
prohibited or restricted in self-service from bulk.
(2) Product module depth shall be 18 inches or less with a total
product volume limited to a maximum of 50 average servings in the
case of food or drink intended for human consumption unless food
or drinks vended through dispensers where the food or drink is
inaccessible to the customer until dispensed.
(3) Containers of bulk pet food and nonfood items shall be separated
by a barrier or an open space of at least 15 feet from the food
containers.
(4) All bulk products, once dispensed by the customer, may not be
offered for resale or returned to the bulk container.
(5) All bulk products containing potentially hazardous foods shall have
a maximum turnover time of three hours. Perishable products shall
have a turnover time that is adequate to prevent spoilage or
degradation of the product.
(6) Potentially hazardous foods, once placed out for self-service, must
be discarded at the end of the work day, and the recombination
cycle shall be broken at least once every six hours during the day.
All other bulk food and pet food products shall have their cycle
broken on a weekly basis. All bulk food must be rotated to ensure
freshness when restocked.
C. Food protection.
(1) All holders of Class 1 licenses shall maintain direct supervision
over the product in addition to visual instruction. The attendant
must be on duty at all hours of operation, be located within 10 feet
of the product modules and be identified by an appropriate name
tag. The attendant shall be responsible for supervision and
compliance with the health code.
(2) For the purpose of bulk-food licenses, customers shall be
considered as employees of the establishment and shall be subject
to the standards of sanitation and hygiene as food-service workers.
By order of the Board of Health, it shall be the duty of the
proprietor, or person in charge, to exclude from self-service all
persons with visible signs of illness or disease or with skin rashes
or sores, or with bandages on the hands or arms and any person by
virtue of cleanliness or behavior that could endanger the welfare of
the public in the opinion of the proprietor.
§ 126-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-11
1:259
§ 126-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 on the first
offense, not less than $200 on the second offense, and not less than $300
nor more than $600 on the third and each subsequent offense. Successive
violations shall be deemed to have occurred if committed within 365 days
of any previous offense under this article. The number of violations shall
be decreased by one for each three-hundred-sixty-five-day period without
violation. The Health Officer may, at his discretion, issue a warning in lieu
of a charge for the first offense. Revocation proceedings may be taken by
the Board at the recommendation of the Health Officer.
(3) Food or pet food products stored in bulk showing signs of
contamination in any portion by insects or rodents shall be deemed
to be totally contaminated and discarded immediately.
(4) Mixing of products shall be considered adulteration. The
adulterated product shall be immediately removed from sale.
D. Sanitation.
(1) All equipment and display areas shall be maintained at all times in
a clean and sanitary condition. Product spillage shall not be
allowed to remain in a display area for more than 1/2 of an hour.
(2) Tongs, scoops, ladles, spatulas, and other utensils, including
tethers, shall be cleaned and sanitized at least daily. More frequent
intervals may be required based on the type of food and the amount
of soiling.
(3) Individual product modules shall be designed to be easily
removable from the display for serving unless the modules are so
designed that they can be effectively cleaned and sanitized when
necessary, through a manual in-place cleaning procedure that will
not contaminate or otherwise adversely affect bulk food or
equipment in the display area.
(4) Product modules including utensils containing potentially
hazardous foods may not be refilled without cleaning and
sanitizing. Other product modules must be cleaned and sanitized at
least weekly.
§ 126-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-12
1:260
ARTICLE V
Food and Beverage Vending Machines
§ 126-13. Definitions related to food and beverage vending
machines.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following, meanings
indicated:
MACHINE LOCATIONS — The room, enclosure, space or area where one or
more vending machines are installed and operated.
MISBRANDING — The use of any written, printed or graphic matter upon
or accompanying products or containers dispensed from vending machines,
including signs or placards displayed in relation to such products so
dispensed, which is false or misleading or which violates any applicable
local, state or federal labeling requirements.
VENDING MACHINE — Any self-service device which, upon insertion of
a coin, coins, token or tokens or by other similar means, dispenses food,
beverage or ice, either in bulk or package, without the necessity of
replenishing the device between each vending operation.
§ 126-14. Single-service containers.
All single-service containers which receive food or beverage from machines
dispensing such products in bulk shall be purchased in sanitary cartons or
packages which protect the containers from contamination, shall be stored
in a clean dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner.
Such containers shall be stored in the original carton or package in which
they were placed at the point of manufacture until introduced into the
container magazine or dispenser of the vending machines. The vending
machine magazine or dispenser shall protect the food-contact surface of
single-service articles from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents and other
contamination.
§ 126-15. Construction of machines.
A. All vending machines used for dispensing of food and beverages shall
be of a design and construction equivalent to or in excess of the
standards approved by the National Automatic Merchandising
Association or the National Sanitation Foundation.
B. All vending machines shall be mounted on legs six inches or more in
height or mounted on casters or rollers or mounted on gliders to permit
them to be easily moved unless the machine is effectively sealed to the
floor.
C. All service connections through an exterior wall of the machine
including water, gas, electrical and refrigeration connections, shall be
grommeted or sealed to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents.
§ 126-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-15
1:261
D. The non-product-contact surfaces of the interior of vending machines
shall be so designated and constructed as to permit easy cleaning and
that facilitate maintenance operations.
E. All product-contact surfaces of vending machines shall be smooth, in
good repair, and free of breaks, corrosion, open seams, cracks and
chipped places. The design of such surfaces shall be such as to preclude
routine contact between food and V-type threaded surfaces. All joints
and welds in product-contact surfaces shall be smooth, and all internal
angles and corners of such surfaces shall be rounded to facilitate
cleaning.
F. All product or ingredient-contact surfaces of vending machines,
including containers, pipes, valves and fittings, shall be constructed of
nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively nonabsorbent materials and
shall be kept clean. All containers, valves, fittings, shoots and faucets
which are in contact with food shall be easily and readily removable and
so fabricated as to be easily disassembled; and when disassembled, all
surfaces shall be visible for inspection and cleaning. In machines of
such design that food-contact surfaces are not readily removable
because of their function, in-place cleaning of such surfaces may be
permitted, provided that:
(1) They are so arranged that cleaning and bactericidal solutions can
be circulated throughout the fixed system.
(2) Such solutions will contact all interior surfaces.
(3) The system is self-draining or otherwise completely evacuated; and
(4) The cleaning procedures result in thorough cleaning of the
equipment.
G. The openings into all nonpressurized containers used for the storage of
vendable foods and ingredients, including water, shall be provided with
covers which prevent contamination from reaching the interior of the
containers. Such covers shall be designed to provide a flange which
overlaps the opening and shall be sloped to provide drainage from the
cover where the collection of condensation, moisture, or splash is
possible. Concave covers or cover areas are prohibited. Any port
opening through the cover shall be flanged upward at least 3/16 of an
inch and shall be provided with a cover which overlaps the flange.
Condensation or drip-deflecting aprons shall be provided on all piping,
thermometers, equipment, rotary shafts, and other functional parts
extending into the container unless a watertight joint is provided. Such
aprons shall be considered as satisfactory covers for those openings
which are in continuous use. Gaskets, if used, shall be of material which
is nontoxic, relatively stable, and relatively nonabsorbent, and shall
have smooth surface. All gasket-retaining grooves shall be readily
cleanable.
§ 126-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-15
1:262
§ 126-16. Water supply.
All water used in vending machines shall be of a safe and sanitary quality
and shall be provided from a source constructed and operated in
accordance with all applicable laws.
§ 126-17. Plumbing.
§ 126-18. Waste disposal.
H. The deliver tube or chute and orifice of all bulk food and bulk beverage
vending machines shall be protected from normal manual contact, dust,
insects, rodents and other contamination. The design shall be such as to
divert condensation or other moisture from the normal filling position of
the container receiving the food or beverage. The vending stage of such
machine shall be provided with a tight-fitting, self-closing door or cover
which is kept closed except when the machine is in the process of
delivering food or beverage, provided that the delivery tube, chute, or
orifice of machines vending only dry, non-readily-perishable bulk foods
may be designed to permit the degree of customer access to food
contact surfaces which is necessary for self-service.
I. The product storage compartment within vending machines dispensing
packaged liquid products shall be so constructed as to be self-draining,
or shall be provided with a drain outlet which permits complete
draining of the compartment. All such drains shall be easily cleanable.
A. All plumbing connections and fittings shall be installed in accordance
with the provisions of the plumbing code or any other applicable code of
the Borough of Columbia.
B. Where check valves are used for the protection of the water-supply
system, a screen of not less than 100 mesh to the inch shall be installed
in the water supply line immediately upstream from the check valves.
C. In any vending machine in which product ingredient water is pushed by
carbon dioxide from pressurized portable containers into icemakers or
other components, copper or other potentially toxic material shall not
be used to store or pipe such water.
A. Self-closing, leakproof, readily cleanable, plainly labeled and
designated waste container or containers shall be provided in the
vicinity of each machine or machines to receive used cups, cartons,
wrappers, straws, closures and other single-service items.
B. Such waste containers shall not be located within the vending machine,
provided that an exception may be made for those machines dispensing
only packaged products with crown closures, in which case the closure
receptive vault may be located within the machine. Suitable rocks or
cases shall be provided for multiuse containers or bottles.
§ 126-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-18
1:263
§ 126-19. Employee regulations.
§ 126-20. Condemnation and embargo; appeal.
C. Containers shall be provided within all machines dispensing liquid
products in bulk for the collection of drip, spillage, overflow, or other
internal wastes.
D. An automatic shut-off device shall be provided which will place the
vending machine out of operation before such container overflows,
provided that vending machines which are not connected to a watersupply
line and whose icemaker condensate or melt-water does not
discharge into a waste container and which are equipped with two or
double-product valves per circuit shall not be required to have such an
automatic shut-off device. Containers or surfaces on which such wastes
may accumulate shall be readily removable for cleaning, shall be easily
cleanable and shall be corrosion-resistant. If liquid waters from drip,
spillage or overflow which originate within the machine are discharged
into a sewerage system, the connection to the sewer shall be through
and air gap.
A. Employees shall wash their hands immediately prior to engaging in any
vending machine servicing operation which may bring them into
contact with food, beverages, ingredients, or with product-contact
surfaces of utensils, containers or equipment.
B. No person while infected with a disease in a communicable form that
can be transmitted by foods or who is a carrier of organisms that cause
such disease or while afflicted with a boil, an infected wound, or an
acute respiratory infection shall work in food service in any capacity in
which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or foodcontact
surfaces with pathogenic organisms or transmitting disease to
other persons.
A. Samples of food, drink, ingredients, containers or any substance used in
connection with food vending machines may be taken by a duly
authorized representative of the Board of Health or the Health Officer
for examination as often as may be deemed necessary for the detection
of impure or unsanitary conditions. Any food, drink or any substance
used in connection with the food vending machine may be condemned,
removed or destroyed by or under the direction of a duly authorized
representative of the Board of Health or Health Officer if, in the
judgment of the representative, such food, drink or substance is
adulterated, decomposed, impure, unfit for human consumption, or
dangerous to the public health. Any food, drink, or other substance may
be stopped from sale or use and placed under an embargo by any duly
authorized representative of the Board of Health for as reasonable a
period of time as may be required to make investigations or
examination, if such may be necessary to determine that the food, drink
or other substance is adulterated, decomposed, impure, unfit for human
§ 126-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-20
1:264
consumption or dangerous to the public health. No food, drink, or other
substance shall be used, removed, destroyed or otherwise disposed
of while under such embargo except by or under the direction of a
representative of the Board of Health.
B. The owner of products placed under embargo by virtue of any power
granted under this health code shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of Health. The Board of Health short afford a hearing and shall
give due notice of the time and place of the hearing to the owner of such
goods. As a result of the hearing, the Board shall have the right to stay
or set aside the order. Any owner aggrieved by any decision of the
Board under this article may appeal that decision in conformity with the
rules and regulations of the Local Agency Law60 of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
60.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
§ 126-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-20
1:265

ARTICLE VI
Swimming and Bathing Places
§ 126-21. Definitions related to swimming and bathing places.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEAN WATER — New clean water used to refill the pool, new clean water
used to replace loss by splashing or during cleaning of the pool or water
taken from the pool and returned after filtration, or any combination of such
water.
NATURAL BATHING PLACE — Any natural pond, river or lake without
bathing place improvements and any lake or body of water created by
excavation or impoundment which is without bathing place improvements
and which has not been created or altered from the natural state for the
purpose of providing a public bathing place.
OPERATOR — The person responsible for the operation of a public bathing
place.
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE — Any outdoor or indoor place used for amateur,
professional or recreative swimming or bathing, whether or not a fee is
charged for admission or for the use of said place, exclusive of a bathing
place at a private, single-family residence which is used solely by the owner
of the residence, his family and their personal guests.
WADING POOLS — A pool or whirlpool containing less than three feet of
water used at a public bathing place for communal swimming, bathing or
hydrotherapy. Wading pools are further divided into three classes:
§ 126-22. Approval of plans.
A. Class 1, Fill-and-drain. A pool emptied after each use.
Class 2, Auxiliary. A pool sharing a common recirculation/filtration
system with a permitted swimming pool.
B.
Class 3, Independent. All other pools utilizing an independent
recirculation/filtration system such as baby pools, lap pools and
whirlpools.
C.
A. Every person who constructs or installs or intends to construct or
install or desires to extend, alter or modify a public bathing place shall
have plans and specifications for such construction, installation,
alteration, extension or modification approved in writing by the Health
Officer before beginning the work or before permitting the work to be
started by a contractor or any employee.
B. The application for approval of plans required by the Health Officer
shall contain complete plans and specifications fully describing the
public bathing place or extension, alteration or change contemplated in
§ 126-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-22
1:267
§ 126-23. Permit required; application; inspection fee; display of
permit; revocation.
§ 126-24. Investigation of public bathing places.
the application and shall be made on forms provided by the Health
Officer.
C. The approval issued in response to the application shall contain such
terms and conditions as may be required by the Health Officer to insure
compliance with the provisions of this health code.
A. Every person owning, managing or maintaining a public bathing place
shall obtain a permit from the Health Officer. Application for a permit to
operate a public bathing place shall be on forms provided by the Health
Officer, which shall set forth the name, residence, business address and
telephone number of the applicant, the location of the public bathing
place, the name and address of the operator of the public bathing place
and any additional information which the Health Officer may require to
enable him to determine whether the provisions of the health code are
being compiled with. The application is also to be accompanied by a
plan showing details of the pool and facilities.
B. Each applicant, at the time of applying for a permit to operate a public
bathing place, shall pay an annual inspection fee for each swimming
pool and wading pool on the premises, as set forth in the schedule of
fees,61 as adopted and amended from time to time by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia.
C. The applicant and/or operator shall post the permit in a place accessible
to patrons in the principal office of the public bathing place, in the
entranceway or in any other conspicuous place approved by the Health
Officer.
D. The holder of a permit to operate a public bathing place shall be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this health code on
and within the premises operated under such permit.
E. If it is found that the provisions of this health code are not being
complied with or that any condition exists which in the opinion of the
Board of Health endangers the life, safety or health of the users of any
public bathing place, the Board of Health may revoke the operator's
permit.
A. The Health Officer shall collect or cause to be collected and shall
analyze or have analyzed in an approved laboratory such samples of
water, pool water, or any other material or substance found on the
public bathing place premises as may be necessary to determine
61.Editor's Note: The schedule of fees is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 126-22 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-24
1:268
§ 126-25. Standards.
compliance with standards and requirements of this article of this
health code.
B. Public bathing places shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection
by the Health Officer.
A. Water. Water supplies shall be furnished from a public water system and
shall comply with the provisions established under the Sewage Code or
other applicable similar code of the Borough of Columbia.62
B. Plumbing systems, both house and pool, shall conform to the standards
established by the applicable plumbing codes or other codes of the:
Borough of Columbia.
C. All sewage and liquid waste and the discharge of filter backwash,
except pool wastewater, shall be disposed of in the sanitary sewer of the
Borough. If a sanitary sewer is not available, all sewage must be
disposed of in accordance with Sewage Code or other applicable similar
code of the Borough of Columbia. All pool wastewater shall be disposed
of in a storm drain in a manner approved by the Health Officer.
D. Toilets.
(1) Adequate and separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be
provided at all public bathhouses. The minimum shall be one toilet
and one urinal for each 100 men and one toilet for each 75 women.
Flush toilets and urinals shall be provided and shall be properly
maintained. The toilets shall be located between the dressing
rooms and showers.
(2) Toilets shall be kept clean, in good repair, well-lighted and properly
ventilated by exterior windows or other mechanical means. The
floors shall be constructed of material impervious to water and
shall be provided with a sanitary base and with adequate and
sufficient drains to permit cleaning. The use of linoleum or similar
floor coverings is prohibited. The walls and ceilings shall be of
smooth washable surface and shall be finished in a light color.
Doors to entrances of toilet rooms shall be sell-closing. All openings
to the outside shall be effectively screened or otherwise protected
during periods when flies are prevalent.
E. Lavatories. Lavatories shall be located adjacent to the toilet facilities
and shall be provided in the number of one lavatory to each 150 persons
using the pool at the time of maximum load.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Sewers and Sewerage.
§ 126-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-26
1:269
§ 126-26. Quality of pool water.
The water in any indoor pool shall be heated to a temperature of 68°
F. to 72° F. The temperature of the air surrounding an artificially-heated
swimming pool shall not be permitted to become more than 8° F. warmer or
more than 2° F. cooler than the water in the pool at any time when the pool
is in use.
§ 126-27. Lifeguards.
A. Except for public bathing places located at multiple-unit residential
facilities (including continuing-care facilities for the elderly), which
public bathing places are open for use only by residents of such
facilities and their guests, one or more lifeguards in adequate numbers
shall be on duty waterside at a public bathing place at all times such
bathing place is open for use by bathers. While they are on waterside
duty, lifeguards shall not be assigned other tasks that will divert their
attention from the safety of the bathers. Lifeguards need not be
assigned to hot tubs, spas or whirlpools.
B. Lifeguards shall be capable swimmers, skilled in lifesaving methods
and In methods of artificial resuscitation as evidenced by their
possession of currently valid certificates from the American Red Cross,
American Heart Association, or equivalent credentialing organization in
advanced lifesaving, lifeguard or water-safety instructor categories.
§ 126-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-27
1:270
ARTICLE VII
Rodent and Insect Control
§ 126-28. Definitions relating to rodent and insect control.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ERADICATION — The elimination of rodents or insects and other pest
life from any building, lot or premises through the use of traps, baiting,
fumigation or any other method of extermination approved by the Board
of Health, subject to applicable laws relating poisonous substances and
fumigants.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rodents, insects, or other pest life.
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot or
premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation or the agent
or occupant of a building, lot or premises or any other person who has
the use or custody of the same or any part thereof, whether an individual,
partnership, corporation or other entity.
RODENTPROOFING — The treatment or shielding with material impervious
to rodent gnawing of all actual or potential openings in the interior and
exterior, walls, ground or first floors, roofs, foundations, basements,
sidewalk gratings, and other places that may be reached by rodents from
the ground or by climbing or borrowing.
§ 126-29. Elimination of harborages.
All buildings, lots or premises in the Borough shall be kept free from any
condition conducive to rodents, insects and other pest life. The person in
control shall not allow the accumulation of casual water, garbage, building
material, brush, wood piles, or any other material stored less then 16 inches
above the ground which may afford harborage or provide food for rodents,
insects or other pest life.63
§ 126-30. Prohibition of conditions to rodent, insect and pest life.
A. No person in control shall feed wild birds other than in suitable,
properly shielded containers for the food, installed in such a manner as
to be inaccessible to rodents and to prevent the scattering of feed on
the ground.
B. No person shall place food in the open for the feeding of any
domesticated fowl or animal except in a container which will prevent
the scattering of the food upon the ground. Unconsumed food shall not
be allowed to remain where it is accessible to rodents, insects, or other
pest life.
63.Editor's Note: Regarding enforcement, See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, Enforcement
of Certain Ordinances.
§ 126-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-30
1:271
§ 126-31. Eradication measures.
§ 126-32. Rodentproofing.
C. All garbage shall be wrapped. Garbage and waste material shall be
placed in approved watertight containers with tight-fitting lids and
stored in such a manner as not to create an attraction or harborage for
rodents, insects or other pest life.
A. When any building, lot or premises is subject to infestation by rodents,
insects or other pest life the person in control shall apply continuous
repeated eradication measures as required by the Board of Health until
there is no evidence of infestation remaining.
B. No building shall be demolished until the Board of Health certifies to
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Columbia that the
building and premises are free from the infestation of rodents, insects
or other pest life.
C. The Board of Health may, in its discretion, order the person in control of
any inland swamp, pond, creek, lake, pool, sunken lot, quarry or
abandoned excavation, or any other place where stagnant water may
collect, to fill in or drain the same, or to employ other methods to
prevent the breeding of insects and other pest life.
A. Whenever conditions inside, outside or under any building or buildings
or on any lot or premises provide harborage for rats, the Board of
Health may require all or any one or more buildings or premises to be
rodentproofed and harborages removed.
B. The person in control of a building or premises required to be
rodentproofed shall maintain the rodentproofing in good repair. No
person shall injure the rodentproofing. When the rodentproofing is
injured in the course of making alterations, installations, additions or
repairs to the building, the person in control shall restore the
rodentproofing in good condition.
C. No person shall undertake to remodel or alter any existing building or
portion thereof for the purpose of rodentproofing without first
submitting plans to the Board of Health.
§ 126-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-32
1:272
ARTICLE VIII
Control of Animals to Prevent Rabies
§ 126-33. Definitions related to rabies control.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Dogs and other mammals susceptible to rabies.
OWNER — Includes any person having a right of property in any animal and
any person who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in his or her care or
allows it to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
VETERINARIAN — A graduate of a recognized school of veterinary
medicine licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 126-34. Dogs at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow such dog to run at
large upon the public streets of the municipality or upon the property of
others unless accompanied by the owner.
§ 126-35. Cats at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat to allow such cat to run at large
upon the public streets of this municipality or upon the property of others
unless accompanied by the owner.
§ 126-36. Required vaccination of dogs and cats.
A. Six months after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity to own,
possess, maintain, house or keep any dog or cat over three months of
age within the Borough of Columbia unless such dog or cat has been
vaccinated against rabies as herein required or has been previously
vaccinated against rabies and unless such dog or cat, at all times, wears
a collar with the tag attached thereto indicating that such dog or cat
has been vaccinated as herein required or has been previously
vaccinated.
B. Within six months after the effective date of this chapter, every owner of
a dog or cat in the Borough which is over three months of age shall have
such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by or under the supervision of
a veterinarian unless such dog or cat has previously been so vaccinated.
C. Within 10 days after any dog or cat in the Borough becomes three
months of age the owner of such dog or cat shall have such dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies by or under the supervision of a veterinarian.
D. Within 30 days after the arrival in the Borough of any dog or cat over
three months of age, the owner of such dog or oat shall have such dog
§ 126-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-36
1:273
§ 126-37. Quarantine and examination of animals bitten by highrisk
animals.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal which has been bitten or
injured by a rabid animal or which has been bitten or injured by a skunk,
fox, raccoon or bat that is unavailable for testing to follow the following
procedures set forth below:
or cat vaccinated against rabies by or under the supervision of a
veterinarian, unless such dog or cat has been previously so vaccinated.
E. Dogs and cats shall be vaccinated with the three-year rabies vaccine
recognized by Rabies Prevention and Control in Domestic Animals and
Wildlife Act, Act of December 15, 1986, P.L. 1610, No. 181, 3 P.S.
§ 455.1 et seq., as amended from time to time. Those animals
vaccinated after one year of age shall be revaccinated every three years
after the initial vaccination. Those animals vaccinated prior to one year
of age shall be considered protected only for one year and shall be
revaccinated one year after the original vaccination and shall be
revaccinated every three years thereafter.
F. Any feral cats captured by the Borough of Columbia shall be held and
dealt with in accordance with § 82-9 of the Code of the Borough of
Columbia. [Added 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 827]
A. Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated against rabies shall be
revaccinated immediately and shall be kept by the owner for an
observation period of 90 days from the date the bite occurred at the
home of the owner or at some other location acceptable to the Board of
Health and in such a manner as will prevent it from escaping or running
at large.
B. Unvaccinated dogs and cats shall be destroyed immediately. If the
owner is unwilling to have this done, the unvaccinated animal shall be
placed in strict isolation at a veterinary hospital or other location
acceptable to the Board of Health for a period of six months. The animal
shall be vaccinated one month before being released. Any other species
of animal that is bitten by a high-risk animal shall be destroyed
immediately. The owner of the animal may file an appeal to the Board of
Health within 10 days of the bite or injury for the purpose of holding a
hearing. The animal shall be held in strict isolation at a veterinary
hospital pending a decision by the Board of Health following such
hearing.
C. At the end of said observation period, the animal shall be examined by a
veterinarian employed by the owner and a written report of the results
of such examination shall be submitted to the Board of Health by the
owner within 24 hours. If the report reveals no symptoms indicative of
rabies, the animal may then be released from confinement.
§ 126-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-37
1:274
§ 126-38. Required reports of bitings and rabies infections.
§ 126-39. Confinement and examination of animals.
D. If at any time during said observation period the animal develops
symptoms indicative of rabies, such fact shall be communicated at once
to the Board of Health, and the animal shall immediately be removed to
a veterinary hospital acceptable to the Board.
E. If at any time during said observation period the animal should die, the
owner shall immediately submit to the Board of Health the head of the
animal for examination.
A. Persons bitten by animals. It shall be the duty of any person who has
knowledge that an animal has bitten or injured any person in this
municipality to immediately report the facts and the whereabouts of
such animal to the Board of Health, and it shall be the duty of the owner
of every such animal to immediately confine it in such manner as will
prevent it from escaping or running at large. Upon receipt of such
report, the Board of Health shall advise the owner as to the procedure
to be followed with respect to the further confinement and examination
of the animal.
B. Animal bitten by an animal suspected of rabies. It shall be the duty of
any person who has knowledge that an animal in this municipality has
been bitten or otherwise injured by or been exposed to or been in
contact with an animal infected with or suspected of being infected with
rabies to immediately report the facts and the whereabouts of such
animal to the Board of Health.
C. Animals infected with rabies. It shall be the duty of any person who has
knowledge that an animal in this municipality is infected with or
suspected of being infected with rabies to immediately report the facts
and whereabouts of such animal to the Board of Health. Any animal
suspected of being infected with rabies shall immediately be removed
to and be confined in a veterinary hospital acceptable to the Board of
Health, and such animal shall not be released therefrom without
permission of the Board of Health. Any animal infected with rabies shall
be disposed of in such manner as the Board of Health may direct.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal which has bitten or
injured any person in this municipality to follow the procedures set
forth hereinbelow.
(1) The animal shall be confined by the owner, for an observation
period of 10 days from the date the bite occurred, at the home of
the owner or at some other location acceptable to the Board of
Health and in such manner as will prevent it from escaping or
running at large.
§ 126-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-39
1:275
(2) At the end of said ten-day observation period, the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner, and a written
report of the results of such examination shall be submitted to the
Board of Health to the owner within 24 hours. If the report reveals
no symptoms indicative of rabies, the animal may then be released
from confinement.
(3) If at any time during said ten-day observation period the animal
develops symptoms indicative of rabies, such fact shall be
communicated at once to the Board of Health and the animal shall
immediately be removed to a veterinary hospital acceptable to the
Board of Health.
(4) If at any time during said ten-day observation period the animal
should die, the owner shall immediately submit to the Board of
Health the head of the animal for examination.
B. If the records of the Board of Health disclose any occurrence of rabies
in this municipality or in adjacent municipalities within 100 days prior
to the receipt of the report of biting, it shall be the duty of the owner of
any unvaccinated animal which has bitten or injured any person in this
municipality to follow the procedures set forth below:
(1) The animal shall be removed to and confined by the owner in a
veterinary hospital acceptable to this Board of Health for an
observation period of 10 days from the date the bite occurred. The
owner or the hospital shall submit the receipt for the animal to the
Board of Health on the same date that it is placed in the hospital.
(2) Immediately upon being placed in the hospital, the animal shall be
examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner. A written
report of the results of such examination shall be submitted to the
Board of Health by the owner within 24 hours.
(3) If at any time during said ten-day observation period the animal
develops symptoms indicative of rabies, such fact shall be
communicated at once to the Board of Health by the veterinarian.
(4) If at any time during said ten-day observation period the animal
should die, the veterinarian shall immediately submit to the Board
of Health the head of the animal for examination.
(5) At the end of said ten-day observation period, the animal shall
again be examined by a veterinarian employed by the owner, and a
written report of the results of such examination shall be submitted
to the Board of Health by the owner within 24 hours. If this second
report reveals no symptoms indicative of rabies, the owner may
obtain from the Board of Health the hospital receipt for the animal,
and it may then be released from confinement after being
vaccinated.
§ 126-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-39
1:276
C. If an owner fails to comply with the procedures set forth hereinabove,
the Health Officer or his designated agent, with or without notice, is
empowered to seize the animal and provide for the observation,
examination and testing of the animal. The owner shall be charged a
reasonable fee for such services, including the cost of the procedure,
and shall be required to make payment prior to repossessing the
animal. If the owner fails to make payment after 10 days' written notice,
the Health Officer is empowered to deliver the animal to the custody of
the humane league.
§ 126-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-39
1:277

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 126-40. Nuisances.
A. Procedures for handling nuisances. The Health Officer, upon receiving a
complaint of the existence within the Borough of Columbia of a
nuisance which may affect the public health or is or may be so offensive
to the senses of a person of normal sensibility as to interfere with the
comfort or enjoyment of life or when the probable existence of any such
nuisance comes to his attention, shall make an immediate and thorough
investigation; and if such nuisance exists, he shall take all measures
within his power and authority to secure its abatement.
B. Investigation.
(1) The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made such surveys,
investigations, inspections and visits as he may deem necessary to
ascertain the existence of a nuisance within the Borough of
Columbia or to prevent the occurrence of a nuisance within the
Borough by securing compliance with the provisions of this health
code.
(2) The Health Officer shall collect or cause to be collected and shall
analyze or cause to have analyzed all samples, specimens,
materials or substances from any premises whatsoever wherein or
whereon a nuisance is suspected to exist for the purpose of
determining the existence of a nuisance or noncompliance with this
health code.
C. Authority of the Health Officer.
(1) Whenever any nuisance, source of filth, or cause or probable cause
of sickness shall be found by the Health Officer to exist on any
private or public property within the Borough of Columbia in
violation of this health code, which violation injuriously affects or
may affect the health and/or welfare of the residents of the Borough
of Columbia, the Health Officer shall order the owner, occupant or
user thereof, by appropriate action, at the expense of such owner,
occupant or user, to correct and remove such nuisance, source of
filth or cause or probable cause of sickness within such reasonable
time as the Health Officer shall determine. Service of such order
shall be as follows:
(a) By delivery personally to the owner, occupant or user,
whichever one is the responsible party, or by leaving the notice
at the usual abode of the owner, occupant or user with a person
of suitable age and discretion; or
(b) By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner,
occupant or user at his last-known address with postage
prepaid thereon; or
§ 126-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-40
1:279
§ 126-41. Appeals.
Except as set forth in Article V, § 126-20, any person or entity who is
aggrieved by the action of the Health Officer or the Board of Health taken
pursuant to this chapter of the Code of the Borough of Columbia may appeal
that action to the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia. Borough
Council shall, in writing, within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal,
hold a hearing thereon in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Local Agency Law64 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 126-42. Public toilets.
Every person who shall provide a toilet for the use of employees, patrons or
members, or available to the public, shall maintain such toilet at all times in
a clean, well-lighted, ventilated and sanitary condition. An adequate supply
of clean toilet paper, hand-washing soap and single-use towels shall be
provided at all times. The floor of any such toilet room shall be impervious to
moisture and properly drained. No drinking cup, towel, hairbrush or comb
shall be provided for common user in any such toilet or in a washroom,
restroom or looker room adjacent thereto. The owner of the building or his
agent in charge thereof, wherein two or more tenants shall have common
use of a toilet or shower, shall be responsible for the maintenance or repair
of such toilet or shower and keep it in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 126-43. Keeping of animals and fowl.
(c) By posting and keeping posted for 24 hours a copy of the notice
in placard form in a conspicuous place on the premises in
violation.
(2) Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may
issue an order, prior to notice herein required, reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be
taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING — A permanent construction consisting of at least three side
walls and a roof.
COMMERCIAL USE — Operation of a business or enterprise which
provides a service or product for sale to the public. For the purposes of
this article, "commercial use" shall include but not be limited to animal
hospitals, veterinarian establishments, pet grooming salons, pet stores,
laboratories and zoological gardens.
COOP — A building commonly used to keep fowl.
64.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105 et seq.
§ 126-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-43
1:280
ENCLOSURE — An unroofed, enclosed area in which animals are
habitually confined.
PEN — A small enclosure.
SHELTER — A roofed or partially roofed area providing protection from
the elements.
SMALL ANIMAL — Dog or cat or other animal weighing under 100
pounds.
B. General requirements. No person may keep an animal, fowl or reptile in
or on any premises in which such keeping is prohibited by law or
ordinance of the Borough or is prohibited as a use of property by the
Zoning Ordinance65 of the Borough of Columbia or is prohibited by a
regulation adopted and promulgated by any appropriate authority of
the Borough of Columbia including the Building Code Official, Fire
Marshal, or any governmental authority having competent jurisdiction.
C. Location of buildings and structures. No person may erect a building or
shelter or enclosure for animals or fowl without securing a permit from
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Columbia. No person
shall keep and maintain within the limits of the Borough any buildings,
shelters or corrals for any animals or domestic fowl unless said
buildings, shelters or corrals shall be so located on the property as to be
at least 20 feet from any building used for human habitation, and at
least 100 feet from any food-service establishment.
D. Health and sanitation. Every stable or other building wherein any
animal is kept shall be constructed of such material and such manner
that it can be clean and sanitary at all times.
(1) The Health Officer may require such other measures to be taken as
may be necessary to insure proper protection of the public health
and safety and compliance with this health code.
(2) All structures, corrals, pens or yards wherein small animals or fowl
are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of all rodents or vermin, free from objectionable odors. No
manure shall be allowed to accumulate nor shall be dumped on any
open area or lot in the Borough of Columbia. The Health Officer,
upon the complaint of any person, shall inspect such structure or
premises and issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out
the provisions of this health code.
E. Prohibitions.
(1) No person shall operate or maintain a piggery in the Borough of
Columbia.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 126-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-43
1:281
§ 126-44. Curbing of dogs.
(2) No person may keep a poisonous reptile or arachnid of any kind in
the Borough of Columbia.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dogs shall
cause or allow such dog to defecate upon any other person's private
property without the permission of such other person or upon any
public property. Where such person shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by the animal and dispose of the same in a sanitary manner,
the nuisance created by defecation shall be considered abated and such
person shall not be in violation of this article.
B. Guide dogs accompanying a blind person, dogs used to assist any other
physically handicapped persons or animals used in any police or fire
activity shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
C. Enforcement.
(1) The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Health
Officer, his duly authorized representatives, and any other officer
having police power within the Borough of Columbia.
(2) In undertaking the enforcement of this article the Borough of
Columbia is assuming only to promote the general welfare. The
Borough of Columbia is not assuming, nor is it imposing on any of
its officers or employees, an obligation for breach of which it is
liable and money damages to any person who claim that any breach
approximately caused injury.
(3) Violation of this article shall not be considered negligent per se.
D. Citizen suits.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection D(2) below, any citizen may
commence a civil action on its own behalf against any person
except the Borough, commonwealth, or United States, or any
department or agency thereof, to enforce the provisions of this
article.
(2) No action may be commenced under this subsection:
(a) Prior to 30 days after the plaintiff has given written notice of
the alleged violation to the Health Officer and to the alleged
violator; or
(b) If the Borough of Columbia has commenced and is diligently
prosecuting a civil or criminal proceeding against the alleged
violator that incorporates the citizen's cause of action.
(c) For the purposes of this subsection the term "citizen" means
any person or persons having an interest which is or may be
adversely affected.
§ 126-43 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-44
1:282
ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 126-45. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations. Failure to secure a permit, when required, or operating after
suspension or revocation of a permit by the Board of Health or the
Health Officer shall constitute a violation of this health code. When
written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this health code
has been served upon any person, such violation shall be discontinued
immediately.
B. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable, on conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding,
to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense
unless a lesser penalty is provided hereunder. Whenever such person
shall have been notified by service of a citation in a summary
proceeding or by service of a notice of violation by the Health Officer
that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he
shall thereafter continue the violation shall constitute a separate
offense punishable by a like fine.
§ 126-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-45
1:283
Chapter 130
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition permits — See Ch. 105.
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 126-45 COLUMBIA CODE § 126-45
1:284
ARTICLE I
Authorization; Title; Purpose and Prerequisites
§ 130-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority contained in the Act of June
13, 1961, Public Law 282, No. 167,66 as amended.
§ 130-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Borough of
Columbia Historic District Ordinance."
§ 130-3. Purposes.
Pursuant to Article I, Section 27, of the Pennsylvania Constitution which
states that "The people have a right to clean air, pure water, and to the
preservation of the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic values of the
environment. Pennsylvania's public natural resources are the common
property of all the people, including generations yet to come. As trustees of
these resources, the Commonwealth shall conserve and maintain them for
the benefit of all the people," now, therefore, it is the purpose and intent of
the Borough of Columbia to:
A. Promote, protect, enhance, perpetuate and preserve the historic
districts located within the Borough for the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation,
protection and regulation of buildings, structures and areas of historic
interest or significance within the Borough;
B. Safeguard the heritage of the Borough by preserving and regulating
historic districts located herein which reflect elements of the Borough's
cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
C. Preserve and enhance the environmental quality of neighborhoods in
the Borough;
D. Strengthen the Borough's economic base by the stimulation of tourism;
E. Stabilize and improve property values within the Borough;
F. Foster economic development in the Borough;
G. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the Borough's
past; and
H. Preserve and protect the cultural, historical and architectural assets of
the Borough that the Borough has determined to be of local, state or
national historical and/or architectural significance.
66.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:285
§ 130-4. Conditions precedent to adoption.
The adoption of this chapter is conditional upon the occurrence of the
following:
A. The Pennsylvania Historical Museum Commission has certified by
resolution the historical significance of the Borough's historic district;
B. The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission's Bureau for
Historic Preservation has reviewed the chapter and confirmed that it
complies with the Pennsylvania Historic District Act (Act 167, as
amended); and
C. The Borough has complied with all other applicable provisions of
Pennsylvania law relating to the adoption of ordinances.
§ 130-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-4
1:286
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 130-5. Interpretation.
For purposes of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include the
future tense and all words in the plural number include the singular number
and vice versa unless the natural construction of the word clearly indicates
otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "used" includes
"designated, intended, built, or arranged to be used."
§ 130-6. Incorporation of zoning definitions.
All of the definitions contained in Article II, § 220-19, and the
interpretations of words provided in Article II, § 220-18, of Chapter 220,
Zoning, are incorporated herein as if fully set forth in §§ 130-5 through
130-7 of this chapter.
§ 130-7. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following additional words, terms and
phrases shall have the following meanings, unless expressly stated
otherwise or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ALTERATION — Any act or process requiring a building permit and any
other act or process not requiring a building permit but specifically listed
in this chapter as an act or process reviewable by the Borough's Historical
Architectural Review Board, including, without limitation, the repair,
application of paint to any previously unpainted building material or
surface, replacement, reconstruction, demolition or relocation of any
structure or object, or any part of any structure or object that is visible from
a property's tax parcel street address, but excluding rear elevations and
rear accessory buildings visible only from secondary public streets or public
alleys, or the installation of a satellite dish, antenna and other required
equipment on the front of buildings, along their facades, or on the roofs
or sides of such buildings if visible from a public right-of-way.[Amended
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 771; 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 902; 10-8-2018
by Ord. No. 905]
ANTENNA — An antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in
diameter or diagonal measurement that is designed to receive video
programming service via broadband radio service, to receive or transmit
fixed wireless signals other than via satellite, or designed to receive local
television broadcast signals. Such antennas may be mounted on masts
to reach the height needed to establish line-of-sight contact with the
transmitter. Masts higher than antennas used for AM/FM radio, amateur
(hand) radio, CB radio, digital radio services (DARS) or antennas used as
part of a hub to relay signals along multiple locations are not covered by
this definition or the provisions of this chapter.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 902]
§ 130-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-7
1:287
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — A municipal employee of or person retained by
the Borough designated by Columbia Borough Council as the person who
enforces compliance of building and/or fire codes and issues the permit for
the erection or alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or
razing of all or part of any building or structure.
BUILDING PERMIT — An approval statement signed by the Building
Inspector authorizing the construction, alteration, repair, reconstruction,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building or structure
within the historic district.
BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION — The request filed by any person with
the Building Inspector that seeks authorization to erect, alter, reconstruct,
repair, demolish or raze all or a part of any building or structure.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The approved statement signed
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia which certifies to
the historical appropriateness of a particular request for the erection,
alteration, repair, reconstruction, restoration, demolition or razing of all or
a part of any building or structure within an historic district and authorizes
the issuance of a building permit for said request.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS APPLICATION (COA APPLICATION)
— The request filed by a property owner, equitable owner or developer
with the Building Inspector seeking authorization to erect, alter, repair,
reconstruct, restore, demolish, or raze all or any part of a building or
structure within the historic district.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area delineated by a municipality
and certified by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission
(PHMC) as being historically significant. Upon PHMC certification, the local
governing body shall appoint a HARB to administer the regulations in the
certified historic district ordinance.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC DISTRICT ORDINANCE — Regulations enacted by
the local governing body and approved by PHMC, in accordance with the
Act of June 13, 1961, Public Law 282, No. 167 (Act 167), as amended, which
are administered by an Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB) for
the area delineated by the Borough Council and certified by PHMC as an
historic district.
CERTIFIED STAFF — The individual retained by the municipality (as an
employee or as a consultant) meeting the professional and educational
requirements set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, Vol. 36, Part 61
(36 CFR 61) as required by the Certified Local Government Program and
designated as the individual responsible for advising residents, applicants,
and the Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB).
COMPLETED APPLICATION — A COA application that conforms to the
submittal criteria as specified in § 130-23 of this chapter.
§ 130-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-7
1:288
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any
building and all operations incident thereto, including neglecting routine
maintenance and repairs which can lead to deterioration and decay.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — The absence of routine maintenance and
repair which can lead to a building's or structure's structural weakness,
decay and deterioration resulting in its demolition.
ERECTION — The result of construction such as a building, structure,
monument, sign or object on the ground or on a building or structure.
FACADE — A building's primary face corresponding to the property's street
address per the Borough of Columbia's tax records. In the case of corner
properties, the definition of "facade" includes a building's elevations facing
two primary streets (but excluding midblock alleys).[Added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 771]
HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (HARB) — The agency,
appointed by Borough Council, that advises Borough Council as well as
applicants for certificates of appropriateness, on any requests for
authorization to erect, alter, reconstruct, repair, restore, or demolish all or
part of any building within a certified historic district.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — The federal listing of
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant to American
history and culture for their architecture, archaeology, contribution to the
broad patterns of history, or association with lives of persons significant in
the nation's past.
PUBLIC WAY — A public right-of-way that has been placed on the Official
Borough Street Map, a copy that is attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference as Exhibit C.67 Such map may be changed from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure, or
object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time but not
necessarily of original material.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of making possible a compatible
use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while
preserving those portions or features which convey its historical, cultural,
or architectural values.
SATELLITE DISH — A dish antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less
in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service,
including direct-to-home satellite service, or to transmit fixed wireless
signals via satellite.[Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 902]
STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION (STANDARDS) — Federal regulations
(36 CFR 67) to guide work undertaken on buildings listed in or eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
67.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 130-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-7
1:289
STREETSCAPE — The overall view of a public street, including front and
side yards, that are visible from a public street, its component elements, and
the relationships of building setbacks, rhythms, height, shapes, spacing,
and textures, that give the public street or neighborhood its distinctive
visual character or image.
§ 130-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-7
1:290
ARTICLE III
Establishment of District
§ 130-8. Creation and delineation.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to Act 167, as amended, there is hereby
created in the Borough an historic district to be known as the
"Columbia Borough Historic District," which shall be referred to herein
as the "historic district."
B. Boundaries: the limits and boundaries of the historic district as
specifically designated by address in the Historic District Address List
attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A, and that shall be
shown on the Historic District Map attached hereto and incorporated
herein as Exhibit B.68 Said Historic District Address List and Historic
District Map are hereby adopted as a part of this chapter.
C. Location of Historic District Map. In addition to being placed in the
Borough's ordinance book as a part of this chapter, a copy of the
Historic District Map shall be located in the office of the Building
Inspector who shall make it available for public inspection during the
regular business hours of the Borough.
D. Certification: the process by which PHMC assures that the area
delineated on the Historic District Map, defined by address in Exhibit A,
meets the criteria set forth in Act 167, as amended.
E. Revisions. The boundaries of the historic district as delineated herein,
shall not be changed (expanded or decreased) without recommendation
from HARB, approval of Borough Council and certification by PHMC.
68.Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 130-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-8
1:291

ARTICLE IV
Historical Architectural Review Board
§ 130-9. Creation.
An Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB) is hereby erected and
established with its members to be appointed by Borough Council.
§ 130-10. Composition and qualifications.
The HARB shall be composed of not less than five members and, of those:
one member shall be a registered architect; one member shall be a licensed
real estate broker; one member shall be the Building Inspector; and the
remaining members shall be property owners who reside in the historic
district who have a demonstrated interest, knowledge, ability, experience
or expertise in restoration, historic rehabilitation, or neighborhood
conservation or revitalization and who have an interest in the preservation
of the historic district.
§ 130-11. Terms; vacancies and removal; compensation.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection B of this section, members shall serve
terms of five years.
B. Upon adoption of this chapter, Borough Council shall appoint persons to
serve as members of the HARB for the following terms, it being
understood that following expiration of those initial terms all
subsequent appointees shall serve the term set forth in Subsection A of
this section:
(1) One member shall be appointed for a term of one year;
(2) One member shall be appointed for a term of two years;
(3) One member shall be appointed for a term of three years;
(4) One (two if more than a five-member board) member(s) shall be
appointed for a term of four years; and
(5) One (two if more than a five-member board) member(s) shall be
appointed for a term of five years.
C. Vacancies on the HARB shall be filled by Borough Council within 90
days. Should Borough Council fail to fill any vacancy within that period,
the HARB may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County
to fill the vacancy.
D. The position of any member of HARB appointed in his capacity as a
registered architect, building official or licensed real estate broker who
ceases to be so engaged shall be automatically considered vacant.
E. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of
the term of the vacancy being filled.
§ 130-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-11
1:293
§ 130-12. Conflicts of interest.
§ 130-13. Operational provisions and administrative duties.
F. Any HARB member may be removed for misconduct or wrongdoing or
failure to perform his responsibilities pursuant to this chapter, or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council, which vote
shall not be taken until the HARB member has been given the
opportunity of a hearing before Borough Council regarding the alleged
infractions or acts of misconduct.
G. HARB members shall serve without compensation.
A. All HARB members who determine that they have a conflict of interest
in any matter before the HARB shall, promptly upon determining that
such a conflict exists, disqualify themselves from participating in any
manner, publicly or privately, in the presentation, discussion or
deliberation of and the voting on any such matter and shall absent
themselves from the room in which the presentation, discussion,
deliberation and/or vote is occurring. When disqualifying themselves,
the HARB members should publicly announce the nature of the conflict
of interest as a public record in a written memorandum filed with the
person responsible for keeping the minutes of the meeting of the HARB
during which the vote on such matter is taken.
B. In addition to those items set forth as conflicts of interest in the State
Ethics Code, a HARB member shall have a conflict of interest in any
matter before the HARB in which their own or a family member's
financial interests are directly or indirectly involved.
A. The HARB shall give recommendations to the Borough Council
regarding the advisability of issuing any certificate of appropriateness
required in accordance with Act 167, as amended, and this chapter.
B. The HARB may establish, adopt and/or amend rules and regulations for
its own operations and procedures, provided, however, that such rules
and regulations are consistent with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Borough of Columbia and this chapter.
C. The HARB may employ secretarial and professional assistance and
incur other necessary expenses with the approval of Borough Council.
Such services and expenses shall be paid for by the Borough.
D. The HARB shall meet publicly at regularly scheduled intervals. The
meeting schedule shall be established and published annually. The
HARB may hold any additional meetings it deems necessary to carry out
its powers and duties as set forth in this chapter. All meetings shall be
open to the public and shall have a quorum of HARB members.
E. A majority of HARB members shall constitute a quorum and action
taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of
the HARB members present.
§ 130-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-13
1:294
§ 130-14. Additional duties.
Additional duties of the HARB shall be as follows:
F. The members of HARB shall make an annual report to Borough Council
that shall include:
(1) Any recommendations for changes to this chapter;
(2) The number and types of cases reviewed;
(3) The number of cases for which a certificate of appropriateness was
either approved or denied;
(4) The number of HARB meetings which each member attended;
(5) A narrative summary describing the state of historic preservation
in the historic district with recommendations in policy, goals, and
objectives for the Borough Council to consider.
G. HARB members are required to attend at least eight hours annually of
seminars, conferences, or workshops related to historic preservation
and HARB administration.
A. To conduct a survey of buildings, structures, objects and monuments for
the purpose of determining those of historic and/or architectural
significance and pertinent facts about them; to act in coordination with
the Borough Planning Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, and other
appropriate groups; and to maintain and periodically revise and update
the survey in accordance or consistent with PHMC's "Cultural Resource
Management in Pennsylvania: Guidelines for Historic Resource
Surveys";
B. To propose, from time to time as deemed appropriate, the
establishment of additional historic districts and revisions to the
existing historic district;
C. To formulate recommendations concerning the establishment of an
appropriate system of markers for selected historical and/or
architectural sites and buildings, including proposals for the
installation and care of such historic markers;
D. To formulate recommendations concerning the preparation and
publication of maps, brochures and descriptive materials about the
Borough and its historic and/or architectural sites and buildings;
E. To cooperate with and advise Borough Council, the Borough Planning
Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, and other groups, as appropriate,
in matters involving historically and/or architecturally significant sites
and buildings (such as appropriate land usage, parking facilities and
signs, as well as adherence to lot dimensional regulations and minimum
structural standards);
§ 130-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-14
1:295
F. To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the National Park Service,
the National Trust for Historic Preservation, Preservation Pennsylvania,
the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission and other
agencies and persons, public and private, from time to time, concerned
with the preservation of historic sites, structures and buildings;
G. To advise owners of historic buildings and structures regarding
rehabilitation, repairs, maintenance methods and technologies,
adaptive uses, economic and tax incentives and other historic
preservation strategies; and
H. To promote public interest in the purpose of this chapter by carrying on
educational and public relations programs.
§ 130-14 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-14
1:296
ARTICLE V
General Regulations
§ 130-15. Action requiring certificate of appropriateness.
Action requiring a certificate of appropriateness is any activity requiring a
building permit or any act or process not requiring a building permit but
specifically listed in this chapter as regulated activity requiring review by
the Historical Architectural Review Board (HARB).
§ 130-15.1. Replacement windows. [Added 12-11-2006 by Ord. No.
771]
In the case of applications for the installation of replacement windows, the
Borough's Code Officer and/or Building Inspector will determine whether
a review at a regularly scheduled meeting of the HARB is required. In
making this determination, the Code Officer will consider structural and
design aspects of the existing replacement windows, including whether the
proposed replacement will result in changes to the size of the window
opening, the size and number of window panes or light configuration and
the overall shape and appearance of the new windows. The material
composition of the proposed replacement windows (whether wood, cladwood,
aluminum or vinyl) will not be a determining factor for review of
the application by the HARB. Specification of other construction and design
details for the replacement windows will be required from the applicant and
will be evaluated by the Code Officer in consultation with certified staff, on
a case-by-case basis in accordance with general guidelines adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council and made available at the
Borough offices.
§ 130-15.2. Satellite dishes, antennas and other required
equipment. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 902]
A. All applications for installation of a satellite dish, antenna or other
required equipment are subject to the following rules and procedures:
(1) No satellite dishes, antennas or other required equipment shall be
installed or placed in front yards, front of buildings, or along their
facades.
(2) All satellite dishes, antennas or other required equipment shall be
located at the rear of the main dwelling unit or to the rear of the
property.
(3) Antennas and satellite dishes may be installed in the rear or on the
roof or side of the property. A roof- or side-mounted satellite dish or
antenna or other required equipment shall not, however, be visible
from the public right-of-way.
§ 130-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-15.2
1:297
§ 130-16. Preapproved activities.
Preapproved activities are activities that require a certificate of
appropriateness as specified in § 130-15 but that will not require review at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the HARB if the activity is in compliance
with conditions specified herein.
(4) When secured to a brick wall, anchoring for satellite dishes,
antennas and other required equipment shall only occur within
mortar joints and not within the bricks themselves.
(5) Satellite dishes, antennas or other required equipment may be
installed in or on the front of buildings, on the roofs of buildings
visible from the public right-of-way and on the side of buildings
visible from the public right-of-way only if no other means of
reception can be provided. In such cases where the proposed
location of a satellite dish, antenna or other required equipment is
visible from the public right-of-way, the owner or tenant of the
property shall seek issuance of a certificate of appropriateness as
required by this chapter and with the application for the same shall
submit a certificate signed by the installer certifying that no means
of reception can be provided by placement of the equipment on a
location on the property not visible from the public right-of-way.
When any such certificate of appropriateness is granted, all such
satellite dishes, antennas or other required equipment shall be
installed so as to be unobtrusive and shall be screened from view
through the use of landscaping, fencing and/or architectural
building features. When such a certificate of appropriateness is
required, it shall be granted or denied within 30 days of submission
of the application with the certificate referenced above.
B. In the case of applications for a certificate of appropriateness for the
placement of an antenna, satellite dish or other required equipment in
the front of buildings, or on the roof or side of a building visible from a
public right-of-way, the Borough's Code Officer and/or Building
Inspector will determine whether a review at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the HARB is required. Notwithstanding whether such Code
Officer or Building Inspector determines that a review is needed, the
application must be granted within 30 days; hence, if a review is
needed, a special meeting of the HARB shall be held in order to review
the application prior to the expiration of said thirty-day period. Further,
any approvals by Borough Council necessary to approve the certificate
of appropriateness must also be held within such thirty-day period.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or his designee
to remove satellite dishes and antennas when the owner or tenant who
installed the device no longer inhabits the property or within 30 days
following termination of any service utilizing such satellite dish or
antenna.
§ 130-15.2 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-16
1:298
§ 130-17. Color of buildings.
This chapter does not regulate paint color; however, if requested, certified
staff and HARB will provide property owners with technical assistance
regarding appropriate colors for historic buildings.
§ 130-18. Demolition of buildings.
A. Determination of compliance with the conditions of the preapproved
activity shall be made by certified staff. Upon determination of
compliance, certified staff shall so notify the Building Inspector who
shall then issue the permit as may be required by other Borough
regulations. Any and all conditions related to preapproved activities
shall be specified as requirements upon issuance of said permit.
B. Borough Council may, with recommendation from HARB, adopt or
rescind, by motion or resolution, preapproved activities.
C. Preapproved activities:
(1) Activities that require a permit or that are specifically regulated by
this chapter but that are not visible from a public way.
(2) In-kind repair/replacement.
(3) Cleaning exterior surfaces of masonry structures in accordance
with NPS Preservation Brief No. 1 and 6. Guidelines will be
available at the Borough office.
(4) Repointing masonry structures in accordance with NPS
Preservation Brief No. 2. Guidelines will be available at the
Borough office.
(5) Painting exterior surfaces of frame structures in accordance with
NPS Preservation Brief No. 10. Guidelines will be available at the
Borough office.69
A. No existing building or enclosed portion of such building within the
historic district shall be demolished, razed or otherwise permanently
destroyed in whole or in part unless there are no reasonable
alternatives available.
B. No building subject to Subsection A hereof shall be demolished or razed
in whole or in part unless one or more of the following standards is
satisfied, in the judgment of Borough Council after considering the
recommendation of the HARB:
69.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(6), which listed installation of commercial and
business signage to the exterior of buildings as a preapproved activity, added 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 771, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-10-2018
by Ord. No. 902.
§ 130-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-18
1:299
§ 130-19. Routine maintenance required; demolition by neglect.
(1) The building does not contribute to the historical or architectural
significance of the historic district as determined by HARB in
accordance with National Register criteria;
(2) The applicant proves by credible evidence that no reasonable
beneficial use of the building is possible, and that such situation is
not the result of intentional neglect by the current owner;
(3) In accordance with Article VIII, § 130-28, the applicant proves by
credible evidence that the denial of the demolition would result in
an unreasonable economic hardship to the owner, which hardship
was not self-created.
C. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant. The HARB or the Borough
Council may require the applicant to submit written documentation
and/or expert testimony regarding the applicant's claims.
D. If the applicant is granted a certificate of appropriateness for the
demolition of a building in the historic district, the building permit for
the proposed demolition shall not be issued prior to the occurrence of
the following:
(1) Recording of an approved subdivision or land development plan for
the lot where the demolition is proposed;
(2) The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by Borough Council
for the proposed new construction;
(3) Issuance of all required zoning approvals;
(4) Filing with Borough officials a timetable for completion of the
proposed subdivision or land development plan;
(5) The interior and exterior of the building and any significant
architectural features are photo-documented. These photos are to
provide documentation of the architectural heritage of Columbia
Borough and shall be kept on file at a location to be determined by
Borough Council.
E. Recipients of permits for demolition shall be encouraged to salvage or
allow to be salvaged materials from the building to be demolished.
A. All buildings and structures within the historic district shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and reasonably protected
against decay and deterioration. "Demolition by neglect" is defined as
the absence of routine maintenance and repair which leads to
structural weakness, decay and deterioration in a building or structure
to the point where the building or structures meets the criteria for
condemnation. Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
§ 130-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-19
1:300
§ 130-20. Review of plans for new construction.
Plans for proposed new construction being considered by the Planning
Commission under Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development, shall
be reviewed by HARB, in accordance with the "standards" and the design
guidelines contained herein or subsequently adopted by Borough Council
upon HARB's recommendation.
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
(4) Deterioration of crumbling exterior stucco or mortar;
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations
including broken windows or doors; and
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that a demolition is necessary for the
public safety.
B. If the Codes Enforcement Officer has cited an owner of a building
within the historic district under the Property Maintenance Code or
International Fire Code for conditions that could lead to structural
weakness, decay or deterioration and the building's owner fails to
correct the condition in the time specified, that property owner may be
cited also for demolition by neglect under this chapter and be subject to
the penalties contained herein.
C. The structural integrity of both occupied and unoccupied buildings
within the historic district shall be maintained in accordance with the
Property Maintenance Code. In addition to the provisions in the
Property Maintenance Code:
(1) Unoccupied buildings shall be properly sealed, fenced and the
utilities turned off. The interior and exterior of unoccupied
buildings shall be inspected no less than annually to determine
structural maintenance requirements.
(2) Significant exterior architectural features should be protected from
deterioration. This includes, but may not be limited to, porches and
balconies and related support and decorative elements; decorative
elements over or around windows and doors; shutters; patterned
shingles; and the like.
(3) Buildings shall not be stripped of their architectural features.
§ 130-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-20
1:301

ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Standards
§ 130-21. Enumeration of standards.
A. The "standards," reprinted here in their entirety, were developed by the
National Park Service Cultural Resources Preservation Assistance
Division. They are to be applied in a reasonable manner, taking into
consideration economic and technical feasibility.
B. HARB shall be guided by the "standards" when reviewing activities that
are regulated by this chapter.
(1) A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
(2) The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
(3) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
(4) Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained
and preserved.
(5) Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be
preserved.
(6) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement
of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be
substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
(7) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
(8) Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed,
mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
(9) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property.
The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
§ 130-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-21
1:303
§ 130-22. Design guidelines.
In determining the recommendations to be made to the Borough Council
concerning the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, HARB shall
consider only those matters that are pertinent to the preservation of the
historical and/or architectural aspect and nature of the building, site, area,
or district, certified to have historical significance, including the following:
compatible with the massing size, scale, and architectural features
to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
(10)New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
A. Broad historical values representing the cultural, political, economic, or
social history of the Borough.
B. The relationship of the building or structure to historic personages or
events.
C. Significant architectural types representative of a certain historical
period and a style or method of construction.
D. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historical and
architectural nature of the district.
E. The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features which can be
seen from a public way.
F. The general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the building
or structure and the relation of such factors to similar features of
buildings or structures in the district. Consideration shall be given but
not be limited to the following:
(1) Proportion of building's front facades: preserving the relationship
between the width of the front of the building and the height of the
front of the building.
(2) Proportion of openings within the building: preserving the
relationship of width to height of windows and doors.
(3) Rhythms of solids to voids in the front facade: preserving the
relationship between a recurrent alteration of strong and weak
architectural elements thereby maintaining a rhythm of solids to
voids.
(4) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets: preserving the existing
rhythm of recurrent or repeated building masses to spaces
between each building.
§ 130-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-22
1:304
(5) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections: preserving the
existing rhythm of entrance or porch projections to maintain a
pedestrian scale.
(6) Relationship of materials: preserving the predominant materials of
the district such as brick, stone, stucco, wood siding, or other
material.
(7) Relationship of textures: preserving the predominant textures of
the district which may be smooth, such as wood siding, or rough,
such as masonry.
(8) Relationship of architectural details: preserving character-defining
features of buildings, such as architectural details, including but
not limited to cornices, lintels, arches, quoins, balustrades and iron
work, chimneys, etc.
(9) Relationship of roof shapes: preserving compatible roof shapes
such as gable, mansard, hip, flat, gambrel, and/or other kinds of
roof shapes.
(10)Walls of continuity: preserving physical elements which comprise
streetscapes such as brick walls, wrought iron fences, building
facades or combinations of these which form visual continuity and
cohesiveness along the street.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation: preserving the
orientation of structural shapes, plan of openings and architectural
detail that reflect a predominantly vertical, or horizontal character
to the building facade.
(12) Scale: preserving the scale of the built environment created by the
size of units of construction and architectural detail that relate to
the size of persons. In addition, preserving building mass and its
relationship to open space.
§ 130-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-22
1:305

ARTICLE VII
Procedures for Certificate of Appropriateness
§ 130-23. Application procedure.
§ 130-24. Review procedure.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Building Inspector shall give the applicant the
following:
(1) Written notice of the time and date of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of HARB at which said application will be considered.
(2) A placard to be placed in a prominent location, visible from a public
way, on the property where the alteration is proposed.
B. All applications for a certificate of appropriateness and the disposition
of same shall be maintained by the certified staff person at the Borough
office.
A. To allow adequate time for review, applications for a certificate of
appropriateness must be received eight business days prior to the
regularly scheduled meeting of HARB at which the application will be
considered. The meeting schedule and application deadline schedule
shall be established and published annually.
B. Certified staff shall retrieve all applications from the file after the filing
deadline. As part of the preparation of the written review of each
application, certified staff may conduct a site visit, talk to the applicant
and/or contractor as necessary. The written review shall contain the
following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Address of the proposed alteration;
(3) Name and address of the contractor, if applicable;
(4) Physical description of the building to which the alteration is
proposed;
(5) List of proposed activities;
(6) Determination of appropriateness: appropriate, appropriate with
comments/conditions, inappropriate.
(a) The determination shall be based upon the "standards" as well
as any design guidelines contained herein or subsequently
adopted by Council based upon HARB recommendations.
(b) A determination of "inappropriate" shall be accompanied by
suggestions that would change the determination to
"appropriate" or "appropriate with comments/conditions."
§ 130-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-24
1:307
§ 130-25. Decision on application.
C. Certified staff shall forward the written report, applications, and all
relevant attachments, together with a meeting agenda, to HARB
members three business days before the HARB meeting at which said
applications will be considered. Applicants shall be sent a copy of the
meeting agenda and a copy of the written report.
A. The applicant or the applicant's representative shall be at the HARB
meeting at which the applicant's application will be reviewed to answer
any questions HARB members may have regarding the application.
B. The HARB shall render a decision at the meeting at which the
application is reviewed with the following exceptions:
(1) The applicant may withdraw the application;
(2) The applicant seeks conceptual review only;
(3) The applicant and the HARB mutually agree to table the application
until the next meeting;
(4) The HARB requires additional time, due to the nature or complexity
of the proposed activity, to review the materials provided with the
application, gather additional information, seek expert testimony,
or deliberate its findings.
(a) HARB shall make a determination for a recommendation to
Borough Council no later than 30 business days from the
meeting at which the application was first reviewed.
(b) The HARB will specify the information to be compiled and/or
any conditions that must be met by the applicant during the
intervening period. The applicant understands that failure to
gather the information or meet the conditions as specified may
result in a recommendation to deny the certificate of
appropriateness.
C. The HARB decision shall be based upon the standards and the design
guidelines contained herein or as are subsequently adopted by
resolution of the Borough Council upon recommendation from the
HARB. At the conclusion of the HARB's deliberation and vote to approve
proposals for new construction or alteration, the property owner will be
required to add his, her or its signature to Line 11 of the application for
HARB review, indicating the property owner's acceptance of the
HARB's recommendation and any associated conditions. In the instance
of HARB approval and/or in the instance of a preapproved activity or
preapproved replacement of windows in accordance with the terms of
this chapter, the Borough Code Officer will notify Borough Council
President in writing of the recommendation or necessity to issue a
certificate of appropriateness, and the Council President be and
thereby is hereby authorized on behalf of the Borough Council to
§ 130-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-25
1:308
§ 130-26. Recommendation to Borough Council.
The written report to Borough Council concerning HARB's
recommendations on the issuance of certificates of appropriateness shall
include the following:
promptly, upon receipt thereof, issue such certificates of
appropriateness. Proposals for demolition are exempt from this
provision, and must follow the procedures cited in § 130-18 addressing
demolition of buildings. The Code Officer and/or Building Inspector
shall thereupon be authorized to issue a building permit to the
applicant, who shall obtain the permit from the Borough's Code
Enforcement Department during regular business hours. No additional
action or vote by the Borough Council shall be necessary as the Council
hereby specifically authorizes the Council President to act on behalf
of the Council in approving the HARB's recommendations and issuing
certificates of appropriateness based upon such recommendations and/
or based upon the submission of an application for a preapproved
activity or an approved replacement window alteration. [Amended
12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 771; 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 902]
D. If the HARB determination is disapproval, or the property owner has
not accepted the HARB's recommendation of approval, the applicant
shall be notified in writing of the determination and be given
suggestions that would result in approval. HARB shall withhold its
recommendation of disapproval from the Borough Council for a period
of five days, during which time the applicant may decide whether or not
to make changes that would result in approval. If the applicant notifies
the HARB prior to the expiration of the five-day period that the changes
will be made, HARB will change its determination and so notify the
Borough Council. In conjunction with any such changes, the property
owner shall be required to add his, her, or its signature to Line 11 of the
application for HARB review as set forth in Subsection C above.
Thereafter, no additional action or vote by the Borough Council shall be
required and the Code Officer and/or Building Inspector is authorized
to issue a certificate of appropriateness to the applicant. If the
applicant does not notify the HARB as set forth above, then the
provisions of Subsection E below shall apply. [Amended 12-11-2006
by Ord. No. 771]
E. HARB shall inform all applicants of the date and time of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of Borough Council at which Council will
act on the HARB's recommendations for certificates of appropriateness.
A. Minutes of the HARB meeting at which the applications were reviewed;
B. A copy of the review prepared by the certified staff;
C. A certificate of appropriateness for each application containing the
following information:
§ 130-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-26
1:309
§ 130-27. Action by Borough Council.
(1) Applicant's name.
(2) Address of applicant.
(3) Address of property where activity is proposed.
(4) List of proposed activities.
(5) Determination of appropriateness and the standard and guideline
cited for each proposed activity.
(6) The HARB's recommendation, indicating the vote, for each
proposed activity.
(7) Comments/conditions associated with each proposed activity.
A. Upon receiving the written report from the HARB concerning
recommendations on applications for certificates of appropriateness,
Borough Council shall consider, at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
the issuance of certificates of appropriateness.
B. The applicant shall have the right to attend the meeting and be heard
regarding his application.
C. In its decision-making process Borough Council shall consider the
recommendations made by HARB, the "standards" and the guidelines
contained herein.
(1) Borough Council shall render a decision at the meeting at which
the HARB's recommendation for a certificate of appropriateness is
reviewed with the following exceptions:
(a) The applicant may withdraw the application;
(b) Borough Council requires additional time, due to the nature or
complexity of the proposed activity, to review and/or deliberate
the findings of the HARB, to seek expert testimony and/or
gather additional information.
[1] Borough Council shall make a determination no later than
45 business days from the meeting at which the HARB
recommendation for a certificate of appropriateness was
first reviewed.
D. Borough Council shall determine the activities proposed on an
application are:
(1) Appropriate and authorize the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant, copied to the Building Inspector
who shall issue the building permit (assuming all other
requirements of the Borough have been met). Borough Council
shall direct the Borough Manager to notify the applicant in writing,
§ 130-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-27
1:310
within five days, of the determination and inform the applicant to
pick up the building permit as noted above.
(2) Appropriate with conditions and authorize the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness to the applicant, copied to the
Building Inspector, who shall issue a building permit with the
conditions specified and assuming all other requirements of the
Borough have been met. Borough Council shall direct the Borough
Manager to notify the applicant in writing, within five days, of the
determination and inform the applicant to pick up the building
permit as noted above.
(3) Inappropriate and deny issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness. In this instance, the applicant, the Building
Inspector and PHMC shall receive written notice from the Borough
Manager within five days indicating that the certificate of
appropriateness has been denied, the reasons it was denied, the
"standards" and guidelines cited, and changes the applicant could
make which would result in a determination of appropriate or
appropriate with conditions. The applicant may appeal the
determination to the County Court of Common Pleas within the
time specified by law.
§ 130-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-27
1:311

ARTICLE VIII
Unreasonable Economic Hardship
§ 130-28. Determination of hardship.
This section applies to Article V, § 130-18B(3):
A. When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made due to the
effect of this chapter, the owner of record must present evidence
sufficient to prove that, as a result of HARB's action, he is unable to
obtain a reasonable return or a reasonable beneficial use from a
resource. The owner of record shall submit by affidavit to the HARB
some or all of the information below at the discretion of HARB that shall
include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Date the property was acquired by its current owner.
(2) Price paid for the property (if acquired by purchase) and a
description of the relations, if any, between the buyer and the seller
of the property.
(3) Mortgage history of the property, including current mortgage and
the annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years.
(4) Current market value of the property.
(5) Equity in the property.
(6) Past and current income and expense statements for the previous
two years.
(7) Past capital expenditures during ownership of current owner.
(8) Appraisals of the property obtained within the previous two years.
(9) Income and property tax factors affecting the property.
(10) All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner
or applicant in connection with the purchase, offerings for sale,
financing or ownership of the property, or state that none was
obtained.
(11) All studies commissioned by the owner as to profitable renovation,
rehabilitation or utilization of any structures or objects on the
property for alternative use, or a statement that none were
obtained.
(12) Estimate(s) of the cost of the proposed erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing and an estimate(s) of
any additional cost(s) that would be incurred to comply with the
recommendations of the HARB for changes necessary for it to
approve a certificate of appropriateness.
§ 130-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-28
1:313
(13) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or nonprofit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture or other.
B. The HARB may require that an applicant furnish additional information
relevant to its determination of unreasonable economic hardship.
C. The HARB may receive and consider studies and economic analyses
from other Borough agencies and from private organizations relating to
the property in question.
D. Should the HARB determine that the owner's present return is not
reasonable, it must consider whether there are other uses currently
allowed that would provide a reasonable return and whether such a
return could be obtained through investment in the property for
rehabilitation purposes. The HARB may choose to recommend to the
Borough Council that special economic incentives be developed to
assist the owner of the resource in maintaining it and obtaining a
suitable economic return or achieving a reasonable beneficial use.
E. The HARB may seek the assistance of appropriate local, statewide or
national preservation organizations in developing solutions which
would relieve the owner's economic hardship. If the HARB chooses to
explore such options, the HARB may delay recommending issuing a
certificate of appropriateness for demolition on the basis of economic
hardship for a period of 90 days in addition to time periods otherwise
applicable.
F. Should the applicant satisfy the HARB that he will suffer an
unreasonable economic hardship if a certificate of appropriateness is
not approved, and should HARB be unable to develop with the Borough
Council appropriate local, statewide and national preservation
organization a solution which can relieve the owner's economic
hardship, the HARB must recommend to the Borough Council a
certificate of appropriateness for demolition.
§ 130-28 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-28
1:314
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement; Amendments
§ 130-29. Designation of enforcement officer.
The Building Official or his designated representative shall have the power
to institute any proceedings at law, in equity, or authorized by Chapter 220,
Zoning, necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 130-30. Notice of violation.
§ 130-31. Violations and penalties.
The penalty provisions of Chapter 220, Zoning, are incorporated herein by
reference and adopted as the penalty provisions hereof.
§ 130-32. Amendments.
The provisions of this chapter may be amended in the future by the Borough
Council upon recommendation from HARB, after notice and a hearing as
may be provided by law.
A. The Building Official shall serve a written notice of violation on any
person in violation of this chapter, which violations would include but
not be limited to:
(1) Failure to apply for a certificate of appropriateness or a building
permit required for the erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition, demolition by neglect (those activities set
forth in Article VIII, § 130-28), or razing of any building or structure
which can be seen from a public way;
(2) Failure to comply with the conditions specified by HARB and/or
Borough Council on the certificate of appropriateness or that are
associated with any preapproved activity as designated herein or
subsequently adopted by Council upon recommendation by the
HARB.
B. The notice shall direct the abatement of the violation. Appeals of any
such notices shall be taken before the Zoning Hearing Board of the
Borough of Columbia and shall be conducted in the manner set forth in
Chapter 220, Zoning. Moreover, pursuant to Section 5 of the Act of June
13, 1961. Public Law 282, No. 167,70 as amended, the agency charged
by law or by local ordinance with the issuance of permits for the
erection, demolition or alteration of buildings within the historic district
shall have power to institute any proceedings, at law or in equity,
necessary for the enforcement of this act or of any ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto, in the same manner as in its enforcement of other
building, zoning or planning legislation or regulations.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8005.
§ 130-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-33
1:315
§ 130-33. When effective; filing.
A. Immediately upon the adoption of this chapter, the Borough Secretary/
Treasurer shall forward a copy hereof to the Pennsylvania Historical
and Museum Commission.
B. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the occurrence of all of
the following:
(1) Adoption hereof;
(2) The Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission has
certified, by resolution, to the historical significance of the historic
district;
(3) This chapter and the said Commission's resolution have been duly
advertised as required by applicable laws; and
(4) The appointment of the membership of the HARB by the Council of
the Borough of Columbia under § 130-10 of this chapter.
§ 130-33 COLUMBIA CODE § 130-33
1:316
Chapter 134
INSURANCE
§ 130-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-33
1:317

ARTICLE I
Fire Loss Claims
[Adopted 5-8-1995 by Ord. No. 663]
§ 134-1. Designation of municipal officer.
The Secretary/Treasurer of the Borough of Columbia or such official's
designee (hereinafter the "municipal officer") is hereby appointed as the
designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties of the municipality stated herein.
§ 134-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LOSS or CLAIM FOR FIRE DAMAGE — Any loss occurring after the
effective date of this article and covered under a policy of fire insurance,
including any endorsement or riders to said policy of fire insurance.
§ 134-3. Certification and payment procedures.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insurer") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located
within the Borough of Columbia, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania (hereinafter the "municipality"), where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the insurer and the named insured comply with the
provisions of Section 508(b)71 and the provisions of this article.
B. The municipal officer shall, upon the written request of the named
insured specifying the tax description of the property, name and
address of the insurer and the date agreed upon by the insurer and the
named insured as the date of a receipt of a loss report of the claim,
furnish the insurer either of the following within 14 working days of the
request:
(1) A certificate or, at the discretion of the municipality, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to
the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
the property and that, as of the date of the municipal officer's
certificate or verbal notification, the municipality has not certified
any amount as total costs incurred by the municipality for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property; or
71.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 134-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:319
§ 134-4. Escrow requirements for damaged structures.
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of the municipal liens,
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties and use charges against
the property (including administration costs and attorney's fees) as
of the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the
date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the
municipal officer's certificate, the amount of the total cost, if any,
certified to the municipal officer that have been incurred by the
municipality for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property. For the purposes of this clause, the
municipality shall provide to the municipal officer the total amount,
if any, of such costs, if available, or the amount of costs known to
the municipality at the time of the municipal officer's certificate. A
tax, assessment, penalty or user charge (including administration
costs and attorney's fees) becomes delinquent at the time and on
the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the property
by the municipality under applicable law.
C. Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this
section, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured in
accordance with the policy terms.
D. Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to Subsection B(2) of
this section, the insurer shall return the bill to the municipal officer and
transfer to the municipal officer an amount from the insurance
proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges
and costs as shown on the bill or the full amount of the insurance
proceeds, whichever is the lesser amount. The municipality shall
receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown
in the bill.
E. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency in taxes, assessments, penalties,
charges and costs (including administration costs and attorney's fees)
as detailed herein following payment from the insurer and crediting of
such payment to the bill by the municipality.
F. The transfer of proceeds of insurance pursuant to Subsection D of this
section to the municipal officer shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurers with applicable policies of insurance providing protection for
fire loss.
A. No insurer doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall
pay a claim of a named insured for a fire damage to a structure located
within the municipality where the amount recoverable for the fire loss
to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is
furnished by the municipal officer with a municipal certificate pursuant
to Section 508(b) and § 134-3B of this article and unless there is
compliance with Sections 508(c) and (d).
§ 134-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 134-4
1:320
B. After full compliance with the requirements of Section 508(b)(1)(i) and
§ 134-3B through F of this article, the insurer shall pay the claim of the
named insured; provided, however, that if the loss as agreed upon by
the named insured and the insurer equals 60% of the aggregate limits
of liability on all fire policies covering the building structure, the
following procedures shall be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
municipal officer the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a
claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, provided that
this section is to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less,
the amount transferred to the municipality shall be $2,000; and
that, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has submitted
a contract or signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure in an amount less than the
amount calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the
insurer shall transfer to the municipality from the insurance
proceeds the amount based upon the estimate.
(2) The transfer of proceeds under this Subsection B shall be on a pro
rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges insuring the
building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the
transfer to the municipality shall be disbursed in accordance with
the policy terms.
C. After the transfer of proceeds to the municipal officer pursuant to
Subsection B of this section, the named insured may submit a contract
or signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the municipal officer shall return the
amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of the
estimate to the named insured, if the municipality has not commenced
to remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
D. Upon receipt of proceeds of insurance under Subsection B of this
section, the municipality shall do the following:
(1) The municipal officer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to
be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the municipality; such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
(2) It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds to
provide the municipality with the name and address of the named
insured; upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and
address of the named insured, the municipal officer shall contact
the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by
the municipality and notify the named insured that the procedures
established under this Subsection D shall be followed; and
§ 134-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-4
1:321
§ 134-5. Additional regulations.
The Borough Council of the municipality may, by resolution, adopt
additional procedures and regulations to implement Section 508 and this
article and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for
municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Section 508 in this
article, including, but not limited to, issuance of certificates and bills.
§ 134-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this
article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 134-7. Filing of article.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Department of
Community and Economic Development of Pennsylvania on or before its
effective date.
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the municipality and the required proof of
such completion received by the municipal officer, and if the
municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the funds shall be returned to the named insured; if the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and, if excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to Subsection D of this section and retained
by it, such interest shall belong to the municipality. To the extent
that the proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest
earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured
at the time that the proceeds are returned.
E. Nothing in Subsections A through D of this section shall be construed to
limit the ability of the municipality to recover any deficiency remaining
after application of the proceeds escrowed by the municipality against
costs incurred by the municipality in removing, repairing or securing
the building or structure. Furthermore, nothing in Subsections A
through D of this section shall be construed to prohibit the municipality
and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits
the transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 134-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 134-7
1:322
Chapter 138
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 112.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126.
Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as
follows:
JUNK — Any personal property which is owned, possessed, collected,
accumulated, dismantled or assorted, including but not limited to used or
salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or combination, used or
salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick and
similar property except animal matter, and motor vehicles, machinery or
equipment for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.
JUNKYARD — Any place at which junk, as defined in this section, is or
may be salvaged for reuse, resale or reduction or similar disposition, and is
owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted for sale
at retail or wholesale.
PERSON — A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of Columbia Borough.
§ 138-2. Registration list; inspections.
The Zoning Officer shall keep a registration list of all existing and future
junkyards in the Borough. He shall periodically inspect such junkyards for
compliance with these regulations and shall inspect each junkyard upon
each annual application for a license.
§ 138-3. Permit required; annual license; revocation.
A. No person shall maintain or operate a junkyard without first having
obtained a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer and shall
contain the name and address of the applicant, the location of the
premises where the business is to be carried on and such other
information as the Zoning Officer shall require to determine compliance
with this chapter. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council shall be charged for each application, which fee shall
belong to the Borough regardless of whether the permit is issued.
§ 134-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-3
1:323
§ 138-4. Effect upon existing junkyards.
Persons owning, leasing, having control of or operating junkyards existing
on the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to make
application for a building permit for the operation thereof, but shall be
required to register such junkyard with the Zoning Officer, and shall
otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter, but no such existing
junkyard shall be enlarged except upon strict compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-5. Appeals.
C. Every person operating a junkyard shall, on or before January 1 of each
year, apply to the Zoning Officer for a license, and the Zoning Officer
shall issue such license upon payment of a fee as set from time to time
by resolution of the Borough Council, provided that a person
commencing business after January 1 shall pay pro rata for the whole
year as of the first day of the month such person begins business.
D. The issuance of a building permit or of an annual license may be
revoked by the Zoning Officer for failure to comply with this chapter,
subject to the applicant's right of appeal under § 138-5.
A. Whenever the Zoning Officer refuses to grant a permit or revokes a
permit or a license, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board within 30 days from the date of notice of the decision.
B. The appeal shall be in the form of a verified petition, filed in triplicate,
which shall set forth a concise statement of the relevant facts, the
decision appealed from and the basis of the appeal.
C. The Board shall forthwith transmit to the Borough Solicitor and to the
Zoning Officer, who shall be deemed to be a party to the appeal, a copy
of the petition and shall set a date for a hearing and give notice thereof
to the parties, which hearing shall be not less than 10 nor more than 30
days after the date of filing the petition. The Board may grant
continuances upon cause shown. Any party in interest may, prior to the
hearing, file such answer to the petition as he deems desirable.
D. At the hearing the Board shall hear testimony, receive evidence and
hear argument on the merits of the appeal. If any party requests that a
record be made of the hearing, the Board shall employ a stenographer
at the expense of the party requesting the record. Any other party may
secure a copy of the record by making timely request and by paying a
pro rata share of the cost.
E. The Board shall render its decision in writing, and give notice thereof to
the parties.
F. This section shall not be construed to limit or deny any judicial
remedies to which a party may be entitled by law or equity, but a person
§ 138-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 138-5
1:324
§ 138-6. Requirements for use.
In granting a building permit for the location and use of premises or land
for a junkyard, the Zoning Officer shall require the following:72
§ 138-7. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any sanction or remedy provided for in this chapter, any
person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on
each day during or on which a violation shall continue.
Chapter 145
MARKET
having an appeal available under this section shall first avail himself of
the appeal.
A. No junk shall be loaded, unloaded or placed outside the enclosure
fence, temporarily or permanently, either on the property or in the
public right-of-way.
B. Every junkyard shall be conducted so as not to create a nuisance by
reason of noise or disagreeable odors or fumes or so as to attract rats or
vermin. The loading or unloading of junk and the use of breakup
hammers shall be carried on only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., as so determined by the prevailing time designation.
C. All junkyards shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and neat
condition. The accumulation of anything not defined as junk, including
but not limited to foodstuff, animal matter and similar materials, shall
not be permitted.
D. The owner of any junkyard in the Borough shall keep or shall require
the operator thereof to keep an up-to-date list of all acquisitions of junk,
including the names and addresses of all persons from whom acquired,
together with a description of such junk which will permit
reidentification thereof. Such list shall date back at least one year at all
times and shall be kept available to police officers of the Borough and
all other authorized police officers during all hours of business. This
provision shall be in addition to any statutory requirement.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 51-6A and B, regarding the area and conduct of junkyards, as
amended, which immediately followed, were repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 138-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-1
1:325
§ 145-1. Powers of Borough Council.
From and after the passage of this chapter, the entire charging control of
the Borough Market shall be vested in Borough Council, who shall operate
the same, establish rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the
proper conduct of said market and take such other actions as it deems
necessary with respect to the same by proper resolution. Borough Council
may designate any or all of these duties to the Committee on Markets.
Chapter 149
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 82.
Transient retail business — See Ch. 198.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 149-1. Purpose and findings.
§ 149-2. Short title.
This chapter shall also be known as the "Borough of Columbia Noise Control
Ordinance."
A. The Council of the Borough of Columbia finds that:
(1) Excessive noise and sound degrade the environment of the
Borough of Columbia to a degree which:
(a) Is harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of
its inhabitants.
(b) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and
recreation and with the conduct and operation of business and
industry.
(c) Causes nuisances.
(2) No one has the right to create such excessive noise and/or sound.
(3) Effective control and elimination of excessive noise and/or sound is
essential to the furtherance of the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Borough of Columbia and to the conduct of the
normal pursuits of life, recreation, commerce and industrial
activity.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prevent excessive noise
and/or sound and to limit, control and eliminate excessive noise and/or
sound in general from whatever source.
§ 145-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-3
1:326
§ 149-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings herein given, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning. All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below,
shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the American
National Standards Institute [ANSI S1.1 - 1960 (R1971) and its revisions] or
its successor body.
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near
and far.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level, in decibels, as
measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The level
so read is designated "dB(A)."
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure and the excavation,
filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the sound-pressure level, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of impulsive sound
include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.
MUFFLER OR SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or used
for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine or
machinery system.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in any clause
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals.
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
C. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
D. Is in excess of the sound levels by zoning districts established herein.
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-3
1:327
prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships
and associations and, as for corporations, the officers and managers thereof
or any of them.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or
landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — An imaginary line drawn through the
points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons, a
demarcation or a line of separation of properties, and also, for any two or
more buildings sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between
any two such buildings. All areas devoted to public rights-of-way shall be
deemed to be across the property line. For the purpose of this definition,
the "property line" includes all points on a plane formed by projecting
the property line in a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing police
officer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE — Any sound which can be heard as a single pitch or a set
of single pitches. For the purpose of this chapter, a pure tone shall exist if
the 1/3 octave band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds
the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of the two contiguous
octave bands by five dB's for center frequencies of 500 hertz and above and
by eight dB's for center frequencies between 160 and 400 hertz and by 15
dB's for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 hertz.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any
areas devoted to public rights-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the superposition
of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The
description of "sound" may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound-pressure level obtained by the use
of a sound-level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or
C, as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications
for sound-level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971 or the latest revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and
§ 149-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-3
1:328
any applicable weighting network used to measure sound-pressure levels
which meets or exceeds the requirement for a Type I or Type II sound
level as specified in American National Standards Institute Specification
S1.4-1971. The manufacturer's published indication of compliance with
such specifications shall be prima facie evidence of such compliance.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The land use districts established by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough, as codified in Chapter 220 of the Code of
the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania, and all subsequent amendments
thereto.
§ 149-4. Prohibited acts; violations.
A. Noise disturbance prohibited. In addition to the specific prohibitions
outlined in this chapter, no person shall make, continue or cause to be
made or continued any noise disturbance, nor shall any person suffer,
allow or permit any noise disturbance to be made or continued from or
at any property, whether real or personal, that is subject to such
person's right to control.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following acts, and the causing thereof, are
declared to be noise disturbances and are therefore in violation of this
chapter:
(1) Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, automobile radio, automobile stereo, high-fidelity
equipment or similar device which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound:
(a) At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a property line (boundary), or between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance.
(b) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
property line (boundary) or at 50 feet from such device,
whichever is less, when the device is operated in or on a motor
vehicle or hand carried on a public right-of-way or public
space.
(c) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any
person other than the operator of the device.
(2) Yelling and shouting, etc. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing:
(a) On the public streets between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
(b) At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:329
(3) Construction.
(a) Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction operations, drilling or
demolition work:
[1] Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day on weekdays and Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays
or legal holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a
noise disturbance across a residential real property line
(boundary), except for emergency work.
[2] At any other time, such that the sound level at or across a
real property line (boundary) exceeds 85 dB(A) for a
period of one hour.
(b) This subsection shall not apply to the use of domestic power
tools subject to § 149-4B(4) hereof.
(4) Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically-powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas (see § 149-5 hereof, Table I) between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. so as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary).
(5) Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential property line (boundary). This
subsection shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or
about the public right-of-way.
(6) Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling
any animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sound continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10
minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to
the disturbance of any person at any time of the day or night
regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated in or upon
private property; provided, however, that at the time the animal or
bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening
to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or
bird is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the animal or bird.
(7) Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across
a residential property line (boundary) between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 149-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-4
1:330
(8) Street sales. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by
any other amplified or unamplified sound within any residential or
commercial area (see § 149-5, Table I) except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and at no time in such a manner as to
violate § 149-5A.
(9) Tampering.
(a) The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other
than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of
any muffler or sound dissipative device or element of design or
noise level of any product.
(b) The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative
of any sound-monitoring instrument or device positioned by or
for the Bureau of Police, provided that such device or the
immediate area is clearly labeled in accordance with noise
control regulations, to warn of the potential illegality.
(c) The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound
dissipative device or element or design or noise level label
removed or rendered inoperative, with knowledge that such
action has occurred.
(10) Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or
aircraft in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line (boundary).
(11) Explosives, firearms and similar devices. Firing any explosives,
firearms or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to
create a noise disturbance across a residential property line or
commercial property line (boundary) or on a public space or rightof-
way.
(12) Air conditioners. Maintaining any refrigeration machinery or air
conditioning, consisting of air compressors or rotating or
reciprocating machinery, in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance across a residential property line (boundary).
C. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
(1) Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person
shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a vehicle,
on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the
sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, or any
equipment attached to such a vehicle, exceeds the level set forth in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Regulations Title 67,
Chapter 157, Subchapter b, 67 Pa. Code § 157.11.
§ 149-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:331
§ 149-5. Sound level by zoning districts.
(2) Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached
to such a vehicle, for a period longer than 15 minutes in any hour
while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion, anywhere within 150 feet of any residence in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
property line (boundary).
(3) Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the
horn or other warning device of a vehicle except when absolutely
necessary as a warning while actually driving such vehicle.
(4) Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound-amplifying equipment
mounted on or attached to any motor vehicle at any time in such a
manner as to exceed the maximum permissible motor vehicle noise
emissions as set forth herein.
(5) Motor/engine retarder devices. No person shall use a motor/engine
retarding device while operating a truck, tractor, motor carrier
vehicle, motor vehicle, or any other vehicle within the Borough of
Columbia. The prohibition against use of a motor/engine retarding
device shall not apply to an emergency vehicle, as defined in
Pennsylvania Title 75,73 when said emergency vehicle is actually
responding to an emergency call. [Added 8-12-2002 by Ord. No.
712]
D. Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid acts that
disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement as to the
times and durations of the noise and who reside in separate residences,
including apartments and condominiums, located across a property line
(boundary) from the property on which the source of the noise is
generated shall be prima facie evidence of a noise disturbance.
A. Maximum permissible sound levels by zoning districts. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the
zoning designations category in Table I hereof when measured at or
across the property line (boundary) from the noise source. Any sound
source that produces sound in excess of those levels shall constitute a
noise disturbance. [Amended 10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 706]
73.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 149-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-5
1:332
Table I
Sound Levels By Zoning Districts
Sound-Level Limit
[dB(A)]
Zoning District of Property
on Which Noise Source is Located
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
9:00 p.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
Residential (P, C, RR, LDR, MDR, HDR,
HDRM, INSR, MDRB)
57 52
Commercial (DC, LB, CR, NC, HC, RC) 67 62
Manufacturing (LI, GI) 77 77
B. When exceeded. The sound-level limits set forth in Subsection A, Table
I, hereof shall be exceeded when any one or more of the following
occurs:
(1) The sound at any one point in time exceeds any of the established
zone limits in Subsection A, Table I, hereof by a measured sound
level of 15 dB(A).
(2) The sound exceeds any of the established zone limits in Subsection
A, Table I, hereof by a measured sound level of 10 dB(A) for a
cumulative total of one minute or more out of any ten-minute
period.
(3) The sound exceeds, except in the Manufacturing District, any of the
established zone limits in Subsection A, Table I, hereof by a
measured sound level of three dB(A) continually for a period of five
minutes, or a total of five minutes out of any ten-minute period.
C. Ambient sound. In the event that the background ambient sound levels
in an area of suspected noise disturbance exceed the levels set forth in
Subsection A, Table I, hereof, the sound level of the intrusive sound
source shall be measured with the ambient background sound level
being substituted as the Table I sound-level limit.
D. Where measured. For the purposes of this section, sound shall be
measured at or beyond the property line (boundary) of the property on
which the noise source is located.
E. Pure tone and impulsive sound. For any source of sound which emits a
pure tone or impulsive sound, the limits set forth in Subsection A, Table
I, hereof shall be reduced by five dB(A).
F. Adjustment for nonconforming uses. Any noise which occurs on
property which, according to Chapter 220, Zoning, is being used in a
legally nonconforming manner, and which noise relates to such use,
shall be judged as if the property bore a zoning designation under
which the use would be conforming.
§ 149-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-5
1:333
§ 149-6. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
G. Measuring instruments. All sound measurements shall be made on a
sound-level meter calibrated in the manner required by the
manufacturer's specifications.
H. Exemptions from sound-level limits. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to:
(1) Activities covered by § 149-4B(3) and (4) or any emergency
signaling device used because of an emergency.
(2) Interstate railway locomotives and cars.
(3) Motor vehicles.
A. Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at
athletic events.
B. Blasting. Blasting and demolition as permitted by appropriate Borough
authorities and bodies, which blasting and demolition may occur only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
unless specifically authorized by such permit.
C. Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors, provided that:
(1) Such activities do not produce sound 15 dB(A) in excess of the
sound levels set forth in § 149-5A, Table I; and
(2) Such activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
D. Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency
work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
E. Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the
public right-of-way.
F. School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related programs, activities, athletic and
entertainment events or other public programs, activities or events,
other than fireworks or fireworks displays and motor vehicle racing
events.
(1) Any person responsible for any activity or event involving fireworks
or fireworks displays shall apply with the Bureau of Police for an
application for a special variance from noise control in accordance
with § 149-7B, prior to applying for a fireworks permit.
§ 149-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-6
1:334
§ 149-7. Variances; Noise Control Board; application and fee.
(2) Any person involved in any motor vehicle racing event shall apply
for a special variance from noise control with the Bureau of Police.
G. Warning devices. Sounds made by warning devices operating
continuously for three minutes or less, except that in the event of an
actual emergency the time limitation shall not apply.
A. Variances.
(1) Authority. The Noise Control Board shall have the authority to
grant variances, consistent with the provisions of this section, after
public hearing, upon application of any person who owns, controls
or operates any sound source which does not comply with the
provisions or standards of this chapter.
(2) Application. The application shall state the standard, provision or
section from which the variance is being sought and the period of
time and reasons for which the variance is sought. It shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the sources of sound
or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with
this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the
applicant, and it shall contain any other supporting information
which may reasonably be required.
(3) Public notification. Public notice of an application and the date,
time and place of the public hearing to be held thereon for a
variance shall be given by publishing notice thereof in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough at least once, not less than
three days prior to the scheduled public hearing and by, if
practicable, conspicuously posting the premises that is the source
of the sound for which the variance is sought.
(4) Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing to decide variance
applications presented to it. Any person who claims to be affected
by allowance of the variance may become a party to the hearing.
(5) Review standards. In determining whether to grant or deny the
application, the Board shall balance the hardship to the applicant
versus the adverse impact to the public health, safety and welfare
and shall consider, at a minimum, the following conditions:
(a) The physical characteristics of the emitted sound.
(b) The times and duration of the emitted sound.
(c) The geography, zone and population density of the affected
area.
(d) Whether the public health and safety is endangered.
(e) Whether the sound source predates the receiver(s).
§ 149-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-7
1:335
§ 149-8. Enforcement.
(f) Whether compliance with the standard(s) from which the
variance is sought would produce hardship without equal or
greater benefit to the public.
(6) Decision. The Board shall render a written decision in granting or
denying the application for variance and, if denied, shall state the
reasons therefor. The Board's decision shall be made available to
the applicant and any other person who requests it in writing. In
granting a variance the Board may attach reasonable conditions,
including but not limited to placing a time limit on the permitted
activity and/or establishing a time schedule within which the
source of sound or activity for which the variance was sought must
be brought into compliance with this chapter. Where the grant of a
variance is conditioned, the variance shall not become effective
until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance
with any condition of the variance shall terminate it and subject the
person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the
source of sound or activity for which the variance was granted.
Variances may be granted for a period of up to one year. The person
obtaining the variance may reapply for additional variance periods
under terms set forth by the applicant and the Board.
(7) Appeals. Appeal from an adverse decision of the Board shall be
made to the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County.
B. Special variances. The Chief of the Bureau of Police or his designee
may, upon application, and guided by the standards for review set forth
in § 149-7A(5) hereof, grant special variances for infrequent events or
activities which do not exceed 24 hours in duration. Such special
variances are not renewable except by action of the Board pursuant to
§ 149-7A hereof. The Board shall hear and decide all appeals from the
denial of a special variance, the practice and procedure thereon to be in
accordance with § 149-7A hereof.
C. Noise Control Board. The Noise Control Board, for the purposes of this
chapter, shall be the Zoning Hearing Board, which Board shall have full
authority to carry out the duties of the Noise Control Board, as set forth
in this chapter. All applications to the Board shall be filed through the
Zoning Officer and shall be accomplished by an application fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. The hearing
shall be held not more than 30 days following the filing of the
application and the decision thereon rendered within 45 days of the last
hearing in the case before the Board.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Bureau of Police.
B. Any Borough of Columbia law enforcement officer, in addition to any
other authority vested in him, has the power, upon presentation of
credentials, to enter and inspect any dwelling, multifamily dwelling,
§ 149-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 149-8
1:336
§ 149-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 149-10. Notice.
The Borough of Columbia Secretary/Treasurer shall provide notice of this
chapter by having copies of this chapter posted in, on or about such public
or quasi-public places as may be determined by the Mayor, Borough Council
and the Police Department in order that the public may be constantly
informed of the Noise Ordinance.
§ 149-11. Cumulative nature of ordinance.
This chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other laws in force.
Chapter 153
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Attorney's fees — See Ch. 116, Art. I Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
building, structure or premises within the Borough of Columbia as may
be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, provided that
permission is obtained from the occupant or, in the case of unoccupied
property, from the owner or his agent. If such permission is refused, a
search warrant must be obtained, upon the showing of probable cause
to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist, before such entry
or inspection is made.
C. Any Borough of Columbia law enforcement officer, in addition to any
other authority vested in him, may stop any motor vehicle, motorcycle
or motorboat operated on a public right-of-way, public space or public
waterway reasonably suspected of violating this chapter and issue a
notice of violation or abatement order which may require the motor
vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat to be inspected or tested.
A. Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined not more than $1,000 for
each offense, plus costs of prosecution, to be collected as other fines
and costs are by law collectible, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day during
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the Borough of Columbia or any person to such
equitable or other remedies as may otherwise be available with or
without process of law.
§ 149-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:337
§ 153-1. Purpose/Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Columbia through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4") in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
("NPDES") permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 153-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
Borough of Columbia designated to enforce this chapter, including without
limitation the Borough Manager or his designees.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of five acres or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof which, because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system; and
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
§ 153-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 153-2
1:338
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system except as exempted in § 153-9 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following: (i) any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain
system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and wash
water, to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless or whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency or; (ii) any drain or conveyance connected
from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which
has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR § 122.26 (b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") [or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1312(b)] that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis,
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.
§ 153-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-2
1:339
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 153-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 153-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Borough Manager or his designees shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in
writing by the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the authorized enforcement
agency.
§ 153-5. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards. Therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 153-6. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
§ 153-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 153-6
1:340
§ 153-7. Suspension of MS4 access.
systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated,
typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire-fighting activities and
any other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time
of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drain system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such
a connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or
welfare of persons or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
§ 153-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7
1:341
§ 153-8. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 153-9. Monitoring of discharges.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must
be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(3) The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up
on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
§ 153-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 153-9
1:342
§ 153-10. Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices.
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying
best management practices for any activity, operation or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement
agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator
of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
(7) If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and
he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the authorized
enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 153-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:343
§ 153-11. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 153-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 153-13. Enforcement; notice of violation.
A. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter,
the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
§ 153-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 153-13
1:344
§ 153-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within 20 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the Borough Council or its designee shall take place at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of Borough Council following receipt of
the notice of appeal. The decision of the Borough Council or its designee
shall be final.
§ 153-15. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10
days of the decision of the Borough Council upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 153-16. Cost of abatement of the violation.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
A. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest
objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the amount
due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of
the Borough Manager or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and may be entered as a lien on the property for the amount of
the assessment in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania law.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Borough of Columbia by reason of such violation. The
liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at
§ 153-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-16
1:345
§ 153-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation. Any such person against whom such an injunction is issued shall
be responsible for paying all costs of the authorized enforcement agency in
obtaining and enforcing such injunction, including the agency's attorney's
fees.
§ 153-18. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized
by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 153-19. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken, with all costs thereof,
including attorney's fees of the authorized enforcement agency, to be borne
by the violator.
§ 153-20. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $600 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days.
§ 153-21. Costs.
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, from persons upon whom
enforcement action is taken or directed.
the rate of 6% per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning
on the second day following discovery of the violation.
§ 153-16 COLUMBIA CODE § 153-22
1:346
§ 153-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
Chapter 158
PAWNBROKERS, ANTIQUE DEALERS AND SECONDHAND
GOODS DEALERS
§ 158-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Pawnbrokers, Antique and Second-
Hand Dealers Ordinance of the Borough of Columbia."
§ 158-2. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number,
words in the singular number include the plural number, and words of
the masculine gender shall include the feminine. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have meanings
indicated:
ANTIQUE DEALER or SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person who
either wholly or in part engages in or operates the trade or business
of buying and/or selling used goods or secondhand goods such as
antiques, precious stones, metals, jewelry, any tools, any electrical
devices, fixtures, appliances, household goods, firearms and bric-abrac.
The foregoing enumeration of articles, goods and properties shall
not be deemed to be exclusive or all-inclusive.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS — All kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and
matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and
appurtenances used therein, which are conducted for profit, or benefit,
directly or indirectly, on any premises in the Borough.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia.
LICENSE OFFICER — The Borough Manager, his designee(s) or such
other enforcement officers as may be appointed by the Borough
Manager or Borough Council.
§ 153-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-2
1:347
LICENSE or LICENSEE — Includes respectively the words "permit" or
"permittee" where the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other
law or ordinance.
PAWNBROKER — Includes any person who:
PERSON — Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, limited-liability
companies or corporations; or any officers, agents, employees, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any of the above, in any
capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other person, under either
personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as
security for a loan in the course of his business as a pawnbroker.
PLEDGOR — The person who obtains a loan from a pawnbroker and
delivers a pledge into the possession of a pawnbroker, unless such
person discloses that he is or was acting for another, in which case a
"pledgor" means the disclosed principal.
POLICE — The sworn police personnel of the Borough of Columbia.
PREMISES — All lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also
any personal property which is either affixed to, or as otherwise used in
connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
SECONDHAND ARTICLES OR GOODS — Are any articles or goods
that are purchased, salvaged or received from any person, association,
copartnership, corporation, trust or limited-liability company. The items
dealt with by an antique dealer or a secondhand dealer shall not be
deemed to include:
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge
of personal property other than choses in action, securities or
written evidence of indebtedness;
(1)
Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied
agreement or understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at
a stipulated price; or
(2)
Lends money upon goods wears or merchandise pledged, stored or
deposited as collateral security.
(3)
Judicial sales or sales or purchases by or from executors or
administrators in conjunction with the settlement of an estate;
(1)
Sales of unredeemed pledges by or on behalf of licensed
pawnbrokers in the manner prescribed by law;
(2)
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
(3)
§ 158-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-2
1:348
§ 158-3. Application of regulations.
§ 158-4. Authority of License Officer.
(4) Auctions of real estate;
(5) The buying or selling of printed or recorded material; or
The taking in trade by a business of an item of a like kind to items
which such businesses sell as the principal or substantial part of
their business.
(6)
A. Compliance required. No person, either directly or indirectly, shall
conduct any business or use in connection therewith any vehicle,
premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a license or
permit is required by this chapter without a license or permit therefor
being first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by
this chapter or other law or ordinance of the Borough. A person
conducting any business which involves either wholly or in part a
combination of one or more of the types of business activities regulated
hereunder shall be required to obtain a separate license for each type of
business conducted and shall comply with all requirements and
regulations for each type of business; provided, however, that such
person shall pay only one license fee, which shall be the fee to the
business having the highest fee.
B. Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other
representatives of nonresidence who are doing business in the Borough
shall be personally responsible for the compliance with this chapter of
their principals and of the businesses they represent.
A. Issue licenses. The License Officer shall collect all license fees imposed
hereunder and shall issue licenses in the name of the Borough to all
persons qualified under the provision of this chapter and shall:
(1) Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and
regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this
chapter.
(2) Adopt forms. Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be
given therein.
(3) Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and
notes necessary to the administration of the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Obtain endorsement. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to
appropriate Borough officials for their endorsements thereon as to
compliance by the applicant with all Borough regulations which
they have the duty of enforcing.
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:349
§ 158-5. Qualifications of applicants.
The general standards herein set forth relative to the qualifications of every
applicant for a Borough license under this chapter shall be applied by the
License Officer.
§ 158-6. Procedure for license issuance; fee.
(5) Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any
applicant for a license.
(6) Examine records. Examine the books and records related to
information required to be kept or maintained by this chapter of
any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(7) Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of
his application and shall, upon refusal of any license or permit, at
the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and
deliver them to the applicant.
(8) Enforcement powers. Take all action necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to institution of
summary criminal proceedings, filing civil or equitable actions,
revocation of licenses and any other appropriate legal action.
B. Information confidential. The License Officer, to the extent permitted by
Pennsylvania law, shall keep all information furnished or secured under
the authority of this chapter in strict confidence, excepting names and
addresses of licensees. Except as otherwise provided by Pennsylvania
law, such information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall
be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to
the person who is charged with the administration of this chapter.
A. Good moral character. Each shall be of good moral character. In making
such determination, the License Officer shall consider only:
(1) Penal history. All convictions for crimes and moral turpitude.
(2) License history. The license history of the applicant; whether such
person, in previously operating in this or another state under a
license had such a license revoked or suspended and the reasons
therefor.
B. No obligations to the Borough. Each applicant shall be in default under
the provisions of this chapter if indebted or obligated in any manner to
the Borough except for current taxes.
C. Compliance with building and zoning laws. The applicant shall certify to
his knowledge that he is not in violation of the building or zoning laws of
the Borough.
§ 158-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-6
1:350
§ 158-7. Determination of fee.
License fees shall be in the amounts established hereafter as may be
modified from time to time by resolution of Council.
A. Formal application required. Every person required to procure a license
under the provisions of this chapter shall submit an application to the
License Officer which shall:
(1) Be a written statement upon forms provided by the License Officer;
such forms shall include a sworn affidavit that the information
furnished is true and correct. Furnishing false certifications or
false or intentionally misleading information shall be grounds for
denial or revocation of the license or other legal action hereunder
by the License Officer.
(2) Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance
with § 158-5 of this chapter and of any other information which the
License Officer finds to be reasonably necessary for the fair
administration of this chapter.
(3) Be accompanied by the full amount of the fee chargeable for such
license.
B. Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time
the application for the same is made, the License Officer shall issue a
receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance subject to the
condition that such receipt should not be construed as the approval of
the License Officer for the issuance of a license; nor shall it entitle or
authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to
provisions of this chapter.
C. Duplicate license procedure. A duplicate license shall be issued by the
License Officer to replace any license previously issued, which has been
lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the
part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn
to before a notary public of this state attesting to such fact and the
paying to the License Officer of a fee of $5. This fee may be changed
from time to time by resolution of Council.
D. Issuance of license. If the License Officer is satisfied that the applicant
has met all requirements of this chapter, the license shall be issued to
the applicant. If the License Officer determines that the requirements
of this chapter have not been met, he shall disapprove the application
and refund all fees paid in advance from which disapproval the
applicant shall have the right to appeal to Council in the manner
hereinafter provided.
A. Adjustment of fee. The License Officer shall require an increase in fee
when the status of a licensee changes to place him in a classification
imposing such increase in fee.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-7
1:351
§ 158-8. Contents of license.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face:
§ 158-9. Duties of licensee: fees.
B. Rebate of fee. No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof
shall be made for any reason except if such license fee was collected
through an error.
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such
business is to be conducted.
B. The kind and address of each business so licensed.
C. The amount of license fee therefor.
D. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
E. Such other information as the License Officer shall determine.
A. General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this chapter shall:
(1) Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business
and examinations of his books containing information required to
be kept or maintained by this chapter by public authorities so
authorized by law.
(2) Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with
all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed business.
(3) Operate properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary
practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare.
(4) Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed business on
premises after expiration of the license and during any period the
license is revoked or suspended.
B. Display of license. Every licensee under this chapter shall:
(1) Premises. Post and maintain such license upon the licensed
premises in a place where it may be seen at all times.
(2) Inoperative licenses. Not allow any license or insignia to remain
posted, displayed or used after the period for which it was issued
has expired or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any
reason becomes ineffective. The licensee shall promptly return
such inoperative license to the License Officer.
(3) Unlawful possession. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other
person or allow any other person to use or display or to destroy,
damage, or remove or to have in its possession except as
§ 158-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-9
1:352
§ 158-10. Transfer of license prohibited.
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another person.
§ 158-11. Refusal to issue license; suspension or revocation.
authorized by the License Officer or by law, any license which has
been issued to such licensee.
C. New location desired. A licensee shall have the right to change location
of the licensed business, provided, that he shall:
(1) Obtain written permission from the License Officer for such change
of location; and
(2) Pay a removal fee of $5 to the License Officer, which fee may be
changed from time to time by resolution of Council.
D. Records kept. Keep all records and books to provide the information
required by this chapter and necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter.
A. Council shall hear all appeals from the decision of the License Officer
disapproving an application for a license. The Borough Council may,
upon recommendation of the License Officer, refuse to renew, suspend
or revoke a license of any applicant or licensee based upon one or more
of the following reasons:
(1) The practice of any fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation or
furnishing false information in obtaining or attempting to obtain a
license.
(2) The practice of fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or furnishing false
information in the course of carrying on the licensed business.
(3) The conviction of any of the enumerated crimes set forth in sections
of this chapter for the particular business license involved.
(4) Violation of or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or
orders of the License Officer issued under the authority of this
chapter.
(5) Loaning, borrowing or using the license of another, or of knowingly
aiding or abetting in any way the granting of improper licenses.
(6) The doing of any act or engaging in any contact in the course of the
business which demonstrates incompetency, bad faith or
dishonesty or substantially adversely affects the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
B. Before Council acts upon any recommendation of the License Officer
refusing to renew, suspending or revoking any license, the License
Officer shall notify the applicant or licensee of the charges against him
§ 158-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-11
1:353
§ 158-12. Appeals; fee.
In addition to its duty to take any action upon the recommendation of the
License Officer in refusing, suspending or revoking any license, Council
shall hear all appeals from persons aggrieved by any decision or order
of the License Officer, except the decision to file summary enforcement
proceedings with the Magisterial District Judge, when it is alleged that the
decision or order complained of is not authorized by this chapter or directs
a method of compliance which imposes an unreasonable burden upon the
licensee without good cause. In such cases, Council shall have the authority,
in a proper case, to change, modify or rescind any decision or order of
the License Officer or to extend the time for compliance. All appeals to
Council from decisions or orders of the License Officer shall be filed with
the License Officer within 10 days of the date of the decision or order
complained of. The appeal shall be in writing, shall specify the grounds
therefor and the relief requested and shall be accompanied by an appeal
fee of $50, which fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of
Council. Upon receipt of an appeal, a hearing shall be held upon not less
than 10 days written notice to the licensee.
§ 158-13. Enforcement.
and shall afford the applicant or licensee ample opportunity to be heard
thereon in person or by Council. The notice shall be in writing and be
served by certified mail, addressed to the applicant or licensee at the
address appearing in the application for the license or on the issued
license and shall notify the applicant or licensee of his right to a hearing
before Council. The applicant or licensee shall have a period of 30 days
from the date of service of the notice, which shall be the date of the
mailing, to request a hearing before the Council, which hearing shall,
if requested, be fixed upon not less than 10 days written notice to the
applicant or licensee. If no hearing before the Council is requested, it
shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant or licensee concurs
in the recommendation of the License Officer and the Council shall take
the action recommended by the License Officer without necessity for
any further proceedings.
A. Inspections. The following persons are authorized to conduct
inspections in the manner prescribed herein:
(1) License Officer. The License Officer shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Officials having duties. The License Officer shall have the authority
to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises
by the police and all Borough officials having duties to perform with
reference to such licensees or businesses.
B. Authority of inspectors. All inspectors shall have the authority to enter
premises of any provision of this chapter. The License Officer shall,
when acting within the scope of his employment, hereunder have the
§ 158-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-13
1:354
§ 158-14. Liability for unlawful premises use.
Where a person allows another person who has not procured a license
to use his premises for an activity requiring a license under this chapter,
such person who allows his premises to be used shall be held liable for
any applicable fees required herein and shall be deemed in violation of the
provisions hereof.
§ 158-15. Pawnbrokers.
powers of a police officer of the Borough; provided, however, that under
no circumstances shall the License Officer have the power of arrest.
Persons inspecting licenses, their businesses or premises, as herein
authorized shall report all violations of this chapter or other laws or
ordinances to the License Officer and shall submit such other reports
as the License Officer shall order.
C. Enforcement duties of License Officer.
(1) When the License Officer determines that there exists any violation
of this chapter, he shall, at his option:
(a) Issue and serve upon the violator a notice of violation, which
notice shall be in writing, shall specify the violation and shall
contain an order directing correction of the violation within a
specified time to be not less than 10 days from the date of the
notice. Any person aggrieved by such notice shall have the
right to appeal as set forth in this chapter.
(b) Institute and prosecute summary enforcement proceedings
before a Magisterial District Judge; and/or
(c) Initiate before Council in the manner specified above
proceedings to suspend or revoke the license of the violator.
(2) The License Officer shall be authorized to take any or all of the
above enforcement actions in any given case as are deemed
necessary in his opinion for proper administration and enforcement
of this chapter, and his right to take any particular enforcement
action shall not be limited by reason of the fact that he has also
taken a different action in the same case.
A. License required. No person shall use, exercise or carry on the trade or
business of a pawnbroker within the Borough without first obtaining a
license from the License Officer. A pawnbroker's license term is from
October 1 to September 30 of each year.
B. Records. Each pawnbroker shall keep a book legibly written in the
English language in which shall be recorded:
(1) A full and accurate description of all articles purchased or left in
pawn with him.
§ 158-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-15
1:355
§ 158-16. Antique or secondhand dealers.
(2) The date and time of pledging, pawning or purchasing the same.
(3) The date and time which such pawned or pledged article is to be
redeemed.
(4) The amount of money lender paid therefor.
(5) The description of the person or persons, including such person's
name, age and address making a pledge.
C. Report to police. All pawnbrokers shall, before 12:00 noon of every
Monday report to the Bureau of Police a description of all articles so
received in the course of their pawnbroking business during the
business week immediately previous, together with the number of
ticket or tickets and description of the person or persons making such
sale, including such person's name, age and address. Forms for this
purpose shall be provided by the Bureau of Police.
D. Information to be given to pledgor. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time
of making or receiving any article in pawn, deliver to the pledgor a
memorandum signed by him containing:
(1) The date.
(2) The amount of the loan.
(3) The rate of interest and storage charges.
(4) The time within which the article is to be redeemed.
(5) A description of the article pledged.
E. Forbidden transactions. A pawnbroker shall not accept a pledge from a
person under the age of 18 years nor from any intoxicated person or
any known thieves.
F. Conviction of certain crimes. If any pawnbroker is convicted of robbery,
burglary, theft or receiving stolen goods or any other crime involving
the unlawful obtaining of personal property, Council shall, after notice
and hearing, revoke his license.
G. Fee. The fee for the issuance of a pawnbroker's license shall be $25,
which fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of Council.
A. License required.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection A(2) hereof, no person shall
engage in the business of being an antique or secondhand dealer
without procuring a license from the License Officer. An antique or
secondhand dealer's license term is from October 1 to September
30 of each year.
§ 158-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-16
1:356
(2) No person shall be required to obtain a license under this
subsection who engages in isolated or occasional purchases or
sales of those items detailed in the definition of antique dealers or
secondhand articles or goods set forth in § 158-2 hereof, provided
that such person maintains no place of business within the
Borough, engages in no promotion or advertising and can prove by
appropriate records that total sales of the previous year did not
exceed $1,500.
(3) Notwithstanding any provisions herein contained, no person
engaged in a business licensed or regulated hereunder shall be
required to comply with any provisions of this chapter in order to
participate in an organized antique or art show or exhibit.
B. Records. Each antique or secondhand dealer shall keep a book legibly
written in the English language at the time of acquiring articles in the
course of business, which book shall give:
(1) An accurate description, including brand names, model number,
serial number, inscribed initials, dates, names and any other forms
of identification, of the article purchased, salvaged or received; and
(2) The name, age, description, address, of person selling, transferring
or trading in the same.
C. Reports to police. Every antique or secondhand dealer shall furnish the
information specified in Subsection B above by 12:00 noon Monday for
the previous week to the Bureau of Police. The Bureau of Police shall
furnish forms for this purpose. The report shall not include:
(1) Names and investors of collectors personally known to the dealer.
(Where this exclusion is claimed, the report shall contain the
legend: "Known Investor" or "Known Collector");
(2) Any information on transactions by a person seeking a trade-in or
allowance on goods or items originally sold by the dealer to the
person seeking such trade-in or allowance;
(3) Any information on transactions involving a trade-in on a like item;
or
(4) Information regarding dealer-to-dealer transactions.
D. Nothing contained in Subsection C regarding exceptions, shall excuse
the maintenance of information records required to be kept by
Subsection B hereof.
E. Retention of purchased articles.
(1) No antique or secondhand dealer shall sell or dispose of in any way
any of the following secondhand articles or goods: antiques,
precious stones, jewelry, watches, gold, platinum, silver or other
precious metals, or any of similar articles or things, until seven
§ 158-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-16
1:357
§ 158-17. Licensing of existing businesses.
All existing businesses required to be licensed hereunder shall apply for a
license within three months from the passage of this chapter, and all such
applicants shall be charged a fee applicable to their license which license
shall thereafter be renewed in accordance with this chapter upon payment
of the specified fee and fulfillment of all other requirements hereunder.
§ 158-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any final order of
the License Officer or Council issued pursuant to authority of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $600, shall pay the cost of prosecution or, in default
of payment, undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day
during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. As
used in this section, the term "person" shall have the meaning set forth in
§ 158-2 above.
days have elapsed after the purchase of the same or until 48 hours
from the time of furnishing to the police a form containing the
information on such articles as required by Subsection C hereof.
(2) It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or
administrative proceeding brought for a violation of this subsection
that, in the case of precious metals, retention for the time period
required would have resulted in serious and substantial economic
losses to the dealer, or the possibility of such losses was significant
due to rapid and highly fluctuating market conditions, provided
that the person so charged shall prove the existence of the market
conditions giving rise to the aforesaid defense by a preponderance
of the evidence. Market conditions, in order to be a defense
hereunder, shall be such that financial analyst would characterize
trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence in an
atmosphere of panic so as to clearly distinguish trading conditions
from normal variations in market movement in response to
economic news or other events.
F. Forbidden transactions. No antique or secondhand dealer shall
purchase any article from any person under the age of 18 or from any
intoxicated person or from a known thief or thieves.
G. Conviction of certain crimes. If any antique or secondhand dealer shall
be convicted of robbery, burglary, theft, receiving stolen goods or any
other crime involving the unlawful obtaining of personal property,
Council shall, after notice and hearing, revoke his license.
H. Fee. The fee for issuance of an antique or secondhand dealer's license
shall be $25, which fee may be modified from time to time by resolution
of Council.
§ 158-16 COLUMBIA CODE § 158-18
1:358
Chapter 166
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 112, Art. II.
§ 158-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-18
1:359

ARTICLE I
Lead Paint Safe Report
[Adopted 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 906]
§ 166-1. Purpose.
§ 166-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CERTIFIED LEAD-BASED-PAINT RISK ASSESSOR — An individual who is
certified by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform on-site investigations to identify
the existence, nature, severity and location of lead-based-paint hazards and
document the findings in order to recommend corrective measures.
CERTIFIED LEAD-SAFE CONTRACTOR — An individual who successfully
completed an EPA eight-hour class titled "Renovator Under the Renovate,
Repair and Painting Rule," also known as the "RRP Rule." The company that
the renovator owns or works for must also be certified as a "firm" under the
RRP Rule.
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY (also known as a CHILD-CARE FACILITY) —
Any dwelling unit where child day-care services are provided for less than
24 hours for four to 12 children for a fee as approved by the Borough of
Columbia and licensed by the State Department of Public Welfare.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia determines that it is
necessary to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare
of residents of the Borough of Columbia through the identification and
elimination of lead source hazards; and
B. The Borough of Columbia currently maintains a licensing and
inspection program for residential rental units; and
C. Pursuant to the existing codes and ordinances of the Borough of
Columbia, the Borough currently inspects and issues certificates of
occupancy for day-care centers and child day-care facilities; and
D. Under the existing codes and ordinances of the Borough of Columbia,
various inspections and reports are required prior to any notices of
condemnation being removed for dwellings which were condemned as
being unfit for human habitation; and
E. With respect to any of the foregoing properties built prior to 1978, the
Borough deems it necessary to receive lead paint safe inspection
reports by a certified Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor prior to issuing
rental housing licenses or certificates of occupancy and prior to
removing condemnation placards.
§ 166-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:361
CONDEMNED PROPERTY — Any structure that is found to be unsafe or
dangerous to the life, health or safety of the public or the occupants thereof
and deemed to be unfit for habitation and condemned by an authorized
employee of the Borough of Columbia under Borough ordinances.
Condemned property shall not include a property which has been closed
for human occupancy due to utility shutoffs or where appliances need to be
replaced with no renovations required to any interior surface.
DAY-CARE CENTER (also known as CHILD-CARE CENTER) — A building
or area within a building licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
where child care is provided, for a fee, for seven or more children in a space
where child care is provided and is not part of a dwelling.
DWELLING — A two-family, multifamily, single-family attached, singlefamily
detached or single-family semi-detached dwelling as defined in the
Borough of Columbia's Zoning Ordinance74 composed of a building designed
for use as a residence.
LEAD (PAINT) SAFE — A building or dwelling unit identified through testing
by a certified Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor as having lead-paint surfaces
that are intact and free from deterioration. As noted in the lead-safe
certification by the Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor, ongoing lead-safe
maintenance may be necessary to maintain the property in a lead-paint safe
condition.
LEAD (PAINT) SAFE REPORT — A report issued by a certified Lead-Based-
Paint Risk Assessor indicating that the referenced building or dwelling unit
identified through testing by a licensed Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor, has
lead paint surfaces that are intact and free from deterioration or is free from
lead paint.
LEAD-SAFE CERTIFICATION — A form provided to the Borough of
Columbia from a licensed Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor certifying that a
visual inspection and dust-wipe samples have been taken from a dwelling
or dwelling unit and stating that it does not have visible deteriorated paint
and that interior dust-wipe samples were collected in compliance with EPA
regulations, were tested, and were found to not contain lead-contaminated
dust in excess of EPA dust level standards.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS — Residential rental units as set forth in
§ 112-6D(2) of the Code of the Borough of Columbia.
STRUCTURES — As used herein, the structures subject to this article are
residential rental units constructed prior to 1978, day-care centers, child
day-care facilities, and dwellings constructed prior to 1978 which meet the
definition of "Condemned Properties" herein.
§ 166-3. Lead (paint) safe reports required.
With respect to structures which are the subject of this article and as
defined above, in the following situations, owners of such structures shall
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Zoning.
§ 166-2 COLUMBIA CODE § 166-3
1:362
be required to provide a lead (paint) safe report to the Codes Department
of the Borough of Columbia:
§ 166-4. Issuance of reports; remediation; responsibility of owner.
All clear lead (paint) safe reports are to be issued by a certified Lead-
Based-Paint Risk Assessor. If remediation is required to receive a clear
lead (paint) safe report, it is the property owner's responsibility to engage
a state-certified lead paint assessment/remediation company to remediate
any substandard findings. All lead paint safe inspections are the
responsibility of the property owner, and all clear lead (paint) safe reports
and findings become the liability of the issuing state-certified lead-safe
contractor. In the instance that any lead (paint) safe report provides that
future inspections will be needed to assess future deterioration, or after
a period of five years from the date of the previous lead (paint) safe
report, the owner shall be required to file with the Codes Department
of the Borough of Columbia additional lead (paint) safe reports issued
by a certified Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor indicating that the property
remains lead (paint) safe. The Borough of Columbia assumes no
responsibility or liability for any inaccurate or incomplete findings and has
no obligation to independently inspect or verify the findings.
§ 166-5. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article
shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts of this
article; it being the intent of the Borough of Columbia that the remainder of
this article shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
A. With respect to structures which are subject to licensing and/or
registration with the Borough of Columbia as residential rental units,
with the application for licensing (or renewal if already licensed at the
time of adoption of this article). The Borough shall not issue the rental
registration license or renewal thereof unless it has received the lead
(paint) safe report issued by a Certified Lead-Based-Paint Risk Assessor
for the structure.
B. With respect to a condemned property, prior to authorizing and/or
removing any condemnation placard.
C. With respect to child day-care facilities and day-care centers, prior to
the issuance of the next required certificate of occupancy (following
inspection by the Borough in accordance with Borough ordinances) by
the Borough of Columbia for such structure. For child day-care facilities
and day-care centers, the report shall state that the property is in
compliance with applicable federal and state laws related to lead paint.
This provision shall not place any duty on the owner or operator of such
child day-care facility or day-care center to meet lead paint levels
greater than those imposed by state or federal law.
§ 166-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:363
Chapter 173
SEWERS AND SEWERAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Health and Sanitation — See Ch. 126.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
Columbia Municipal Authority — See Ch.
A224.
§ 166-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 166-5
1:364
PREAMBLE
[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No 878]
On May 27, 2015, the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority ("LASA") purchased
Columbia Municipal Authority and the Borough's wastewater collection and
transportation system assets. In accordance with that transaction, the Rules
and Regulations of LASA (as amended, the "LASA Rules and Regulations")
are incorporated by reference into this Chapter 173 and attached hereto
as Appendix A.75 If there is any conflict between the LASA Rules and
Regulations and this Chapter 173 or with any other provision of the Borough
Code, then the LASA Rules and Regulations shall control and supersede
such conflicting provision. If there is any dispute over whether such a
conflict exists and how it is resolved, the opinion of the Executive Director
of LASA shall be final and binding on LASA, the Borough and any third party.
Notwithstanding the preceding Subsection, the incorporation of Chapter
60, Industrial Waste, and Chapter 165, Trucked Waste, is incorporated
herein contemporaneously with the point in time that LASA notifies the
Borough that the "startup of the transportation facilities" has occurred (as
such term is defined in the Bulk Treatment During Construction Service
Agreement dated May 27, 2015, between the Borough and LASA).
75.Editor's Note: A copy of the LASA Rules and Regulations is on file in the Borough offices.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:365

ARTICLE I
Sewer Inspector and Sewer Permits
[Adopted 8-18-1933; amended in its entirety 8-13-1979 by Ord. No.
557 (Ch. 70, Art. I, of the 1971 Code)]
§ 173-1. Sewer Inspector.
The Sewer Inspector shall be the Superintendent of the Borough's
municipal sewer system or an authorized Borough employee working under
the supervision of said Superintendent. He shall perform the duties as
herein set forth and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 173-2. Sewage Enforcement Officer. [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 86576]
The Sewage Enforcement Officer or Officers are the Municipal officials of
the Borough of Columbia charged approving permits to construct private
sewage disposal units and, officials, representatives and employees of the
Lancaster Area Sewer Authority.
§ 173-3. Permit required for connection to municipal system; fee;
endorsement.
§ 173-4. Permit required for reconnection, repair, maintenance,
alteration, extension or upgrading; fee. [Added 10-9-1989 by Ord.
No. 617]
A. No building or premises shall be connected with the Borough's
municipal sewer system until and unless a permit for such connection
shall be obtained from the Secretary/Treasurer of the Council.
B. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council per
equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall be paid by the applicant for each
permit granted. [Amended 12-29-1983 by Ord. No. 584; 10-9-1989
by Ord. No. 617]
C. The Sewer Inspector shall endorse on such permit the distances and
dimensions locating the sewers and the Y- or T-branch in the sewer
nearest the desired point of connection.
A. No building or premises which shall have been disconnected from the
Borough's municipal sewer system shall be again connected with the
Borough's municipal sewer system until and unless a permit for such
reconnection shall be obtained from the Secretary/Treasurer of the
Council. No repair, maintenance, alteration, extension or upgrading
shall be performed affecting the connection of any building or premises
76.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also transferred the functions and powers of the Borough of
Columbia as to the implementation and enforcement of regulations pertaining to the
collection and transportation of wastewater to the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority and
designated and appointed the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority as the Council’s agent for
purposes of implementation and enforcement.
§ 173-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-4
1:367
§ 173-5. Permit required for private disposal unit procedure; fees.
to the Borough's municipal sewer system unless a permit for such
repair, maintenance, alteration, extension or upgrading shall be
obtained from the Secretary/Treasurer of the Council.
B. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council shall
be paid by the applicant for each permit granted for reconnection,
repair, maintenance, alteration, extension or upgrading.
C. The Sewer Inspector shall endorse on such permit the distances and
dimensions locating the sewers and the Y- or T-branch in the sewer
nearest the desired point of connection.
A. No private sewage disposal unit shall be erected, constructed, altered
or extended until and unless a permit for such erection, construction,
alteration or extension shall be obtained in the manner set forth herein.
B. All applications for permits under this section shall be made to the
Borough Secretary/Treasurer who shall refer such application to the
Sewage Enforcement Officer designated by the Borough Council of
Columbia Borough.
C. Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the
applicant and shall be on the standard form adopted by or prescribed by
the Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit upon compliance
by the applicant with the provisions of the "Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act," Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535,77 as amended, and
any regulations adopted thereunder, as well as this article of Columbia
Borough and any regulations adopted pursuant hereto.
E. Fees.
(1) The fee charged for the application required herein shall be as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council, and shall be
paid by the applicant to the Borough Secretary/Treasurer at the
time of filing the application. Said fee shall not be refunded to the
applicant in the event that a permit is not granted and shall be
charged in addition to the costs of any tests required for the
granting of the permit, which costs are to be paid by the applicant
directly. Such costs for the following services are as set from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council:
(a) Preparation of application and permit forms.
(b) Soil profile description.
(c) Percolation test, including digging holes.
77.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 173-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-5
1:368
§ 173-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall fail or refuse to
comply with the provisions of this article shall, for every such offense, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be fined a sum for the use of the
Borough of Columbia not exceeding $600 for each and every offense, for
each 90 days or fraction thereof that such violation shall persist, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. All fines and penalties
imposed by this article shall be recoverable by summary proceedings before
any District Justice of the County of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and all fines
and penalties shall be paid to the Secretary/Treasurer of said Borough of
Columbia.
(d) Percolation test, excluding digging holes.
(e) Verification of percolation test.
(f) Retest of percolation, including digging holes.
(g) Final inspection.
(h) Miscellaneous investigation or meetings, minimum charge
(time over three hours will be billed at a rate per hour as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council).
(2) Any charge or fee for service to applicant not specifically set forth
shall be subject to negotiation between the Borough and such
applicant.
§ 173-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-6
1:369

ARTICLE II
Sewer Regulations
[Adopted 6-14-1948 by Ord. No. 216 (Ch. 70, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 173-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVING AUTHORITIES — The municipal officials charged with the
approving of permits to construct private sewage disposal units and to
connect to the municipal sewerage system.
BUILDING SEWER — That portion of the sewer system extending from
the outside of the building or end of the inside plumbing system to and
including the connection with the municipal system.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — That liquid from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens
and home laundries.
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE — That liquid resulting from processes employed in
industrial establishments.
LATERAL — A sewer pipe extending from the sewer line to the curb or
property line.[Added 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
MAIN TRUNK LINE — That portion of the municipal sewer system to
which building sewers are attached, which convey sewage to the municipal
sewage treatment plant.[Added 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
MUNICIPAL SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The facilities for treating the
municipal sewage.
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewers and storm sewers
owned by the Borough of Columbia or leased thereby from a Municipal
Authority.[Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 283]
PARTY — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
PROPERLY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BOROUGH — The
manager of the municipal sewage treatment plant or other qualified persons
so designated by the Borough Manager.[Added 4-14-1986 by Ord. No.
596]
RECEIVING WATER — That body of waters receiving the discharge waters
from the sewerage system or sewage treatment plant.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Conduits intended to receive domestic
sewage and such industrial sewages and/or wastes, with or without
treatment, as are acceptable to the municipality.
STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEM — Sewers intended to receive surface
water from storms, street washings, roof drainage and sewage and
§ 173-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-7
1:371
industrial sewage that have been treated to the extent required for
discharge into the receiving waters.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Borough employee appointed by the Borough
Council to be responsible for the operation of the municipal sewage
treatment plant and sewer lines connected therewith.
§ 173-8. Unlawful methods of sewage disposal; timely connection.
§ 173-9. Sewers for buildings; connections.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner any human excrement, garbage or
any other organic waste upon private or public property. It shall be
unlawful to discharge any untreated domestic sewage, industrial
sewage or other polluted waters into any stream, ditch, pond, lake or
groundwaters within the Borough or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the Borough. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, cesspool or septic tank or deep well intended for or subject
to receiving organic wastes. The owner or owners of all houses,
buildings or properties situated within the Borough abutting on any
streets, alleys or parkways in which there is now located or may
hereafter be located any sewer pipeline of the sanitary sewer system of
the Borough are hereby required, at no expense to the municipality, to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect said houses or
buildings erected upon the property directly with the sanitary sewer
system within three months after the date of official notice to do so, if
the municipal sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.78
B. It is provided, however, that where municipal sewers are not available
and cannot be made available, a septic tank and tile field or other
method of private sewage disposal must be constructed to meet the
requirements of the State Department of Health of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, after receiving the necessary permit from the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer or other designated municipal official.
A. A separate building sewer is required for each individual building or
house, whether constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or
row, but a single building sewer will be permitted to serve an apartment
house or other multiple-unit structure or industrial plant if the land on
which the units are located is held under one deed. However, if a single
building sewer is permitted to serve an apartment house or other
multiple-unit structure or industrial plant by reason of the fact that the
land on which such units are located is held under one deed, then as
soon as the land on which such units are located is no longer held on
one deed, a separate building sewer shall be required for each unit.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, should a building sewer serving
multiple houses or buildings be in existence as of January 1, 2007, no
78.Editor's Note: Regarding enforcement, See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, Enforcement
of Certain Ordinances.
§ 173-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-9
1:372
new separate building sewers need be constructed; provided, however,
that the existing building sewer is in good working condition without
defect to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or
Borough Engineer. [Amended 12-9-1968 by Ord. No. 434; 1-8-2007
by Ord. No. 776]
B. Building sewers, from the point of entry to the municipal sewer system
to the building, shall be laid at the owner's expense, but only after such
connections have been authorized by a properly authorized
representative of the Borough, the payment of a permit of amount in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter of the Columbia Borough
Code, which is made a part of this article by reference and a statement
by the owner that the discharge from the building sewer will comply
with all of the regulations of this article. [Amended 4-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 596]
C. Old building sewers may be used to connect new building plumbing or
new plumbing in old buildings to the municipal sewerage system when
a permit has been secured as for new construction of building sewers.
D. All building sewers shall be not less than four inches in diameter and
shall have a uniform fall of not less than 1/8 inch per foot. They shall be
of cast iron, vitrified clay or polyvinyl chloride pipe as specified by a
properly authorized representative of the Borough. If polyvinyl chloride
pipe is used, four inches of one-quarter-inch stone shall be laid beneath
the pipe and over the pipe. Where a building sewer cannot be laid in a
straight line, straight pipe with bends shall be used for every deflection
from a straight line of more than one inch per foot. The pipe shall be of
cast iron with neoprene joints, or polyvinyl chloride with neoprene
joints. It shall be unlawful to lay a water and sewer line in the same
trench. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should any building sewer in
existence as of January 1, 2007, not be in compliance with the
foregoing, the noncompliant building sewer need not be replaced or
repaired if, in the discretion of the Borough Engineer and/or Code
Enforcement Officer, said building sewer is in good working condition
without defect. [Amended 12-9-1968 by Ord. No. 434; 4-14-1986
by Ord. No. 596; 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 776]
E. The connection between the building sewer and the municipal sewer
shall be made at a Y-branch, installed for that purpose with a fitting
approved by a properly authorized representative of the Borough. If no
Y-branch has been installed in the main trunk line for such building
sewer, the connection shall be made by a contractor licensed by the
Borough and at no expense to the Borough. The fitting shall be specified
and approved by a properly authorized representative of the Borough
prior to installation and encased in Class C concrete after installation.
The location of the lateral shall be marked on the curb by cutting into
the stone or concrete curb directly above the lateral. The cut shall be
neat but large enough to be permanent. [Amended 4-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 596]
§ 173-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-9
1:373
§ 173-10. Sampling station manhole. [Amended 4-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 596]
The owner of every building sewer which is discharging industrial sewage
from any plant or establishment into the municipal sewerage system may
be required, at the discretion of the approving authorities, to construct a
sampling manhole for the purpose of ascertaining the quality and quantity
of the waste flowing in the building sewer. The manhole shall be located
in a suitable and satisfactory location, and it shall be not less than three
feet in inside diameter and built in a manner designated by the approving
authorities.
§ 173-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-20-1950 by Ord.
No. 232]
Whenever it is found that any person, firm or corporation is violating any
of the provisions or requirements set forth in this article, a written notice
stating the offense and setting a time limit, not exceeding 30 days, for the
correction thereof shall be served upon the offender by the police of the
F. Each new building sewer or replacement sewer must be inspected and
approved by a properly authorized representative of the Borough. The
entire trench from the building to the main sewer trunk line or any
applicable segment must be open at the time of inspection. [Amended
4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
G. All properties served by a sewer lateral shall install a trap at the
curbline or right-of-way. It shall be a properly vented single-hub trap. A
cleanout shall be installed in any lateral over 80 feet in length. [Added
4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
H. Any work performed on the main sewer trunk line shall be performed by
a contractor or plumber licensed by the Borough. If, during the course
of work, the main sewer trunk line is damaged, the contractor or
plumber shall notify the Borough immediately. The Borough will
arrange for repair of the main sewer trunk line, with all expenses for
repair borne by the contractor or plumber. [Added 4-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 596]
I. A properly authorized representative of the Borough shall have final
approval regarding the repair or installation of sewer laterals and any
connection to the main sewer trunk line. [Added 4-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 596]
J. Any person who wishes to clean any portion of the lateral shall clean the
entire length of line from the point of blockage, whether partial or
complete, to the main trunk line. [Added 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
K. Any person who blocks or causes a blockage of the building sewer shall
be responsible for the removal of the blockage and any resultant
damage. [Added 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
§ 173-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-11
1:374
Borough of Columbia or by registered mail. The offender shall, within the
time limit stated in the notice served upon him, forever cease all violations.
Anyone who shall continue to violate any of the provisions of this article
after notice is served upon him as herein set forth shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$600 for each 90 days or fraction thereof that such violation shall persist,
plus costs of prosecution, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible, and, in default of payment thereof, be subject to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 173-12. Power and authority of inspectors.
A. Authority is hereby granted to properly authorized representatives of
the Borough to enter upon all properties to make necessary inspections,
tests and measurements to ensure compliance with all of the
regulations of this article. [Amended 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 596]
B. The Sewer Department will respond to service calls during regular
working hours. Emergency calls will be responded to at any hour.
However, if the trouble is not the responsibility of the municipal sewage
system, the Borough reserves the right to bill the resident requesting
service performed.
§ 173-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-12
1:375

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
[Adopted 8-20-1951 by Ord. No. 238 (Ch. 70, Art. III, Part 1, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 173-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Refers to said Columbia Municipal Authority as the same
now is or may hereafter be constituted.
BOROUGH — Refers to the Borough of Columbia.
CONNECTION — Means and refers to a connection or connections between
the house line and the lateral at the curbs or property lines.
EXISTING SEWERS — Refer to the present sewers previously constructed
and now in place in the Borough.
LATERAL — Means and refers to a sewer pipe extending from the sewer
line to the curb or property line.
SEWAGE — Refers to household waste, liquids, human excreta or other
materials commonly known as "sewage," but shall not include roof or
surface waters, exhaust steam, oils, tar, grease, gas, gasoline, benzine,
other combustible gases and liquids, garbage (unless treated in a manner
approved by the Sewer Manager), offal, insoluble solids or industrial wastes
of a dangerous nature or which would interfere with treatment in the
sewage treatment plant of the Authority.
SEWER — Refers to any pipe forming part of the sewer system.
SEWER MANAGER — Means and refers to the person from time to time
placed in general charge of the sewer system.
SEWER SERVICE — Means and refers to sanitary sewer service to be made
available through the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — Refers to the existing sewers used in conjunction
with the additional sanitary sewers and sewage treatment plant to be
constructed by the Authority, but does not include stormwater sewers.
§ 173-14. Connection to available sewer required; notice.
As the sewer system is constructed and sewer service becomes available,
each and every owner of improved property in the Borough of Columbia
not already connected with a sewer forming a part of the sewer system and
abutting on or adjoining any street, alley, lane or other public highway in
which there is a sewer is hereby required to connect his, her or its premises
with the sewer system in accordance with regulations duly adopted by the
Authority or the Borough, but only upon receipt of due notice to so connect.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-15
1:377
§ 173-15. Connection required as service becomes available; notice.
As from time to time sewer service becomes available to additional
properties within the Borough by reason of improvements of properties
abutting on or adjoining any street, alley, lane or other public highway in
which there is a sewer or by reason of the extension of the sewer system
so as to make sewer service available to additional improved properties,
each and every owner of such additional property shall likewise be required
to connect his, her or its premises with the sewer system, but only upon
receipt of due notice to so connect.
§ 173-16. Failure to connect; connection by Borough.
If, after the expiration of three months from the date of the notice given
pursuant to § 173-14 or 173-15 of this article, any owner of improved
property abutting on or adjoining any street, alley, lane or other public
highway in which there is a sewer shall have failed to connect with the
sewer system, the Borough or its agents may enter upon the property of
such owner and make such connection. In such ease, the Borough shall,
upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of
construction of such connection to the owner of the property to which
connection has so been made, which bill shall be payable forthwith, and in
case of the neglect or refusal of the owner of said property to pay said bill,
the Borough may collect the same by an action in assumpsit or the Borough
may file a municipal lien for said construction of said connection, the same
to be subject in all respects to the general laws providing for filing and
recovery of municipal liens.
§ 173-17. Failure to connect is violation.
If after the expiration of three months from the date of the notice given
pursuant to § 173-14 or 173-15 of this article, any owner shall have failed
to connect his, her or its property with the sewer system as required by
§ 173-14 or 173-15, such failure shall be and is hereby declared a violation
of this article.
§ 173-18. Unlawful to use cesspool after sewer available. [Amended
8-12-1968 by Ord. No. 420]
At the expiration of three months after the construction of the sewer system
has been completed, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to erect, construct, own, maintain, operate or use within the Borough any
privy, cesspool, septic tank or similar receptacle for receiving sewage,
upon any property now or hereafter improved which abuts on or adjoins
any street, alley, lane or other public highway in which sewer service is
available; or to connect with the sewer system any existing sewer, privy,
cesspool, septic tank or receptacle on any such property; or to discharge
sewage into any pipe or other outlet leading from any such property and not
connected to the sewer system. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to discharge any sewage or contaminated water of any kind into
§ 173-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-18
1:378
any pipe, manhole, vent or other opening other than a proper connection to
the sewer system or lateral which complies with existing laws, ordinances
and regulations.
§ 173-19. Discharge of harmful substances into sewer. [Amended
9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 513]
A. Prohibited discharge.
(1) No customer shall discharge into the sewer system any exhaust or
steam or any oil, tar, grease, gas, benzine or other combustible
gases or liquids or any garbage (unless treated in an approved
manner), offal, insoluble solids or industrial waste or other
dangerous or harmful substances which would adversely affect the
functioning of the sewer system or the processes of sewage
treatment.
(2) Restaurants, garages or service stations shall install interceptors of
the types Series GA, GX, GNC, GRC of Josam Manufacturing
Company, Michigan City, Indiana, or the equivalent.
(3) Other commercial establishments discharging sewage containing
oils or greases shall be required to install an interceptor of the
above-mentioned type when directed by the Sewer Superintendent.
B. No person shall discharge to the public sanitary sewerage system any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes having any of the following
characteristics:
(1) Wastes containing liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quality may cause fire or explosion or be in any other way
injurious to persons, the structures of the public sanitary sewerage
system or its operation.
(2) Wastes having a temperature in excess of 150º F. or less than 32º
F.
(3) Wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any
corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the public sanitary sewerage
system. Where the Borough Council deems it advisable, it may
require any person discharging industrial wastes to install and
maintain at his own expense, in a manner approved by the Borough
Council or its designated representative, a suitable device to
continuously measure and record the pH of the wastes so
discharged, and/or a readily accessible sampling manhole for
additional sampling of discharged wastes.
(4) Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance
which either singly or by interaction with sewage or other wastes
is, in the opinion of the Borough, likely to create a public nuisance
§ 173-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-19
1:379
or hazard to life, or prevent entry to sewerage structures for their
maintenance and repair.
(5) Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, hair, chemical or
paint residues, greases, lime, slurry or viscose materials of such
characters or in quantity that, in the opinion of the Borough, they
may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewers or otherwise
interfere with the proper operations of the public sanitary
sewerage system. Attention is called to the fact that the maximum
permissible concentration will vary throughout the public sanitary
sewerage system depending upon the size of the particular
interceptor sewer receiving the same and the flows therein.
(6) Wastes containing insoluble, nonflocculent substances having a
specific gravity in excess of 2.65.
(7) Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentration as to
cause the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than 1.1.
(8) Wastes containing any of the following substances in solution or in
suspension in concentrations exceeding those shown in the
following table.
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
Phenolic compounds as C5H6OH 1.0
Cyanides as CN 0.0
Cyanates as CNO 0.3
Iron as Fe 5.0
Trivalent Chromium as Cr plus 0.3
Hexavalent Chromium as Cr 0.5
Nickel as Ni 1.0
Copper as Cu 0.3
Lead as Pb 0.5
Zinc as Zn 0.3
(9) Wastes containing more than 100 milligrams per liter by weight of
fat, oil or grease.
(10)Wastes containing more than 10 milligrams per liter of any of the
following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide or
any of the halogens.
(11)Wastes containing gases or vapors, either free or occluded in
concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals.
§ 173-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-19
1:380
§ 173-20. Industrial wastes; use of sewers by industry. [Amended
9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 513]
The Borough reserves the right to refuse connection to a Borough sewer or
to compel discontinuance of use of a sewer or to compel pretreatment of
industrial wastes by an industry, in order to prevent discharge to the sewer
deemed to be harmful to the sewerage system or a sewage treatment plant
or to have a deleterious effect on the sewage treatment or sludge handling
processes.
§ 173-21. Making sewer connections.
No connection shall be made to the sewer system or to any lateral thereof
excepting in a manner and of such materials as comply with existing laws,
ordinances and regulations and good plumbing practices.
§ 173-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice residing in Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, pay a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall undergo
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each and every day that
the provisions of this article shall be violated shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense with a like penalty.
§ 173-23. No obligation to make sewer service available.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as imposing any obligation
on the Borough or the Authority to make sewer service available to any
property or portion thereof, either within or without the Borough limits.
(12)Wastes containing toxic substances in quantities sufficient to
interfere with the biochemical processes of the sewerage treatment
works or that will pass through the treatment process and still
exceed the state and federal requirements for the receiving stream.
(13)Wastes containing toxic radioactive isotopes, without a special
permit.
§ 173-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-23
1:381

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Rentals and Charges
[Adopted 8-20-1951 by Ord. No. 239 (Ch. 70, Art. III, Part 2, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 173-24. Sewer rentals. [Last amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 700]
Pursuant to the operating agreement above referenced,79 the establishment
of sewer rentals and surcharges for industrial wastes shall hereinafter be
vested with the Columbia Municipal Authority who will establish the same
by resolution. Any and all other authority vested in the Borough of Columbia
pursuant to such code shall remain in effect until otherwise modified by
resolution of the Columbia Municipal Authority.
§ 173-25. Payment of rents; discounts and penalties. [Last amended
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 700]
The operating agreement by and between Columbia Municipal Authority
and the Borough of Columbia, dated June 12, 2000, vests with Columbia
Municipal Authority the right to establish rules and regulations regarding
the payment of rents, discounts and penalties by resolution. No resolution
by the Columbia Municipal Authority will alter the rights of the Borough
of Columbia to enforce collection of the same in accordance with the
laws of Pennsylvania, including imposing liens on the property served in
accordance with other sections of Chapter 173 of the Code of the Borough
of Columbia.
§ 173-26. Sewer rentals as lien.
The sewer rentals hereby imposed shall be a lien on the property served,
and all delinquent bills for sewer rentals hereby imposed shall be entered
as a lien against the property served, and such lien shall be filed annually
in the office of the Prothonotary of Lancaster County and collected in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.
79.Editor's Note: The prefatory material to this ordinance referred to an operating
agreement, dated 6-12-2000, entered into by the Borough of Columbia and the Columbia
Municipal Authority.
§ 173-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-26
1:383

ARTICLE V
Discontinuance of Water Service for Nonpayment of Sewer Rents
[Adopted 11-22-1957 by Ord. No. 317 (Ch. 70, Art. III, Part 3, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 173-27. Authority of Water Company.
If the owner or occupant of any premises shall neglect or fail to pay, for
a period of 60 days from the date thereof, any sewer rental or charge for
sewer, sewage or sewage treatment service imposed by the Borough, the
Columbia Water Company, Columbia, Pennsylvania, is hereby authorized
and requested at the request and direction of the Borough of Columbia to
shut off the supply of water to such premises until all such overdue rental
rates and charges, together with any penalties and interest thereof, shall be
paid.
§ 173-28. Written request to discontinue service; fees.
The Borough of Columbia will formally request the discontinuance of such
water service in writing, signed by the Chairman of the Sewer Committee
and/or the Sewer Manager, and on such request will agree to save harmless
the said Columbia Water Company from any claims by reason of such
discontinuance. The Borough of Columbia also agrees to pay to the
Columbia Water Company their standard fee for each shutoff, and an
additional standard fee when service is restored. This charge will be
collected with overdue rental rates.
§ 173-29. Cases of hardship.
This article need not be enforced in exceptional or hardship eases, but shall
be determined by the Chairman of the Sewer Committee and/or the Sewer
Manager.
§ 173-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-29
1:385

ARTICLE VI
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 8-20-1951 by Ord. No. 240 (Ch. 70, Art. III, Part 4, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 173-30. Charge for connection with sewers imposed. [Amended
1-12-1959 by Ord. No. 325; 6-10-1968 by Ord. No. 416; 12-8-1969 by
Ord. No. 450]
All owners of property who may hereafter connect with newly constructed
sewer lines of the sewer system in the Borough of Columbia, for which no
connection charge has previously been paid, shall pay a connection charge
as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 173-31. Collection of charges. [Amended 9-17-1968 by Ord. No.
427]
A. If any owner or owners against which such connection charge shall
have been made refuse or neglect to pay such connection charge within
90 days after service thereof shall have been made, upon the owner or
owners of such properties, either personally or by leaving the
connection charge bill with an adult member of the family with whom
the said owner or owners reside, or if the owner or owners of such
properties have no residence, or cannot be found in the Borough, then
the connection charge bill shall be posted upon the property or a copy
thereof left with the occupant thereof, if there be one, and shall further
be mailed by registered United States Mail to the owner or owners or
his or their agent or attorney at his or their last known address, then
the Borough shall forthwith cause to be filed a municipal claim or lien
therefor, together with interest thereon at the rate of 6% per annum
from the date of such connection charge bill. The Secretary/Treasurer
of the Borough shall certify to the Borough Solicitor all such unpaid
connection charges and the Borough Solicitor shall so file municipal
claims therefor in the proper office of Lancaster County, as provided by
law, against the property or properties upon which such connection
charges shall have been made. The Borough Solicitor shall thereupon
proceed to collect the same under the general law relating to the
collection of municipal claims, including, if so directed by the Borough,
the filing of suits in assumpsit, unless the owner of owners shall have
been granted the privilege of paying such connection charge or
connection charges in installments and is currently not in default in
such installment payments. All such municipal claims shall be filed not
later than the last day permitted by law for the filing of such municipal
claims. The certificate of the consulting engineers, filed with the
Borough shall be conclusive of the time of the completion.
B. Any owner or owners of property against whom and which connection
charges have been made as above provided shall have the privilege,
upon written request in the form prepared by the Borough filed with the
Secretary/Treasurer of the Borough within 30 days after service of the
§ 173-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-31
1:387
§ 173-32. Property adjoining more than one street.
Where any property shall be situate at the intersection of or adjacent to
or adjoining more than one street, alley, lane or other public highway
containing a sewer line to which an individual connection can be made, the
owner or owners of such property shall pay a connection charge for the full
frontage of the longest side adjacent to such street, alley, lane or public
highway and shall pay no charge for any other frontage.
§ 173-33. Extensions by developers. [Added 10-14-1968 by Ord. No.
428]
connection charge bill has been made and upon payment of not less
than 1/5 of the amount of the connection charge against the property
of such owner or owners, of paying the balance of said connection
charge in equal semiannual installments within the next following four
years and the said unpaid installments shall bear interest at the rate
of 6% from the date of such connection charge bill: provided, however,
that the granting of such privilege of paying the connection charge in
installments shall not relieve the Borough of the duty of filing a lien or
municipal claim for every connection charge not paid in full within 90
days of such service of the connection charge bill.
C. In case of default of any owner in the payment of an installment and
interest as aforesaid for a period of 60 days after the same shall become
due, the entire balance of the connection charge and accrued interest
plus a penalty of 5%, on such balance, shall become due and payable;
and it shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer when any
such default shall occur, to notify the Borough Solicitor thereof
promptly, and the Borough Solicitor shall thereupon proceed to collect
the same under the general law relating to the collection of municipal
claims, including, if so directed by the Borough, the filing of suits in
assumpsit.
D. Any such owner who has been granted the privilege of paying such
connection charge in installments, may pay the balance remaining due
in full at any time with interest thereon to the next semiannual payment
date plus the costs of filing and satisfying the lien, and such payment
shall discharge the lien or claim against such owner.
A. Where an individual, builder, or developer desires to install sewer lines,
service laterals, and service lines to a house or to every housing unit
within a development, prior to their use or sale, or prior to the
construction of a sewer system by the Authority, he may do so after
having made proper written application and meeting all the conditions
of these rules and regulations. Plot plans of the development showing
the preliminary layout of sewer lines must be submitted to the Authority
for approval prior to construction of sewers. Sewer plans conforming to
the standards of the Authority and meeting all the specifications
established by the Authority shall be submitted to and approved by the
§ 173-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-33
1:388
Authority's engineer prior to the issuance of a permit. The individual
builder or developer may request the Authority to provide the plans
and detailed design of the sewer system for the extensions including
all approvals from the necessary state agencies. The cost of the
preparation of the plans and specifications and all other fees, including
legal and administrative expenses, shall be paid by the individual
builder or developer. The estimated cost of engineering and other
fees must be deposited with the Authority before the design will be
undertaken.
B. As an alternate to the above, the individual, builder or developer may
secure the design of the extensions directly from any professional
engineer qualified and competent in the field of sanitary engineering
design. In such case, the preliminary plans and detailed design must
conform to the standard design of the Authority. The completed plans,
conforming to the standards of the Authority, shall be submitted to the
Authority's engineer for approval. Any revisions in the design
considered necessary, in the opinion of the Authority's engineer, shall
be made and approved prior to the construction of the system. The
builder shall secure in the name of the Authority all necessary
approvals from any state or other agencies having control over the
system. An amount equal to the estimated cost of any necessary legal
fees and inspection fees shall be deposited with the Authority prior to
construction. All extensions shall be constructed by and at the expense
of the individual, builder, or developer under the supervision and
inspection of the Authority. The cost of such supervision and inspection
shall be borne by the individual, builder, or the developer making the
extension. The cost of the inspection will be deducted from the amount
deposited by the builder or developer with the Authority. All costs in
excess of the estimates must be paid by the builder before final
approval of the facilities. Any balances remaining after final approval by
the Authority will be refunded to the builder or developer. The
ownership of the extensions shall be vested with the builder or the
developer until such time as the sewer system of the Authority has been
fully and finally completed. At that time a final inspection will be made
by the Authority, and if the extensions are found to conform with the
previous inspection made by the Authority, the individual, builder or
developer shall convey the extension, free of encumbrances, to the
Authority. When the extension has been accepted by the Authority, all
connections shall be made in accordance with these rules and
regulations, including all the necessary inspection of house
connections, securing of permits and other pertinent requirements. No
front foot assessments shall be levied for properties within the
development, fronting or abutting this extension.
§ 173-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-33
1:389

ARTICLE VII
Water from Cooling Systems
[Adopted 4-13-1953 by Ord. No. 251 (Ch. 70, Art. III, Part 5, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 173-34. Authorization for ordinance.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of that portion of Section
1 of Ordinance No. 23980 of said Borough, which provides that the Borough
shall have the authority to promulgate from time to time rules and
regulations interpreting said ordinance and applying it to specific situations
including, without being limited to, cases where uncontaminated water is
used solely for cooling purposes.
§ 173-35. Use of storm sewers; inspection; cost of connection.
Owners and occupiers of property, or either of them, are hereby authorized
to drain uncontaminated water used solely for cooling purposes through
separate underground pipes to storm sewers, provided that the installation
of such pipes and fittings shall be open to inspection by the Superintendent
of the Borough of Columbia and all employees of the Borough authorized
to make such inspections by the Superintendent, the Mayor or the Borough
Council, and provided that the cost of all such changes shall be paid by the
owners and occupiers of such premises.
§ 173-36. Storm-sewer water not included in computation.
Whenever the changes necessary to drain uncontaminated water used
solely for cooling purposes through separate underground pipes to storm
sewers shall have been completed in accordance with the provisions of
this article, the owners of such premises shall be permitted to exclude
the water used for such purposes in computing the sewer rental imposed
under Ordinance No. 23981 of the Borough of Columbia; provided that
separate water meters shall have been installed to determine the amount
of water used solely for cooling purposes and so drained into storm sewers
and the amount of water used for all other purposes on such premises;
provided further that all the meters, pipes, fittings and appliances installed
or operated in such buildings in connection with drainage and the use of
water in any manner whatsoever shall be open for inspection by the Sewer
Manager of the Borough of Columbia and all employees of the Borough of
Columbia authorized to make such inspection by the Sewer Manager, the
Mayor or the Borough Council.
§ 173-37. Changes to be made without expense to Borough.
All changes necessary to obtain the benefits of this article shall be made
without any expense of any kind whatsoever to the Borough of Columbia.
80.Editor's Note: See Art. IV, Sewer Rentals and Charges.
81.Editor's Note: See Art. IV, Sewer Rentals and Charges.
§ 173-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-38
1:391
§ 173-38. When inspections may be made.
Inspections under the provisions of this article shall be made at all
reasonable times, including, but not limited to, usual business hours,
provided that no inspections shall be made on any Sunday or legal holidays.
§ 173-38 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-38
1:392
ARTICLE VIII
Wastewater Disposal
[Adopted 5-11-1987 by Ord. No. 604 (Ch. 70, Art. IV, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 173-39. Purpose and policy.
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the Borough of Columbia and enables the Borough to comply with
applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of
1977,82 as amended, and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
CFR 403).
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(4) Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
C. This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
D. This article shall apply to the Borough of Columbia and to persons
outside the Borough who are, by contract or agreement with the
Borough, users of the Borough POTW. This article is a supplement to
Ordinance No. 513, as amended,83 and supersedes Ordinance No. 586,
as amended. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Wastewater
Treatment Plant Manager of the Borough POTW shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
82.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See §§ 173-19, 173-20 and 173-24.
§ 173-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-40
1:393
§ 173-40. Definitions; abbreviations; word usage.
A. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director in a NPDES state with an
approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the
EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER —
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20º C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)], as performed in the
latest edition of Standard Methods.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia or the Borough Council of
Columbia or its designated official or officials or employee or
employees.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) — The
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any department or agency of the commonwealth
succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or responsibility of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
The chief executive officer or the chief operating officer of the user
if the user is a corporation;
(1)
A partner or the general manager of the user if the user is a
partnership;
(2)
The owner or the general manager of the user if the user is a
proprietorship; or
(3)
The person duly designated as the responsible individual by a
corporation, partnership or proprietorship, provided that such
person shall be actually responsible for the overall operation of the
user.
(4)
§ 173-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-40
1:394
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
DISCHARGE — The release of, or the act of releasing, wastewater from
the point of generation or the point of storage.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the
term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of said agency or any agency or department
of the United States succeeding to the existing jurisdiction or
responsibility of the Environmental Protection Agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes but shall
reasonably reflect actual discharge conditions for that instant.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) of the Act into the POTW, including holding tank waste
discharged into the system.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A user who is engaged in whole or in part in
the manufacture, conversion or assembly of any product, commodity or
article or in a trade, business or profession or which uses or maintains
property for social, religious, educational, charitable or public use; or
a source of indirect discharge which does not contribute a discharge of
pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.
INTERFERENCE — The inhabitation or disruption of the POTW
treatment processes or operations, including, without limitation, any
inhibition or disruption which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the Borough's NPDES permit or which prevents sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of
the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria, including those
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Title IV of the SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the POTW.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act.
§ 173-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-40
1:395
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation
developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR
403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a standard of
performance under Section 306 of the Act which will be applicable to
such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance
with Section 306 of the Act.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in standard "pH" units, as performed in the
latest edition of Standard Methods.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water or any material that, when
added to water, shall render that water (either because of the nature or
quantity of the material) unacceptable for its original intended use.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes or process changes or other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any federal, state or local
substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other
than a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or National
Prohibitive Discharge Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or
pretreatment requirement whether now in effect or enacted
subsequent hereto, including, without limitation, all regulations issued
by appropriate bodies related to such pretreatment standard.
§ 173-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-40
1:396
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A "treatment
works" defined by Section 212 of the Act, which is owned in this
instance by the Columbia Municipal Authority. This definition includes
any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For
the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the Borough who
are, by contract or agreement with the Borough, users of the POTW.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the
Borough's POTW who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more
per average workday; who has a flow greater than 5% of the flow
in the Borough's POTW per average workday; who has in its wastes
toxic pollutants; who is found by the Borough, the DEP or the EPA
to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributors, on the POTW, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent
quality or air emissions generated by the system; which is a categorical
industry under the regulations promulgated pursuant to Section
306(b)(1)(H) of the Act and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, as the
same may be amended or revised; or who is found to have violated any
standard made applicable by this article by sampling and monitoring
procedures established by the Borough.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972, as the same may be revised or amended from time to time.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter in wastewater
that is retained on a standard laboratory filter after filtration of a wellmixed
sample, expressed in mg/l, as performed in the latest edition of
Standard Methods.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of
Section 307(a) of the Act or other Acts or in any pretreatment standard.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Borough's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid- and water-carried wastes from any
structure or use, including, without limitation, dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or
untreated.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 173-55 of this
article.
§ 173-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-40
1:397
§ 173-41. Prohibited discharges.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
B. Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations
COD — Chemical oxygen demand
DEP — Department of Environmental Protection
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency
l — Liter
mg — Milligrams
mg/l — Milligrams per liter
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
USC — United States Code
TSS — Total suspended solids
C. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference
with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
federal, state or local pretreatment standard. A user may not contribute
the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substance which is a
fire hazard or a hazard to the system. The determination of the
§ 173-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-41
1:398
entry of these prohibited materials into the POTW shall be by
the laboratory analysis of a grab sample and/or by the use of an
explosion hazard meter. At no time shall two successive readings
on an explosion meter at the point of discharge into the system, or
at any point in the system, be more than 5% nor any single reading
over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or may cause other interference with the operation
of the POTW such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
POTW.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or to
cause interference with the operation of the POTW, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the POTW or exceed the limitation set forth in a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to cause interference with
the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use
or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(7) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state or DEP disposal system permit or the receiving water
quality standards.
§ 173-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-41
1:399
§ 173-42. Applicability of pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for
a particular industrial subcategory, the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this article. The Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager shall
notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40
CFR 403.12.
(8) Any wastewater with color, such as but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into
the POTW which exceeds 40º C. (104º F.).
(10) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a
flow rate or contain concentration or qualities or pollutants that on
a grab sample exceed five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation as
established by the Borough.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
any pretreatment standard.
(12) Any wastewater containing more than 20 milligrams per liter of oil
and grease, if the oil and grease is of unknown or petroleum origin,
or any wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
oil and grease, if the oil and grease is determined to be of an animal
or vegetable origin. The differentiation between oil and grease of
animal/vegetable origin and those of petroleum origin will be
determined by laboratory analysis for hydrocarbons as performed
in the latest edition of Standard Methods.
(13) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
B. When the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager determines that a user
is contributing to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances in
such amounts as to cause interference with the operation of the POTW,
the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager shall advise the user of the
impact of the contribution of the POTW and develop effluent limitations
for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. In addition, the
Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager may take such action or actions
as he may determine to be necessary to correct the interference and to
enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 173-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-43
1:400
§ 173-43. Modification of pretreatment standards.
Where the Borough's POTW achieves consistent removal of pollutants
limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the Borough may
apply to the approval authority for the modification of specific limits in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 173-44. Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations exceeding
those presented in the following table:
Substance
24-Hour
Composite
(mg/l)
Instantaneous Grab
(mg/l)
Cadmium (Cd) 0.1 0.15
Chromium (total) 0.5 1.0
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1 0.2
Copper (Cu) 0.4 1.0
Cyanide (CN) (total) 0.1 0.2
Iron (Fe) 10 15
Lead (Pb) 0.5 1.0
Mercury (Hg) 0.01 0.02
Nickel (Ni) 0.5 1.0
Phenols (C6H5OH) 1.0 2.0
Zinc (Zn) 0.7 1.4
Silver (Ag) 0.5 1.8
Aluminum (Al) 10.0 15.0
Tin (Sn) 1.0 1.5
§ 173-45. More stringent regulations to prevail.
Where state pretreatment requirements or pollutant limitations or National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or National Prohibitive Discharge
Standards are more stringent than the limitations in this article, the most
stringent of such requirements or pollutant limitations shall apply.
§ 173-46. Right of revision.
The Borough reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply
with the objectives presented in § 173-39 of this article.
§ 173-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-47
1:401
§ 173-47. Dilution of discharge in lieu of proper treatment
No user, without prior Borough approval, shall ever increase the use of
process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or in any other pretreatment standard or pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the Borough or state.
§ 173-48. Accidental discharges; notification required.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall
be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the Borough for review and shall
be approved by the Borough before construction of any new facility. All
existing users shall complete such a plan within six months after
notification by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager. No user who
commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this
article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the POTW until
accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Borough.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an
accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager of the
incident. The Borough will provide each user with the proper
procedures to be used in the event of an accidental discharge. The
notification by the user shall include location of discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. The user shall
provide such other information as the Borough may from time to time
request with respect to the discharge.
B. Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager a
detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
C. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a dangerous discharge, as provided by the Borough.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer
such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
§ 173-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-49
1:402
§ 173-49. Sampling standards.
§ 173-50. Analytical methods.
All analyses of samples shall be performed with EPA approved methods as
required under 40 CFR 136. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling
or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or
with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the EPA.
A. The sampling procedure for the determination of unacceptable
wastewater as specified in §§ 173-41 through 173-51 of this article, any
wastewater discharge permit or any pretreatment standard shall be as
follows:
(1) An eight-hour composite shall consist of samples collected and
composited every half hour during a normal eight-hour working
day.
(2) A twenty-four-hour composite shall consist of samples collected
and composited every half hour over a twenty-four-hour period.
(3) The instantaneous maximum value will be determined by analysis
of a grab sample.
(4) A flow-proportioned sample shall be collected daily according to
flow.
B. All sample collection procedures will be performed with EPA approved
methods as required under 40 CFR 136.
C. Samples shall be collected at a monitoring location designated by the
Borough or at the monitoring location as specified in the user's
wastewater discharge permit.
D. Each user shall maintain records of all information resulting from
monitoring activities required by any pretreatment standard. Such
records shall include for all samples:
(1) The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names
of persons taking the sample.
(2) The date the analyses was performed.
(3) Who performed the analyses.
(4) The analytical techniques/methods used.
(5) Results of such analyses.
§ 173-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-51
1:403
§ 173-51. Federal and state requirements.
Any and all federal or state requirements and limitations on industrial
discharges, either present or future, may be added to this article by
amendment in any case where they are more stringent than those in this
article or in the case that the requirements or limitations are not addressed
in this article. In cases in which limitations set under this article are more
stringent than either federal or state requirements, those limits set by this
article shall supersede those set by the federal or state governments.
§ 173-52. Purpose of fees.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the Borough's POTW for the implementation of the program
established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set by the
Borough by ordinance or resolution.
§ 173-53. Establishment of fees.
§ 173-54. Unauthorized discharge into natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Borough
of Columbia, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Borough, and/
or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the Wastewater
Treatment Plant Manager in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 173-55. Wastewater discharge permit required; terms.
A. The Borough may adopt, by resolution, from time to time, charges and
fees which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Borough's pretreatment program.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
(4) Fees for permit applications.
(5) Fees for filing appeals.
(6) Fees for consistent removal by the Borough of pollutants otherwise
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(7) Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
§ 173-51 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-55
1:404
A. General permits. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to
or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days before connecting to or contributing to the
POTW. All existing significant industrial users connected to or
contributing to the POTW shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days after notification from the Wastewater Treatment Plant
Manager.
B. Permit application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the Borough an application in the form
prescribed by the Borough, which shall be substantially in the form
set forth in § 173-72 of this article, and shall submit a fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. The
application shall be executed by an authorized representative of
the user. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following:
(a) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any pretreatment
standard and a statement regarding whether or not all
applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the
user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
(b) Information as to whether additional pretreatment and/or
operation and maintenance will be required to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards, along with the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in the schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standards.
(2) The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Borough may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge
permit of users subject to such standard shall be revised to require
compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by
such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for
a wastewater discharge permit as required by § 173-55B, the user shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge
permit shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager within
§ 173-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-55
1:405
180 days after the promulgation of an applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard the information required by § 173-55B(1)(a) of
this article.
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Borough. Permits
may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a sewer.
(2) Limitations on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(3) Limitations on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection,
sampling and monitoring facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
wastewater discharge, as specified by the Borough, and affording
Borough access thereto.
(9) Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the POTW.
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to ensure
compliance with this article.
E. Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a time period of three
years and will expire on a specific date. The Borough may increase or
decrease the permit duration at any time, upon 30 days' notification
prior to the effective date of change. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject
to modification by the Borough during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in §§ 173-41 through 173-51
are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of
§ 173-55 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-55
1:406
§ 173-56. Reports of compliance required.
any proposed change in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
F. Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
Borough. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the
terms and conditions of the existing permit.
A. Compliance date report. Within 180 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards
shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for
these process units in the user facility which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, in the
case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge to the
POTW, shall submit to the Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager
during the months of June and December a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the user's discharge to
the POTW which are limited by such pretreatment standards or by
limitations contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit. In
addition, this report shall include a record of actual or estimated
discharge flow to the POTW and a record of all daily flows for any
regulated process stream or other streams as necessary to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set forth at 40 CFR
403.8(e). At the discretion of the Wastewater Treatment Plant
Manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Wastewater Treatment
Plant Manager may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted.
§ 173-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-56
1:407
§ 173-57. Monitoring facilities.
§ 173-58. Inspection and sampling.
The Borough may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or where there is a wastewater discharge shall allow the Borough
(2) The Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager may impose mass
limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or in other cases where the imposition of
mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required
by Subsection B(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of
the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by the
Wastewater Treatment Plant Manager, of pollutants contained
therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment
standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable pretreatment standards. All analysis shall be performed
in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to
Section 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by
the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the EPA.
(3) All reports required by this article or the user's wastewater
discharge permit shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the user.
A. The Borough may require to be provided and operated at the user's own
expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's
premises, but the Borough may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it
will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
monitoring facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Borough's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the Borough.
§ 173-56 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-58
1:408
or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or
in the performance of any of its duties. The Borough, approval authority
and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from
the Borough, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 173-59. Pretreatment.
§ 173-60. Confidentiality of information.
A. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by the National Categorical Pretreatment regulations. Any
facilities required to provide pretreatment of wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Borough shall be provided, operated and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Borough
for review and shall be acceptable to the Borough before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in
no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility
as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Borough under
the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and
be acceptable to the Borough prior to the user's initiation of the
changes.
B. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be
made available to officials of the Borough, the EPA or approval
authority upon request.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction; provided, however, that if the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Borough that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user, the portions of a report which would
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public but shall nevertheless be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
article, the NPDES permit, any state disposal system permit and/or the
programs under applicable pretreatment standards or for use by the
§ 173-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-60
1:409
§ 173-61. Suspension of service.
§ 173-62. Revocation of permit.
The wastewater discharge permit of any user may be revoked in accordance
with the procedures of §§ 173-61 through 173-65 of this article upon the
occurrence of any of the following:
Borough, any state, the United States or any state or federal agency
in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user or
the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
B. Information accepted by the Borough as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the public by the
Borough until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
A. The Borough may suspend services provided by the POTW and/or a
wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the Borough, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the Borough
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any user notified of a suspension of the services provided by the POTW
and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the user to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Borough shall take such steps
as it may deem necessary, including, without limitation, immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The Borough
shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the service
provided by the POTW upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the Borough within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
A. The failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge as required by any pretreatment
standard;
B. The failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by any
pretreatment standard;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
§ 173-60 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-63
1:410
§ 173-63. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Borough finds that any user has violated or is violating
this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition,
limitation or requirements contained herein, the Borough shall serve upon
such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30
days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof
shall be submitted to the Borough by the user, provided that this provision
shall not affect or limit the Borough's rights and powers under § 173-61 to
immediately suspend service.
§ 173-64. Show cause hearing.
A. The Borough Council may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the
Borough Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A show cause hearing is not mandatory and may be required by
Borough Council in its discretion. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Borough
Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken and the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to
show cause before the Borough Council why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent
or officer of a corporation or on any agent or partner of a partnership.
B. The Borough Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or
employee of the Borough to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Borough Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Borough Council for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof unless deemed
confidential.
D. After the Borough Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the service provided by the POTW be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
§ 173-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-64
1:411
§ 173-65. Commencement of legal action.
If any user discharges wastewater, sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this article or any
pretreatment standard or any order of the Borough Council, the Borough
may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in
any court of appropriate jurisdiction whether or not there shall have been a
show cause hearing.
§ 173-66. Imposition of surcharges.
Although the POTW treatment plant will be capable of treating wastewater
of certain characteristics, the actual treatment of such wastewater may
increase the cost of operating and maintaining the POTW treatment plant.
Therefore, there will be imposed upon each user discharging such
wastewater into the POTW a surcharge, or surcharges, which are intended
to cover such additional costs. Such surcharges shall be in addition to the
regular sewage service charge established by the Borough.
§ 173-67. Determination of surcharge.
The strength of any wastewater, discharge of which shall be subject to
surcharge, shall be determined from samples taken either at one or more
manholes or at any other sampling point or points designated by the
Borough. The frequency and duration of the sampling period shall be such
as, in the opinion of the Borough, will permit a reasonably reliable
determination of the average composition of such wastewater. Samples
shall be collected or their collection supervised by a representative of
the Borough and will be composite samples that reasonably reflect the
characteristics of the wastewater over a twenty-four-hour period. Except as
hereinafter provided, the strength of the wastewater so found by analysis
shall be used for establishing the surcharge or surcharges. However, the
Borough may, if it so elects, accept the results of routine sampling and
analyses by the producer of such wastewater in lieu of making its own
sampling and analyses.
§ 173-68. Calculation of surcharge.
related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment
facilities or devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate may be issued.
A. In the event that, after sampling and analysis as prescribed herein, any
wastewater is found by the Borough to have pollutants of BOD
concentration in excess of 250 milligrams per liter and/or suspended
solids concentration in excess of 300 milligrams per liter and/or total
phosphate as P concentration in excess of 10 milligrams per liter, the
producer of said wastewater shall pay a surcharge in addition to the flat
§ 173-64 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-68
1:412
§ 173-69. Surcharges to be added to service charge.
The surcharges provided for in this section shall be added to the sewage
service charge established by the Borough and shall be collectible in the
manner in which such sewage service charge is collected.
§ 173-70. Violations and penalties.
§ 173-71. Penalty for falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
produced, filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or
the user's wastewater distribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more
than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
rate of volume charge established by the Borough's sewer rental rates,
which surcharge shall be computed by using the following formula.
B. Where the concentration of the wastewater is less than 250 milligrams
per liter for BOD or 300 milligrams per liter for suspended solids or 10
milligrams per liter for phosphate as P, the values in parentheses for
BOD and/or suspended solids and/or total phosphate as P shall be equal
to one.
C. The amount of the surcharge shall be computed by multiplying the flat
rate or volume charge established by the Borough, by the surcharge
factor derived above.
A. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Borough Council
or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this
article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
shall be fined not more than $600 for each offense, plus costs of
prosecution (described below), and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Each day during which a violation shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Borough may recover
reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the user who is
found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and
permits issued hereunder.
§ 173-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-72
1:413
§ 173-72. Wastewater discharge permit application.
To the Borough of Columbia
The undersigned being the __________________________ of the property
located at ___________________________________________ does hereby request
a permit to (make) (continue) an industrial sewer connection serving
_______________________________________ which company or person is
engaged in _______________________________ at said location.
In support of this application, the undersigned submits the following
information:
(1) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(2) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to
show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation; attached as Exhibit A.
(3) A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes
produced or expected to be produced at said property, including a
description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and
maximum rates of discharge, and compliance with any applicable
pretreatment standard or requirements is attached as Exhibit B.
(4) Constituents and characteristics of all wastewater, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Section 2 of Columbia Borough
Ordinance No. __________ as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g)
of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended; is attached as
Exhibit C.
(5) Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit D.
(6) The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
covered by this permit is _____________________.
In consideration of the granting of this permit, the undersigned agrees:
(1) To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use
of the sewer for which this permit is sought or the services sought as
may be requested by the Borough.
(2) To accept and abide by all provisions of Ordinance No. __________ of
the Borough of Columbia and of all other pertinent ordinances or
regulations that may be adopted in the future.
(3) To operate and maintain any wastewater pretreatment facilities, as
may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the wastewater
treatment system of the wastes involved, in an efficient manner at all
times and at no expense to the Borough.
(4) To cooperate at all times with the Borough and its representatives in
their inspecting, sampling and study of the industrial wastes and any
facilities provided for pretreatment.
§ 173-72 COLUMBIA CODE § 173-72
1:414
(5) To notify the Borough immediately in the event of any accident or
other occurrence that occasions contributions to the wastewater
treatment works prohibited or not covered by this permit.
Date: Signed
$ _________ inspection fee
paid
§ 173-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-72
1:415
Chapter 177
SKATEBOARDS, HOVERBOARDS/ELECTRONICALLY
MOTORIZED BOARDS, SCOOTERS AND SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 86.
Borough property — See Ch. 90.
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
§ 177-1. Intent and purpose.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia finds and declares that
the provisions of this chapter are enacted to establish regulations governing
the operation of skateboards, hoverboards/electronically motorized boards,
scooters, and skates on the roadways, sidewalks, public parks, paths, public
places, or public property of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 177-2. Applicability.
Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all skateboards, hoverboards/electronically motorized boards, scooters and
skates operated within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Borough of
Columbia.
§ 177-3. Short title.
This chapter may be referred to as the "Skateboard Ordinance of the
Borough of Columbia."
§ 177-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
HOVERBOARD/ELECTRONICALLY MOTORIZED BOARDS — A wheeled
device designed to be stood on and powered by electronic propulsion,
designed to go no more than 15 miles per hour.
ROADWAY — That portion of the highway designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic or travel excluding sidewalks.
SCOOTER — A device consisting of a narrow board or platform of wood,
metal, fiberglass or other similar material with wheels affixed to the
underside and guided by a handle attached to the front wheel or wheels
which is propelled solely by human power and gravity.
SIDEWALK — That portion of any highway or roadway designed or
ordinarily used for pedestrian traffic or travel.
§ 173-72 COLUMBIA CODE § 177-4
1:416
SKATEBOARD — A device consisting of a flat surface constructed of wood,
metal, fiberglass, or other similar material with two or more wheels affixed
to the underside which is used by a person for coasting, is guided by
distribution of weight of the user and is propelled solely by human power
and gravity.
SKATES — Any device worn on or attached to the human foot affixed to
wheels and propelled by human power and gravity.
VEHICLE — Every device, excluding skateboards, hoverboards/
electronically motorized boards, scooters, skates, wagons, wheelchairs,
unicycles, bicycles, pedicycles, push carts, tricycles or other children's toys,
in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a roadway or sidewalk.
§ 177-5. Prohibited activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in operating a
skateboard, hoverboard/electronically motorized board, skates or
scooter or to ride upon or propel any skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board, scooter or skates at any time upon the
following roadways, and the corresponding curbs and sidewalks located
adjacent thereto, all within the Borough of Columbia:
(1) Locust Street from Second Street to Fifth Street;
(2) Third Street from Cherry to Walnut Street;
(3) Fourth Street from Cherry to Walnut Street;
(4) State Route 441; and
(5) State Route 462.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in operating a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, skates or scooter, or to ride
upon or propel any skateboard, hoverboard/electronically motorized
board, scooter or skates between sunset and sunrise on any day or at
any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons are not clearly discernible from a
distance of 100 feet, upon any roadway, sidewalk, municipal lot,
municipal parking lot or public school yard.
C. It shall be unlawful to ride or propel a skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board, scooter, or skates, onto or from any
bench, chair, flowerbox, retaining wall, stairway or other public
accessory or structure not intended for pedestrian foot traffic, or
intended only for pedestrian foot traffic.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter or skates upon any
sidewalk, path, roadway, or any public place where doing so creates
destruction of property or safety hazards to pedestrians.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-5
1:417
§ 177-6. Road rules.
E. It shall be unlawful for more than one person to operate, ride upon, or
propel a single skateboard, hoverboard/electronically motorized board
or scooter at one time.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter, or skates on any
roadway where the volume or speed of vehicular traffic or the width of
the roadway renders the roadway unsafe or unsuitable for such activity.
G. It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter and to
operate, ride or propel skateboards, hoverboards/electronically
motorized boards, scooters or skates in any manner inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
A. No person shall operate, ride or propel a skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board. skates or scooter upon any sidewalk,
park, schoolyard, roadway, or any public place as to obstruct pedestrian
traffic or endanger another person's safety or as so to impede the
normal flow of vehicular traffic.
B. Every person engaged in operating, riding or propelling a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board or scooter shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian and may not overtake or pass a
pedestrian while riding, operating, or propelling a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board or scooter. The operator of a
skateboard or scooter shall dismount from the same before passing or
overtaking the pedestrian on foot, or shall wait until the pedestrian
passes prior to remounting and recommencing operation of the
skateboard or scooter.
C. No person engaged in operating, riding or propelling a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter or skates shall
suddenly leave a curb, sidewalk, berm or street or any other place of
safety and ride upon or propel any skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board, scooter or skates into or toward the
path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute a safety hazard.
Where there are no pedicycle or bicycle lanes, persons engaged in
operating, riding or propelling a skateboard, hoverboard/electronically
motorized board, scooter or skates upon a roadway, shall ride as near to
the right of the roadway as practical, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction as the
skateboard, scooter or skates.
D. Every person engaged in operating, riding, or propelling a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter or skates shall obey
the instructions of any police officer or any other properly attired
person authorized by state, federal, or local law to direct, control or
regulate traffic.
§ 177-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 177-6
1:418
§ 177-7. Ramp devices.
No person shall place any ramp, half-pipe, or other structure used in
conjunction with operating a skateboard, hoverboard/electronically
motorized board, scooter or skates in a public street, roadway, alley,
sidewalk, parking lot or path within the Borough of Columbia.
§ 177-8. Regulations to implement chapter.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Columbia or his designee is hereby
authorized to establish any written regulations necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof:
E. Every person engaged in operating, riding or propelling a skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter or skates shall obey
all traffic and pedestrian control signals and laws set forth or
promulgated in or under the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code84 and the
Code of the Borough of Columbia.
A. Every offense. Upon conviction of any offense, whether it be a first
offense or subsequent offense of any provision of this chapter, such
person shall be ordered to pay restitution should any damage or injury
have resulted from the action giving rise to the violation of the chapter.
B. First offense. The skateboard, hoverboard/electronically motorized
board, scooter or skates used in violation of this chapter shall be
impounded by the Police Department of the Borough of Columbia for a
period not exceeding 15 days. If the person violating the chapter is a
minor, in addition to the confiscation of the skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board, scooter or skates as aforesaid, the
Police Department of the Borough of Columbia shall notify the parents,
guardians, or other persons having legal custody of said minor of the
violation of this chapter and the impounding of the skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter or skates. In
addition, said individual shall be provided with a copy of the chapter.
C. Second and/or subsequent offenses. The skateboard, hoverboard/
electronically motorized board, scooter, or skates of any person
violating the provisions of this chapter for the second or any subsequent
time shall be impounded by the Police Department of the Borough for a
period not exceeding 30 days, and said person shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than $15 and no more than $50,
plus costs. In the event said person is a minor, the skateboard,
hoverboard/electronically motorized board, scooter, or skates of said
84.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 177-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-9
1:419
Chapter 181
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
§ 181-1. Definitions.
Any capitalized term, if not defined in this chapter, shall have the meaning
as from time to time set forth in the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations which
are incorporated into this chapter by reference. In addition, as used in this
chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.85
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.86
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
aluminum. This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BATTERY BAGS — Bags which LCSWMA makes available to generators of
municipal waste and which shall be used as disposal containers for batteries
which are generated in households.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Borough of Columbia Board of Health.
CLEAR GLASS — Clear glass consists only of clear food and beverage
containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity, and comprised
of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime
and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture
of glass.
COLORED GLASS — Colored glass consists only of green or brown food
and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or less capacity,
and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent or partially transparent
minor shall be impounded by the Police Department of the Borough
of Columbia for a period not exceeding 30 days, and the parents,
guardians or other persons having legal custody of said minor shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15 nor
more than $50, plus costs and restitution as set forth in Subsection A
above.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 177-9 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-1
1:420
substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda
and lime and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the
manufacture of glass.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — The effective date of this chapter.
COMMINGLED — Designated recyclable materials:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, including but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
COMPOSTING — The process by which solid organic waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled aerobic or anaerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Unbleached, unwaxed kraft paper that is
formed into layers with a fluted medium and manufactured into shipping
boxes and related products.
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of refuse containers
and recycling containers for the purpose of collection by the permitted
collector, which shall be:
CUSTOMER — A person who independently contracts with a permitted
collector for the collection of regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
designated in § 181-6 of this chapter for source separation.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials generated or located within the
municipality which:
FACILITY — Any specific site designated by LCSWMA (or approved by
LCSWMA) as the specific place or site to which solid waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials, or any portion of solid waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence
Which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste but which
have not been separated into different types of recyclable materials;
and
A.
Which have been placed in a recycling container for the purpose of
collection.
B.
A. Adjacent to the residential unit; and
No more than five feet from the public street used by collection
vehicles.
B.
A. Was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this chapter; and
B. When entered into was legally enforceable.
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-1
1:421
of a specific site being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for
the delivery of any category of solid waste or source-separated recyclable
materials.
FARM — A tract of land containing 10 or more acres which is used for
agricultural purposes, which agricultural activities provide the major and
primary source of income to the residents of the tract.
GENERATOR — A person who produces or creates any solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Desktop-generated white paper limited to
ledger, copy paper, and computer printout (CPO).
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — A portion of municipal waste that
would be considered hazardous under Act 97 but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as Hazardous Waste
Garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural
operations, and from community activities, or a combination of these
factors, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
morbidity in either an individual or the total population; or
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
A.
The term does not include.
Coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act (52
U.S.C.A. §§ 30.51 to 30.62);
(1)
Treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants,
disposal of which is being carried on under and in compliance with
a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1
to 691.1001);
(2)
(3) Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage;
(4) Solid dissolved materials in irrigation return flows;
Industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits
under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C.A. § 1342); or
(5)
Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C.A. §§ 2011 to 2394).
(6)
B.
§ 181-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-1
1:422
under Act 97 and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as
hazardous waste generators by Act 97. "Household hazardous waste"
includes the following materials and other materials of a similar nature:
LCSWMA — The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority,
a municipal authority organized and existing under the Municipality
Authorities Act, as amended.87
LCSWMA FACILITY — Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA.
MANIFEST — A form supplied by LCSWMA to be completed and signed
by each person who collects solid waste or source-separated recyclable
materials and which specifies, inter alia:
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A property which contains four or more residential
units, including without limitation, apartment complexes, condominium
complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
A. Antifreeze;
B. Batteries;
C. Chlorinated hydrocarbons;
D. Fluorescent light bulbs and other mercury-containing devices;
E. Gasoline and kerosene;
F. Grease and rust solvents;
G. Oven, toilet and drain cleaners;
H. Paints, rust preventatives, stains and wood preservatives;
Pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, rodenticides, roach and
ant killers;
I.
J. Photographic and pool chemicals;
K. Thinners, solvents and furniture strippers;
L. Transmission and brake fluids;
M. Used oil or other hydrocarbon based lubricants; and
N. Wood, metal, rug and upholstery cleaners and polishes.
The source, type, quantity and delivery point for the solid waste or
source-separated recyclable materials;
A.
B. The applicable license number; and
C. Other pertinent information.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-1
1:423
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and
regulations adopted and revised from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council of the municipality which govern and pertain to:
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend and special edition publications commonly known as newspapers.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments, all community activities and all farms, excluding residential
units and multifamily units.
OPEN BURNING — A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted
directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a
flue.
PERMITTED COLLECTOR — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Recyclable plastics are identified on the bottom of the
container and consist of two types of containers, namely: #1 PETE (such
as soda bottles) and #2 HDPE (such as milk, spring water, and detergent
bottles).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be processed into
raw materials or products or which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, yard waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of
reusable materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For residential units, the term "recycling
container" shall refer to the container supplied by the municipality. For
multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "recycling container"
A. The municipality's recycling program; and
The on-site collection or storage of regulated municipal waste within
the municipality.
B.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and LCSWMA for the off-site
collection, transportation, storage or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials; and
A.
The municipality for the on-site collection of solid waste or recyclable
materials generated within the municipality.
B.
§ 181-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-1
1:424
shall refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass
and has adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE CONTAINER — A container which is constructed of plastic, metal
or fiberglass, and which has handles of adequate strength for lifting and
a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by
vectors.[Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 898]
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste generated or collected
within the municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials, resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities and any sludge not meeting the definition of "residual waste"
or "hazardous waste" from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control
facility. The term does not include designated recyclable materials or
unacceptable waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single-family detached, semidetached or
townhouse dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a building containing three or
fewer dwelling units, excluding farms.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term does not include:
SCAVENGING — The removal of designated recyclable materials in
violation of § 181-10 of this chapter.
SINGLE STREAM — A system where recyclable materials; commonly fibers
and glass, metal and plastic containers; are collected and processed
together.
SOLID WASTE or WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to
municipal, residual, or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials.
SOURCE SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of
separating, or the separation of, designated recyclable materials from other
solid waste at the location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
A. Coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Act;88 or
Treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal
of which is being carried on under and in compliance with a valid
permit issued under the Clean Streams Law.89
B.
88.Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-1
1:425
STEEL CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly
known as "tin cans."
TIRES — Any pneumatic rubber automobile, truck, or farm implement tire.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The following types of solid waste are
unacceptable waste unless approved by LCSWMA on a case-by-case basis:
WHITE GOODS — A portion of regulated municipal waste consisting of
large appliances, including the following: clothes washers, clothes dryers,
dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, hot water heaters, air
conditioners, dehumidifiers, furnaces and electrical heaters.
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, leaves, shrubbery, tree trimmings,
grass clippings, and sod.
§ 181-2. Mandatory recycling.
All persons within the municipality shall source-separate designated
recyclable materials generated by such person or generated within a
residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit occupied by such
person.
§ 181-3. On-site collection and disposal.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit, multifamily unit
or nonresidential unit within the municipality shall ensure that regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials generated at such
residential unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit are collected and
disposed of in accordance with this chapter, the municipality's policies and
procedures, and the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations.
§ 181-4. Responsibilities of residential units.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall provide proper
collection and disposal of regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials generated at such residential units by either:
A. Chemotherapeutic waste;
Drums, barrels, buckets and paint cans unless lids have been removed
and interiors are cleaned and free of any residue;
B.
C. Explosives and ordnance materials;
Gas cylinders, unless empty and delivered separate from other solid
waste;
D.
E. Hazardous waste;
F. Infectious/pathological waste; and
G. Radioactive materials.
A. Themselves delivering such materials to a facility; or
§ 181-1 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-4
1:426
§ 181-5. Responsibilities of nonresidential and multifamily units.
§ 181-6. Designated recyclable materials.
§ 181-7. On-site collection of regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials.
B. Utilizing a permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials to a
facility.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or multifamily
unit shall provide proper collection and disposal of regulated municipal
waste and designated recyclable materials by either:
(1) Themselves delivering such materials to a facility; or
(2) Utilizing a permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials
to a facility.
B. Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit shall:
(1) Provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source-separation of designated recyclable materials;
(2) Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each
multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to ensure that all
designated recyclable materials are source-separated; and
(3) Provide collection and delivery to a facility of source-separated
designated recyclable materials at a frequency of not less than
once per month.
A. Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall sourceseparate
the following recyclable materials: clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel cans, plastic, newsprint, yard waste, tires, and white
goods.
B. Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall sourceseparate
the following recyclable materials: clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel cans, plastic, yard waste, tires, and white goods.
C. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall sourceseparate
the following recyclable materials: clear glass, colored glass,
aluminum, steel, plastic, yard waste, high grade office paper,
corrugated cardboard, tires, and white goods.
A. Residential.
(1) No person other than a permitted collector shall collect on-site
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials
generated in any residential unit, except that a person may deliver
to a facility such waste or designated recyclable materials which
was generated at such person's residence.
§ 181-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-7
1:427
(2) Each permitted collector who provides regularly scheduled service
for the collection of regulated municipal waste from a residential
unit shall also collect designated recyclable materials from such
residential unit. Each permitted collector shall establish, and notify
each customer, of procedures for the source-separation,
segregation and packaging of regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials. Such procedures shall permit
commingling of all aluminum, clear glass, colored glass, steel cans,
and plastics, in a single recycling container. Newsprint shall either
be bagged or bundled in accordance with instructions from the
permitted collector to the customer. Each permitted collector shall
schedule collections for tires, white goods, and yard waste at least
once annually and shall give customers at least thirty-day advance
notice of the schedule for such collections.
(3) Each permitted collector shall complete monthly LCSWMA
manifests, as required, reporting the amount of regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials collected in
the municipality. Each permitted collector shall submit copies of
LCSWMA manifests to the municipality, upon request.
(4) The schedule for collection of regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials shall be as specified in the
municipality's policies and procedures.
(5) Recycling containers for residential units will be provided by the
municipality which shall retain title to all such recycling
containers. Permitted collectors shall distribute recycling
containers to all of their residential unit customers in accordance
with guidelines to be established by the municipality.
B. Nonresidential and multifamily units.
(1) No person other than a permitted collector shall collect on-site
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials
generated in any nonresidential or multifamily unit.
(2) Each permitted collector that collects on-site designated recyclable
materials generated in any nonresidential or multifamily unit shall
complete monthly LCSWMA manifests, as required, reporting the
amount of regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials collected in the municipality.
C. General.
(1) All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
generated or collected in the municipality shall be delivered
directly to a facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and
Regulations and without any intervening transfer, unloading,
processing, sorting, salvaging, scavenging, or reuse of any portion
of any load of such regulated municipal waste and designated
§ 181-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-7
1:428
recyclable materials from the time of its collection until the time of
its delivery to the facility.
(2) No permitted collector who collects or disposes of regulated
municipal waste or designated recyclable materials shall, by
contract or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in the storage,
collection, processing or disposal of designated recyclable
materials in a manner which treats such materials as regulated
municipal waste or which is otherwise inconsistent with source
separation or recycling. Any delivery of designated recyclable
materials to a LCSWMA facility in accordance with the LCSWMA
Rules and Regulations shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements
of this § 181-7C(2).
(3) Each permitted collector shall give written notice to each customer
of such permitted collector's obligations under this chapter and
particularly the requirement to offer collection services for
designated recyclable materials.
(4) Each permitted collector shall collect and deliver, separately to a
LCSWMA facility battery dropoff location, all battery bags placed at
curbside by residential units.
D. Precollection practices. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
(1) All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
should be prepared for collection and transportation to a facility as
follows:
(a) All regulated municipal waste, before being placed in refuse
containers for collection, shall have drained from it all free
liquids and shall be sealed in plastic bags.
(b) All tree trimmings, hedge clippings and other similar yard
waste shall be cut in lengths not exceeding six feet and shall be
securely tied in bundles before being deposited at curbside for
collection in accordance with the Borough's Policies and
Procedures.90 Christmas trees shall be cut in lengths not
exceeding six feet before being deposited at curbside for
collection in accordance with the Borough's Policies and
Procedures or taken to a designated Christmas tree dropoff
point as designated by the Borough.
(c) All other yard waste shall be sealed in Kraft bags and placed at
curbside for collection in accordance with the Borough's
Policies and Procedures.
(d) Newsprint shall either be bagged or bundled in accordance
with instructions from the licensed hauler to the customer.
90.Editor's Note: A copy of the Borough's Policies and Procedures is on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 181-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-7
1:429
§ 181-8. Collector permits.
(e) All designated recyclable materials shall be cleaned free of
debris prior to source separating.
(f) All designated recyclable materials shall be clean with
contents removed and with caps removed before being placed
in recycling containers for collection.
(2) Except when placed for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, all recycling containers and refuse
containers shall be securely stored out of the public view (not in
front of a unit or in any public alleyway). All refuse containers shall
be of galvanized or aluminized iron, plastic material or equivalent,
shall be of substantial construction, shall have suitable handles by
which they may be lifted, shall not leak, and shall have tight-fitting
covers sufficient to keep out water and to prevent disturbances by
animals and entrance of insects which shall be kept on such
containers at all times except for when being filled, emptied or
cleaned. All such containers shall be kept in a sanitary and good
condition and shall be cleaned after being emptied or as needed to
maintain the same sanitary condition.
E. On-site collection of regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable material. For special events which produce large amounts of
garbage and refuse and require significant garbage and refuse removal,
event coordinators may obtain from the Borough's Code Enforcement
Officer written authorization to collect regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials for such events outside and/or beyond
their regulated hours of collection. The permitted collector shall,
however, make request to the Code Enforcement Officer at least two
business days prior to the planned event and, where possible, with even
further advance notice so as to give the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Borough adequate time to consult with the Columbia Borough
Board of Health and Columbia Borough Police Department. In the
instance a written waiver is received from the Code Enforcement
Officer, the permitted collector shall keep it with him/her when
performing collection services in accordance with the waiver. [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
A. All persons who desire to collect on-site, store, process or dispose of
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials within
the municipality shall obtain a collection permit from the municipality
prior to performance of any such activities.
B. Every person desiring a collection permit under this chapter shall make
application to the municipality. Such application shall include the name
and address of the person making application, proof of a valid license
issued by LCSWMA and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
identification of other municipalities which have permitted that person,
and whether any licenses have been revoked by LCSWMA or any other
§ 181-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-8
1:430
municipality which requires permitting of haulers. (The municipality
may establish an annual collection permit fee set by ordinance or
resolution.)
C. Applicants for a collection permit to operate as a permitted collector
within the municipality shall demonstrate that:
(1) A valid license has been issued by LCSWMA to the applicant.
(2) Applicant's operation is in conformity in all respects with the rules
and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PADEP), LCSWMA, and all municipality ordinances and
the municipality policies and procedures.
(3) Regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
shall be suitably enclosed or covered so as to prevent roadside
littering, attraction of vectors, or the creation of other nuisances.
(4) All disposal of regulated municipal waste other than designated
recyclable materials shall be at a facility.
(5) All designated recyclable materials shall be recycled and shall not
be disposed of as regulated municipal waste.
(6) Insurance shall be obtained for the applicant's proposed operation
in the municipality. A certificate of insurance demonstrating limits
as follows:
(a) Required vehicle liability insurance. The minimum liability
insurance required under state law.
(b) General liability. Bodily injury, $100,000 per occurrence, and
property damage, $100,000 per occurrence.
(c) Worker's compensation. As required by law.
(7) All equipment to be used have been properly licensed and
inspected, and all operators have valid operator's licenses for the
class of vehicle operated.
D. All municipality collection permits shall be issued for a period of one
year or longer. (There will be no proration of collection permit fees in
the event a permit is held for less then a full year.) The municipality's
policies and procedures may designate a sticker or other mechanism to
be affixed to all collection equipment in order to verify that the
equipment is properly permitted.
E. Collection permits may be suspended or revoked by the municipality at
any time for just cause. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to,
where the permitted collector:
(1) Fails to maintain a valid license issued by LCSWMA;
§ 181-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-8
1:431
§ 181-9. Illegal dumping and open burning.
§ 181-10. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable
materials, all such designated recyclable materials shall be the property of
the generator or the permitted collector who has contracted to provide onsite
collection. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, other
(2) Violates any of the provisions of this chapter or the municipality's
policies and procedures;
(3) Improperly disposes of designated recyclable materials or
regulated municipal waste;
(4) Scavenges;
(5) Fails to perform in good faith all the covenants of any agreement
entered into with municipality customers or other customers.
F. Any person who has been denied a collection permit or whose collection
permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal the denial,
suspension or revocation to the municipality. Such appeal shall be made
in writing within 10 days after such decision has been made and shall
be heard by the Board of Health. The appeal shall be verified by an
affidavit and shall be filed with the Borough Secretary. The appellant or
his representative shall have the right to appear and be heard by the
Board of Health, if such right is requested in the written appeal. The
appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee established by resolution
or ordinance of the municipality (which fee may be changed from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council of the municipality), and no
appeal shall be considered complete without the payment of the appeal
fee. The Board of Health shall have the power to subpoena witnesses
and documents required, to administer oaths, and to examine
witnesses. Testimony before the Board of Health shall be
stenographically recorded. The Board of Health shall not, however, be
bound by technical rules of evidence at hearings and may receive any
and all relevant evidence which, it, in its sole discretion, ascertains to
be of reasonably probative value. A prompt decision on such appeal
shall be made by the Board of Health.
G. Collection permits are not transferable to any other person.
A. No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials except at a facility.
Notwithstanding the foregoing or § 181-5, yard waste may be
composted to the extent and in the manner provided in the
municipality's policies and procedures on the property on which such
yard waste was generated.
B. No person shall process or dispose of any designated recyclable
materials through open burning.
§ 181-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-10
1:432
than such permitted collector, to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected
or picked up, any such designated recyclable materials.
§ 181-11. Existing contracts.
§ 181-12. Authorization of municipality.
The municipality shall have the power to issue the municipality's policies
and procedures governing all matters set forth in this chapter and any
other related matters deemed necessary or convenient by the municipality.
The municipality's policies and procedures shall be effective when adopted
by resolution of Borough Council of the municipality. The municipality
shall have the power to establish record and reporting requirements, and
standards and procedures for the issuance, administration and revocation
of permits, as deemed necessary, including without limitation, application
procedures, fees, standards and conditions for permits; the fixing of a
monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the compliance by any
Permitted Collector with any such requirements, standards or procedures;
and any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the municipality.
In the event of suspension or revocation of any permit which is issued by the
municipality and/or license issued by LCSWMA, the person whose permit or
license is suspended or revoked shall refund to each customer any prepaid
fees.91
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair the obligations of
any existing contract.
B. No renewal or modification of any existing contract, and no new
contract for the storage, on-site collection, processing or disposal of
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials, shall be
entered into after the effective date of this chapter unless such renewal
or modification or new contract shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter and the municipality's policies and procedures.
C. No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or
assigned after the effective date of this section shall provide for on-site
collection services for regulated municipal waste to be performed after
the commencement date unless on-site collection services are also
offered for designated recyclable materials. With respect to any
contract which violates this chapter, such contract shall be deemed void
and the permitted collector that is a party to such contract:
(1) Shall reimburse to the applicable residential units and multifamily
units any funds which have been paid for such on-site collection
services as violate this chapter; and
(2) Shall not collect or attempt to collect any funds for such collection
services as violate this chapter.
91.Editor's Note: Regarding enforcement, See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, Enforcement
of Certain Ordinances.
§ 181-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-13
1:433
§ 181-13. Unlawful activity. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
The following activities are prohibited:
§ 181-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Disposing of refuse, litter, residual waste, regulated municipal waste,
recyclable materials or solid waste in any way contrary to the
provisions of this chapter. This prohibition shall not apply to the
following situations:
(1) Refuse disposed of on premises owned or leased by the generator
of the refuse, provided that it is disposed of in a safe, sanitary and
nuisance-free manner and provided that it is disposed of in
compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances.
(2) Manure, fertilizer and refuse used as fertilizer in gardening or
farming.
(3) Dead household pets interred in places set apart for that purpose.
(4) Soil, earth, sand, clay, gravel, loam, ashes, slate, stones, bricks,
plaster, cement, leaves, branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shavings,
wood, grass, straw and corn fodder when used as filler, provided
that it is done in a safe and sanitary manner.
B. Allowing a hauler without a license (a nonlicensed hauler) to collect or
remove regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials
from a residential unit, multifamily dwelling unit or nonresidential unit.
C. Permitting the accumulation of residue of liquids, solids or a
combination thereof on the bottom or sides of refuse containers or
recycling containers.
D. Violating the provisions hereof regarding the storage of regulated
municipal waste and recyclable materials.
E. Failing to source separate designated recyclable materials.
F. Failing to comply with the provisions hereof regarding the placing of
refuse containers and recycling containers for collection.
G. Failing to comply with the provisions hereof regarding the
preconditioning or cleansing of designated recyclable materials and
regulated municipal waste.
H. Collecting, transporting or conveying regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials in nonconforming vehicles.
I. Violating any other provision of this chapter.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each
§ 181-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-14
1:434
§ 181-15. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this chapter or the
municipality's policies and procedures, and for purposes of any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential unit,"
"multifamily unit" and "nonresidential unit" shall:
§ 181-16. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, the municipality
may institute proceedings to restrain any violation of, or to require
compliance with, this chapter.
violation to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 10 days. Each violation of any provision
of this chapter, and each day that such a violation shall exist, shall
constitute a separate violation and offense.
B. For purposes of the obligations established by this chapter or the
municipality's policies and procedures, and for purposes of any fine,
penalty, imprisonment, or other sanctions, the term "person" shall
include officers, directors, partners and members of any corporation,
partnership, limited-liability company or other legal entity having the
same, and refer to and impose joint and several liability upon both the
person residing in or occupying the residential unit or multifamily unit
and the owner, landlord, condominium owners' association and/or agent
of an owner, landlord or condominium owners' association of such
premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a premises may
not assign or delegate any duties imposed upon such owner by this
chapter or the municipality's policies and procedures to any tenant or
occupant of the premises.
C. Any licensed hauler who violates any provision of this chapter may have
its license suspended or revoked by the Board, in the Board's sole
discretion. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
A. Include officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity
having officers and directors; and
B. Refer to, and impose joint and several liability upon, both:
(1) The person residing in or occupying any such residential,
multifamily or nonresidential units; and
(2) The owner, landlord, condominium owner's association and/or
agent of an owner, landlord or condominium owner's association of
such premises.
§ 181-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-17
1:435
§ 181-17. Concurrent remedies.
The existence or exercise of any remedy provided by this chapter shall not
prevent the municipality from exercising any other remedy available at law
or equity.92
§ 181-18. Effect on prior ordinances.
Any other ordinances which pertain to regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials, are hereby repealed to the extent of any
inconsistency with this chapter.
§ 181-19. Appeals. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
A. Any person affected by any notice (including notices of denial of
application for or revocation of a permit or license) issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer in connection with the enforcement or operation of
any provision hereof or any of the Borough's Policies and Procedures93
shall have the right to request a hearing on the matter before the Board
of Health; provided that such person shall file, in the office of the
Borough Manager of the Borough, a written petition requesting such
hearing containing a statement of the factual grounds thereafter and a
statement of any legal grounds therefor within 20 days after the notice
was served upon such person. For purposes hereof, service shall mean
the date personally served or placed into the United States Mail,
postage prepaid, by the Code Enforcement Officer. If any licensed
hauler appeals the revocation, suspension or refusal by the Borough to
issue a license, such appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee to be
established from time to time by resolution of Council.
B. The Board shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall give the
Borough and the person filing the petition advance notice of the time
and place for such hearing. At such hearing, the petitioner shall have
the right and opportunity to be heard, to present evidence and to show
cause why such notice should be modified or withdraw.
C. The Board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and documents
required for the hearing, to administer oaths and to examine witnesses.
Testimony shall be stenographically recorded by the Board. The Board
shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence at hearings and the
Board may receive any and all relevant evidence which it, in its sole
discretion, ascertains to be of reasonably probative value.
D. Within 60 days after such hearing, the Board shall issue a written
decision sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice. After a
hearing, in the case of any notice suspending or revoking any license or
permit required and issued pursuant to this chapter or the Borough's
92.Editor's Note: Regarding enforcement, See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, Enforcement
of Certain Ordinances.
93.Editor's Note: A copy of the Borough's Policies and Procedures is on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 181-17 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-19
1:436
§ 181-20. Accumulation of refuse. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
870]
Policies and Procedures, if such notice has been sustained by the Board,
any such license or permit which has been suspended or revoked by
a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked or suspended in
accordance with the terms of the notice, if no petition for hearing is
filed in the office of the Borough Manager within 20 days after such
notice is served.
E. The proceedings of such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered into
the records of the Board.
F. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. No person shall throw, place, deposit or cause or permit the dumping,
depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter or other refuse on any
sidewalk, street, alley or other public place, or upon any private
property, except in proper receptacles for collection.
B. No person may throw, place, deposit or cause or permit the dropping,
depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of regulated municipal waste
originating from a residential unit, multifamily dwelling unit or
nonresidential unit which is of a type which can and should be handled
for collection and transportation in accordance with the other
provisions of Article III of this chapter in public trash receptacles or
containers.
C. No person shall deposit refuse in any stream or body of water.
D. No person shall deposit, throw or place refuse on the property of
another without the consent of the owner.
E. No person, except the occupants of the property on which a refuse
container is placed and a licensed hauler, shall remove the lids on or
from such refuse containers, except for the loading and unloading of
refuse, or remove the contents thereof.
F. Persons owning, renting and/or occupying property in the Borough
shall keep the sidewalks in the front, rear and side(s) of their premises
broom clean and free of litter and refuse. No person shall sweep or
deposit litter or refuse into any gutter, street, alley or public place
within the Borough from any building, property, or public or private
sidewalk or driveway.
G. Persons owning, occupying or operating places of business within the
Borough shall keep the sidewalks and the front, rear and side(s) of their
business broom clean and free of litter or refuse. No such person shall
§ 181-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-20
1:437
sweep or deposit such litter or refuse into any gutter, street, alley or
public place within the Borough.
H. No empty boxes, barrels, appliances, furniture, household fixtures,
commercial fixtures or any other refuse of any kind shall be left upon
any pavement, sidewalk, street or alley within the Borough except in
accordance the provisions of this chapter.
I. Compost piles not located within the front or side yard of any lot shall
be permitted on such premises so long as such compost pile does not
create a health hazard or nuisance.
J. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes or
other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have
prevailed shall be performed under the direction and supervision of the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with all applicable laws and
rules and regulations, including those which may be adopted from time
to time by the Borough or the Board of Health.
K. Hazardous waste shall not be placed in any refuse containers for
collection and shall be collected and disposed of under the direction
and supervision of the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with all
applicable laws and rules and regulations, including those which may
be adopted from time to time by the Borough or the Board of Health.
L. No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials except at a facility.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, yard waste may be composted in
compost piles, as set forth herein, on the property on which the yard
waste was generated.
M. From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable
materials, all such designated recyclable materials shall be the
property of the generator of the same or the licensed hauler who has
contracted to provide collection. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person, other than such generator, or licensed hauler, to collect
or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such designated
recyclable materials.
N. Construction and demolition waste may be stored upon the land where
actual construction or demolition is in progress; provided, however,
that such construction waste shall not be stored for a period exceeding
30 days and shall not be stored in any manner which will allow it to be
scattered by wind or rain. All such construction and demolition waste
shall be removed by and at the expense of the owner of the premises
upon which such waste was produced and shall be disposed in
accordance with the provisions hereof, the Borough's Policies and
Procedures94 LCSWMA's Policies and Procedures and the applicable
laws, rules and regulations.
94.Editor's Note: A copy of the Borough's Policies and Procedures is on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 181-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 181-20
1:438
§ 181-21. Roll-off containers. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
Chapter 184
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Nonstormwater discharges — See Ch. 153.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
O. It is mandatory that ashes be thoroughly extinguished before being
comingled with any other regulated municipal waste and before being
placed for collection.
P. No person shall permit any refuse to accumulate within the building or
structure or anywhere on the property for a period of longer than seven
days, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, upon property in
the Borough. The provisions of this section are not, however applicable
to farms.
A. Any person or nonlicensed hauler who wishes to place, leave, deposit or
otherwise rent to consumers roll-off containers shall submit an
application to the Borough for a permit to do the same. With such
application, which shall be on the forms supplied by the Borough, the
applicant shall pay an annual application fee of $50.
B. No roll-off containers shall be placed in or on the Borough streets,
highways, roads or public alleys or on any Borough property without
Borough approval and without conforming to all other laws,
regulations, and ordinances of the Borough including the Code of the
Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania as amended from time to time.
C. Roll-off containers shall conform to all the requirements for nonpolyethylene-
bag refuse containers except size.
D. Roll-off containers shall not be filled so that they cannot be properly
covered.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep the area
around the roll-off containers clean and sanitary.
F. The accumulation of residue of liquids, solids or a combination thereof
shall not be permitted in the bottom or sides of roll-off containers.
G. Roll-off containers shall be emptied no less frequently than every 30
days.
§ 181-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-21
1:439

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 184-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Columbia
Stormwater Management (SWM) Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 184-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare by
minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 184-2 of
this chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of SWM, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental
to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of
the municipality and all the people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Riparian forest buffers enhance water quality by filtering pollutants in
runoff, providing light control and temperature moderation, processing
pollutants, increasing infiltration and providing channel and shoreline
stability, thus decreasing erosion (DEP Riparian Forest Buffer
Guidance, November 27, 2010).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-3
1:441
§ 184-4. Statutory authority.
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as practicable.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management best management practices (SWM BMPs) that are
implemented within the municipality through the (LIMC) Lancaster
Inter-Municipal Committee's Operation and Maintenance "Good
Housekeeping Guidance and BMP Manual" 2012.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. Promote stormwater runoff prevention through the use of nonstructural
best management practices (BMPs).
J. Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density
and intensity of development called for in the Comprehensive Plan;
allow for creative methods of improving water quality and managing
stormwater runoff; and promote a regional approach to water resource
management.
K. Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources, and conserve
and restore natural resource systems.
L. Promote stormwater management practices that emphasize infiltration,
evaporation, and transpiration.
A. Primary authority. The municipality is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act" and Act 394 of 1937, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et
seq., the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law. The municipality also is
empowered to regulate land use activities that affect stormwater
impacts by the authority of the Borough Code (Act 43 of 2012).95
B. Secondary authority. The municipality also is empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
95.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 184-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-4
1:442
§ 184-5. Applicability.
The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this chapter shall
apply to regulated activities, as defined in this chapter.
§ 184-6. Repeals and continuation of prior regulations.
§ 184-7. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended.96
A. Except as otherwise required by law, this chapter is intended as a
continuation of, and not a repeal of, existing regulations governing the
subject matter. To the extent that this chapter restates regulations
contained in ordinances previously enacted by the Borough Council,
this chapter shall be considered a restatement and not a repeal of such
regulations. It is the specific intent of the Borough Council that all
provisions of this chapter shall be considered in full force and effect as
of the date such regulations were initially enacted. All ordinances or
parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are
hereby repealed. It is expressly provided that the provisions of this
chapter shall not affect any act done, contract executed or liability
incurred prior to its effective date, or affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any rights, rule, regulation or
ordinance, or part thereof, or to punish any violation which occurred
under any prior stormwater regulation or ordinance. In the event any
violation has occurred under any prior stormwater regulation or
ordinance of the Borough, prosecution may be initiated against the
alleged offender pursuant to the provisions of said prior stormwater
regulation or ordinance, and the provisions and penalties provided in
said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance shall remain effective as
to said violation.
B. Any plan (hereinafter defined) pending at the time of the effective date
of this chapter shall be allowed to proceed with revisions, finalization
and implementation in accordance with any ordinance in effect prior
hereto. Any subdivision and land development plan filed pursuant to the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code where
there isn't a prior stormwater management ordinance in effect may
proceed with development in accordance with the filing at the time of
the effective date of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-8
1:443
§ 184-8. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 184-9. Municipal liability.
Except as specifically provided by the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act, Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended,
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the making of any administrative decision by the
Borough or any of its officials or employees shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Borough of the
practicability or safety of any proposed structure or use with respect to
damage from erosion, sedimentation, stormwater runoff, flood, or any other
matter, and shall create no liability upon or give rise to any cause of
action against the Borough and its officials and employees. The Borough, by
enacting and amending this chapter, does not waive or limit any immunity
granted to the Borough and its officials and employees by the Governmental
Immunity Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and does not assume any
liabilities or obligations.
§ 184-10. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 184-11. Financial security.
A. A financial security (bond, restricted account or letter of credit) for
stormwater related improvements shall be supplied by the developer in
conjunction with the subdivision/land development approval, or in
conjunction with the SWM site plan approval if no subdivision/land
development plan is required.
B. The applicant shall provide a financial security to the municipality for
the timely installation and proper construction of all SWM facilities,
including E&S BMPs, as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter and, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the MPC.97
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510, and 10511.
§ 184-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-11
1:444
C. As the work of installing the required SWM facilities proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the governing body to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the
financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the governing body, and the governing body shall have 45
days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Municipal
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the governing body that such portion
of the work upon the SWM facilities has been completed in accordance
with the approved SWM site plan. Upon such certification, the
governing body shall authorize release by the bonding company or
lending institution of an amount as estimated by the Municipal
Engineer fairly representing the value of the SWM facilities completed.
The governing body may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid SWM facilities.
D. In the event that any SWM facilities which may be required have not
been installed as provided in the approved SWM site plan, the
governing body of the municipality is hereby granted the power to
enforce any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are
insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections
to all the SWM facilities covered by said security, the governing body of
the municipality may, at its option, install part of such SWM facilities
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
monies necessary to complete the remainder of the SWM facilities. All
of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal
or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used
solely for the installation of the SWM facilities covered by such security,
and not for any other municipal purpose.
§ 184-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-11
1:445

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 184-12. Word usage.
The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
§ 184-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or
derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter
gender shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint
ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any
other similar entities.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "tract," and "parcel."
F. The words "shall," "must" and "will" are mandatory in nature and
establish an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision.
The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
G. The time within which any act required by this chapter is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania
General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word "day" shall mean
a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
H. Any words not defined in this chapter or in Section 107 of the MPC98
shall be construed as defined in standard dictionary usage.
I. References to officially adopted regulations, standards, or publications
of DEP or other governmental agencies shall include the regulation,
publication, or standard in effect on the date when a SWM site plan is
first filed. It is the intent of the (governing body) in enacting this section
to incorporate such changes to statutes, regulations, and publications
to the extent authorized by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 184-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:447
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACCESS EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing entry for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining and repairing
SWM facilities.
ACT 167 PLAN — A plan prepared under the authority of Pennsylvania's
Storm Water Management Act of October 4, 1978.99
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops and raising livestock, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops, or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
practices. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; earth disturbance activity.
ANIMAL HEAVY USE AREAS — A barnyard, feedlot, loafing area, exercise
lot, or other similar area on an agricultural operation where due to the
concentration of animals, it is not possible to establish and maintain
vegetative cover of a density capable of minimizing accelerated erosion
and sedimentation by usual planting methods. The term does not include
entrances, pathways and walkways between areas where animals are
housed or kept in concentration.
APPLICANT — A landowner and/or developer, as hereinafter defined,
including his heirs, successors and assigns, who has filed an application
to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a
development site located within the municipality.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, control
measures, planning or procedures used to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation and manage stormwater to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the quality of waters and the existing and designated uses of waters
within this commonwealth before, during and after earth disturbance
activities.100 See also "nonstructural BMP" and "structural BMP."
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual of December 2006, or most recent version thereof and the
Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee's Operations and Maintenance "Good
Housekeeping Guidance and BMP Manual," 2012 Version.
99.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
100. Reference: 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:448
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall
or fence, occupying more than four square feet of area and/or having a roof
supported by columns, piers, or walls.
CARBONATE GEOLOGY — Limestone or dolomite bedrock. Carbonate
geology is often associated with karst topography.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION — Documentation verifying that all
permanent SWM facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
CHAPTER 102 — 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
CHAPTER 105 — 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway
Management.
CHAPTER 106 — 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 106, Floodplain Management.
CISTERN — A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The 1972 Amendments to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500 of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by an NRCS certified planner
that identifies conservation practices and includes site specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE — (n) Any structure that carries a flow. (v) The ability of a
pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to carry the peak flow from the design
storm.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which can convey a stream
under or through an embankment or fill.
DEP, PA DEP or PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or any agency successor to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of SWM systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes any regulated activity of this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific area of land where regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or maintained.
DISAPPEARING STREAM — A stream in an area underlain by limestone or
dolomite that flows underground for a portion of its length.
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:449
DISTURBED AREA — An land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — Rights to occupy and use another person's real
property for the installation and operation of stormwater management
facilities, or for the maintenance of natural drainageways to preserve and
maintain a channel for the flow of stormwater therein, or to safeguard
health, safety, property, and facilities.
E&S — Erosion and sediment.
E&S PLAN (also EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN) — A sitespecific
plan consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies
BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation before, during
and after earth disturbance activities.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; land development;
agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of animal heavy use areas; timber
harvesting activities; road maintenance activities; oil and gas activities;
well drilling; mineral extraction; building construction; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.101
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Slopes greater than 15%,
shallow bedrock (located within six feet of ground surface102), wetlands,
Natural Heritage Areas and other areas designated as Conservation or
Preservation in Greenscapes, the Green Infrastructure Element of the
County Comprehensive Plan, where encroachment by land development or
land disturbance results in degradation of the natural resource.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action. See also "accelerated erosion" as
defined above.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.103
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary, mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Also, the area of
inundation that functions as a storage or holding area for floodwater to a
101. Reference: 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
102. Reference: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
103. Reference: Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44: Emergency Management and Assistance,
§ 9.4, Definitions.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:450
width required to contain a base flood of which there is a 1% chance of
occurrence in any given year. The floodplain contains both the floodway and
the flood fringe.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No.
166, as amended, 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed absent evidence to the contrary that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.104
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include conducting a
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREQUENCY — The probability or chance that a given storm event/flood
will be equaled or exceeded in a given year.
GRADE — (n) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (v) To finish the surface
of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The process by which water from above the
ground surface is added to the saturated zone of an aquifer, either directly
or indirectly.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Refers to soils grouped according
to their runoff-producing characteristics by NRCS. There are four runoff
potential groups ranging from A to D.
(Low runoff potential) Soils having high infiltration rates even when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of deep, well to excessively
drained sands or gravels. These soils have a high rate of water
transmission (greater than 0.30 inches/hour).
A.
Soils having moderate infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of moderately deep to deep, moderately well-to-well
drained soils with moderately fine to moderately coarse textures. These
soils have a moderate rate of water transmission (from 0.15 to 0.30
inches/hour).
B.
Soils having slow infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of soils with a layer that impedes downward
movement of water, or soils with moderately fine to fine texture. These
C.
104. Reference: 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:451
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — Surfaces which prevent
the infiltration of water into the ground. All structures, buildings, parking
areas, driveways, roads, streets, sidewalks, decks, and any areas of
concrete, asphalt, packed stone, and compacted soil shall be considered
impervious surface if they prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention facility designed to retain
stormwater runoff and infiltrate it into the ground (in the case of a retention
basin) or release it at a controlled rate (in the case of a detention basin).
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, rain gardens,
vegetated swales, pervious paving, infiltration basins, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. The upstream end of any
structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT — A natural, transient body or conveyance of water that
exists for a relatively long time, but for weeks or months of the year is
below the local water table and obtains its flow from both surface runoff and
groundwater discharges.
INVASIVE VEGETATION (INVASIVE) — Plants which grow quickly and
aggressively, spreading, and displacing other plants. Invasives typically are
introduced into a region far from their native habitat. See "Invasive Plants
in Pennsylvania" by the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by features
including but not limited to surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/
uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed
on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
soils have a slow rate of water transmission (from 0.05 to 0.15 inches/
hour).
(High runoff potential) Soils having very slow infiltration rates when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of clay soils with a high
swelling potential, soils with a permanent high water table, soils with
a clay pan or clay layer at or near the surface, and shallow soils over
nearly impervious material. These soils have a very slow rate of water
transmission (from zero to 0.05 inches/hour).
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
(2)
A.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:452
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIMITING ZONE — A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition
which is so slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of
effluent.106 Seasonal high water tables; whether perched or regional also
constitute a limiting zone.
LINEAMENT — A linear feature in a landscape which is an expression of an
underlying geological structure such as a fault.
MANNING'S EQUATION — An equation for calculation of velocity of flow
(e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
Manning's Equation assumes steady, gradually varied flow.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Applies when the applicant
demonstrates to the municipality's satisfaction that the performance
standard is not achievable. The applicant shall take into account the best
available technology, cost-effectiveness, geographic features, and other
competing interests such as protection of human safety and welfare,
protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation of
historic properties in making the assertion that the performance standard
cannot be met and that a different means of control is appropriate.107
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains),
which is all of the following:
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.105
C.
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, township, county,
district, association or other public body (created under state law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater or other wastes;
A.
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
106. Reference: 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 71, Administration of Sewage Facilities Planning
Program, § 71.1.
107. Reference: Based on definition in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
Administrative Rule NR 151.006.
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:453
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — All separate
storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal
separate storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(18), or
designated as regulated under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v).
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
A permit issued under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92a (relating to National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permitting, monitoring and
compliance) for the discharge or potential discharge of pollutants from a
point source to surface waters.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have evolved or are indigenous
to a specific geographical area. These plants are adapted to local soil and
weather conditions as well as pests and diseases.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY — An existing channel for water runoff that was
formed by natural processes.
NATURAL GROUND COVER — Ground cover which mimics the infiltration
characteristics of predominant hydrologic soil group found at the site.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Any source of water pollution that
does not meet the legal definition of "point source" in § 184-26(14) of the
Clean Water Act.
NONSTRUCTURAL BMPs — Planning and design approaches, operational
and/or behavior-related practices which minimize stormwater runoff
generation resulting from an alteration of the land surface or limit contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, or SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full. Open channels may include closed conduits so long as
the flow is not under pressure.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, pipe, or drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
agency successor thereto.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR
122.2.
D.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:454
PERVIOUS AREA — Any material/surface that allows water to pass through
at a rate equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Columbia
Borough, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PLANS — The SWM and erosion and sediment control plans and narratives.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water that comes in contact with any raw
material, product, by-product, or waste during any production or industrial
process.
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATE CONTROL — SWM controls used to manage the peak flows for the
purposes of channel protection and flood mitigation.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD) — A rainfall-runoff relation
used to estimate peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any physical improvement to a previously developed
lot that involves earthmoving, removal, or addition of impervious surfaces.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan to manage
stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single development site. A
regional stormwater management plan could include two adjacent parcels,
an entire watershed, or some defined area in between. Regional stormwater
management plans can be prepared for new development, or as a retrofit to
manage runoff from already developed areas.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Activities, including earth disturbance
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities shall include, but not be
limited to:
Land development subject to the requirements of Chapter 190,
Subdivision and Land Development;
A.
B. Removal of ground cover, grading, filling or excavation;
Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-impervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.), and associated improvements;
C.
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
Installation or alteration of stormwater management facilities and
appurtenances thereto;
E.
F. Diversion or piping of any watercourse; and
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:455
RELEASE RATE — For a specific design storm or list of design storms,
the percentage of peak flow rate for existing conditions which may not be
exceeded for the proposed conditions.
RELEASE RATE MAP — A graphical representation of the release rates for
a specific area.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management facility that includes a
permanent pool for water quality treatment and additional capacity above
the permanent pool for temporary runoff storage.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to a stream, river or other watercourse. Also, plant
communities occurring in association with any spring, lake, river, stream or
creek through which waters flow at least periodically.108
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A BMP that is an area of permanent vegetation along
a watercourse.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A narrow strip of land, centered on a stream
or river that includes the floodplain as well as related riparian habitats
adjacent to the floodplain.109
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR EASEMENT — An easement created for the purpose
of protecting and preserving a riparian corridor.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER — A type of riparian buffer that consists of
permanent vegetation that is predominantly native trees, shrubs and forbs
along a watercourse that is maintained in a natural state or sustainably
managed to protect and enhance water quality, stabilize stream channels
and banks, and separate land use activities from surface waters.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto roof surfaces by incorporating controlledflow
roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SCS — U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (now
known as NRCS).
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by stormwater as a
product of erosion.110
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
Any other regulated activities where the municipality determines that
said activities may affect any existing watercourse's stormwater
management facilities, or stormwater drainage patterns.
G.
108. Reference: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-0300-002
(December 2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, Harrisburg, PA.
109. Reference: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-0300-002
(December 2006), as amended and updated. Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, Harrisburg, PA.
110. Reference: 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102 Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:456
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The action or process of forming or depositing
sediment in waters of this commonwealth.111
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS/SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which
prevents some infiltration of water into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SMALL PROJECT — Regulated activities that, measured on a cumulative
basis from (the date of enactment of this chapter or other date as
determined by the municipality), create additional impervious areas of
1,000 square feet or less or involve removal of ground cover, grading, filling
or excavation of an area less than 5,000 square feet and do not involve
the alteration of stormwater facilities or watercourses. Domestic landscape
and/or vegetable gardening is exempt from specific approval and permitting
under this chapter.
SMALL STORM EVENT — A storm having a frequency of recurrence of once
every two years or smaller.
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — See "hydrologic soil group."
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN). For more
information, see "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Second Edition,
Technical Release No. 55, SCS, June 1986 (or most current edition).
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law and the Clean Water Act.
STORAGE — A volume above or below ground that is available to hold
stormwater.
STORM EVENT — A storm of a specific duration, intensity, and frequency.112
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels designed to
convey stormwater.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
111. Reference: 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102 Erosion and Sediment Control.
112. Reference: City of Jacksonville website, http://www3.coj.net/Department/CityFees/
Glossary.aspx.
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:457
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT — Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No.
167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM
BMP) — See "BMPs."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY (SWM FACILITY) — Any
structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or
construction, conveys, stores, infiltrates/evaporates/transpires, cleans or
otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical SWM facilities include, but are
not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, watercourses,
road gutters, swales, storm sewers, pipes, BMPs, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
(O&M PLAN) — A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning
of the SWM facilities in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The plan
prepared by the developer or his representative indicating how stormwater
runoff will be managed at a particular development site according to this
chapter.
STREAM — A watercourse.
STRUCTURAL BMPs — Physical devices and practices that capture and
treat stormwater runoff. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the development site.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.113
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a single lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devises, transfer of ownership, or building, or lot development, or as
defined in the MPC.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
SWM SITE PLAN — A stormwater management site plan.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP OF STREAM BANK — First substantial break in slope between the
edge of the bed of the stream and the surrounding terrain. The top of stream
113. Reference: Lancaster County Model Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
§ 184-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-13
1:458
bank can either be a natural or constructed (that is, road or railroad grade)
feature, lying generally parallel to the watercourse.
TREATMENT TRAIN — The sequencing of structural best management
practices to achieve optimal flow management and pollutant removal from
urban stormwater.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
VOLUME CONTROL — SWM controls, or BMPs, used to remove a
predetermined amount of runoff or the increase in volume between the preand
post-development design storm.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a watercourse.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
WOODLAND — Land predominantly covered with trees and shrubs. Without
limiting the foregoing, Woodlands include all land areas of 10,000 square
feet or greater, supporting at least 100 trees per acre, so that either:
At least 50 trees are two inches or greater in diameter at breast height
(DBH); or
A.
B. Fifty trees are at least 12 feet in height.
§ 184-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-13
1:459

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 184-14. General requirements.
A. Preparation of a SWM site plan is required for all regulated activities,
unless preparation and submission of the SWM site plan is specifically
exempted according to § 184-26 or the activity qualifies as a small
project.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality issues
unconditional written approval of a SWM site plan or stormwater
permit.
C. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 184-29, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
D. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.114 The municipality shall maintain a record of
consultations with DEP pursuant to this subsection. Where an NPDES
permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities is required, issuance of an NPDES permit shall constitute
satisfaction of consultation with DEP.
E. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of
this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their
design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual (E&S Manual),115 No. 363-2134-008 (March
2012), as amended and updated, and the BMP Manual.
F. Developers have the option to propose a regional stormwater
management plan or participate in a regional stormwater management
plan developed by others. A regional stormwater management plan may
include off-site volume and rate control, as appropriate and supported
by a detailed design approved by the municipality in accordance with
Subsection D. A regional stormwater management plan must meet all of
the volume and rate control standards required by this chapter for the
area defined by the regional stormwater management plan, but not
necessarily for each individual development site. Appropriate
agreements must be established to ensure the requirements of this
114. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
115. Reference: Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008
(March 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
§ 184-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-14
1:461
chapter and the requirements of the regional stormwater management
plan are met.
G. Unless prohibited by Chapter 220, Zoning, or any ordinance which
regulates construction and development within the areas of the
Borough of Columbia subject to flooding, and any other applicable
requirements of the Floodplain Management Act, stormwater
management facilities located in the floodplain are permitted when
designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the BMP
Manual, regulatory requirements and the requirements of this chapter.
H. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious area shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages or phases.
(2) For development taking place in stages or phases, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this chapter.
(3) Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious.
I. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Protect and/or improve the function of floodplains, wetlands,
and wooded areas.
(b) Protect and/or improve native plant communities, including
those within the riparian corridor.
(c) Protect and/or improve natural drainageways from erosion.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
J. The design of all stormwater management facilities over karst shall
include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
K. Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. Infiltration BMPs
shall include pretreatment BMPs unless shown to be unnecessary.
L. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on suitability of soils and development site conditions
§ 184-14 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-14
1:462
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the municipality that the selected BMP has design criteria which
allow for a smaller separation.
(2) A stabilized infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant's professional designer.
(a) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined in the same
location and within the same soil horizon as the bottom of the
infiltration facility.
(b) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined as specified
in the BMP Manual.
M. The calculation methodology to be used in the analysis of volume and
peak rates of discharge shall be as required in § 184-18.
N. A planting plan is required for all vegetated stormwater BMPs.
(1) Native or naturalized/noninvasive vegetation suitable to the soil
and hydrologic conditions of the development site shall be used
unless otherwise specified in the BMP Manual.
(2) Invasive vegetation may not be included in any planting schedule.
[See "Invasive Plants in Pennsylvania" by the Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR)].
(3) The limit of existing, native vegetation to remain shall be
delineated on the plan along with proposed construction protection
measures.
(4) Prior to construction, a tree protection zone shall be delineated at
the dripline of the tree canopy. All trees scheduled to remain during
construction shall be marked; however, where groups of trees exist,
only the tress on the outside edge need to be marked. A forty-eightinch-
high snow fence or forty-eight-inch-high construction fence
mounted on steel posts located eight feet on center shall be placed
along the tree protection boundary. No construction, storage of
material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or regrading shall
occur within the tree protection zone.
(5) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc. in the American Standard of Nursery Stock.
(a) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for
optimal root growth whenever possible.
§ 184-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-14
1:463
§ 184-15. Volume controls.
Volume control BMPs are intended to maintain existing hydrologic
conditions for small storm events by promoting groundwater recharge and/
or evapotranspiration as described in this section. Runoff volume controls
shall be implemented using the design storm method described in
(b) No staking or wiring of trees shall be allowed without a
maintenance note for the stake and/or wire removal within one
year of planting.
O. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity. Staging of earthmoving
activities and selection of construction equipment should consider this
protection.
P. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff from
disturbed areas until the entire contributory drainage area to the
infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
Q. A minimum ten-foot-wide access easement shall be provided for all
stormwater facilities with tributary areas equal or greater than 1,000
square feet and not located within a public right-of-way. Easements
shall provide for ingress and egress to a public right-of-way.
R. Drainage easements shall be provided where the conveyance,
treatment, or storage of stormwater, either existing or proposed, is
identified on the SWM site plan. Drainage easements shall be provided
to contain and convey the one-hundred-year frequency flood.
S. The municipality may require additional stormwater control measures
for stormwater discharges to special management areas, including but
not limited to:
(1) Water bodies listed as "impaired" on Pennsylvania's Clean Water
Act 303(d)/305(b) integrated list.
(2) Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL).
(3) Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold-water fisheries, carbonate or other
groundwater recharge areas highly vulnerable to contamination,
drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, source water protection
zones, etc.).
T. Roof drains and sump pumps shall be tributary to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs. Use of catchment facilities for the purpose of reuse is
also permitted.
U. Nonstructural BMPs shall be utilized for all regulated activities unless
proven to be impractical.
§ 184-14 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-15
1:464
Subsection A below, or through continuous modeling approaches or other
means as described in the BMP Manual. Small projects may use the method
described in Subsection B to design volume control BMPs.
A. The Design Storm Method is applicable to any size of regulated activity.
This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event.
(2) For modeling purposes.
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) When the existing project site contains impervious area, 20%
of existing impervious area to be disturbed shall be considered
meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
(c) The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in
karst areas shall be 3:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration
area and 5:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. The
maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in nonkarst
areas shall be 5:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration
area and 8:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. A higher
ratio may be approved by the municipality if justification is
provided. Hydraulic depth may be used as an alternative to an
area-based loading ratio if the design hydraulic depth is shown
to be less than the depth that could result from the maximum
area loading ratio.
B. Volume control for small projects.
(1) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces or
an equivalent volume shall be permanently removed from the
runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of
this commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration and infiltration.
C. A detailed geologic evaluation of the development site shall be
performed in areas of carbonate geology to determine the design
parameters of recharge facilities. A report shall be prepared in
accordance with § 184-24A of this chapter.
D. Storage facilities, including normally dry, open-top facilities, shall
completely drain the volume control storage over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm. Any designed infiltration at such facilities is exempt from
the minimum twenty-four-hour standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter
period of time, provided that none of this water will be discharged into
waters of this commonwealth.
§ 184-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-15
1:465
§ 184-16. Rate controls.
Rate control for large storms, up to the one-hundred-year event, is essential
to protect against immediate downstream erosion and flooding.
E. Any portion of the volume control storage that meets the following
criteria may also be used as rate control storage:
(1) Volume control storage that depends on infiltration is designed
according to the infiltration standards in § 184-14.
(2) The volume control storage which will be used for rate control is
that storage which is available within 24 hours from the end of the
design storm based on the stabilized infiltration rate and/or the
evapotranspiration rate.
F. Volume control storage facilities designed to infiltrate shall avoid the
least permeable hydrologic soil group(s) at the development site.
A. Match predevelopment hydrograph. Applicants shall provide
infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will allow the
postdevelopment one-hundred-year hydrograph to match the
predevelopment one-hundred-year hydrograph, along all parts of the
hydrograph, for the development site. To match the predevelopment
hydrograph, the postdevelopment peak rate must be less than or equal
to the predevelopment peak rate, and the postdevelopment runoff
volume must be less than or equal to the predevelopment volume for
the same storm event. A shift in hydrograph peak time of up to five
minutes and a rate variation of up to 5% at a given time may be
allowable to account for the timing affect of BMPs used to manage the
peak rate and runoff volume. "Volume control" volumes as given in
§ 184-15 above may be used as part of this option.
B. Where the predevelopment hydrograph cannot be matched, one of the
following shall apply:
(1) For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act
167 Plan, postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storm events.116 If it
is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for two-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storms,117 then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as
necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
116. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm. See
Table III-1 in § 184-18.
117. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm. See
Table III-1 in § 184-18.
§ 184-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-16
1:466
§ 184-17. Stormwater management performance standards.
(2) For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Plan. For the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year
storm events,118 the postdevelopment peak discharge rates will
follow the applicable approved release rate maps.
C. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities shall completely drain the rate
control storage over a period of time less than or equal to 24 hours from
the peak one-hundred-year water surface design elevation.
D. A variety of BMPs should be employed and tailored to suit the
development site. The following is a partial listing of BMPs which can
be utilized in SWM systems for rate control where appropriate:
(1) Decreased impervious surface coverage.
(2) Routed flow over grass.
(3) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(4) Bioretention areas (rain gardens).
(5) Concrete lattice block or permeable surfaces.
(6) Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures.
(7) Rooftop detention.
(8) Parking lot detention.
(9) Cisterns and underground reservoirs.
(10) Amended soils.
(11) Retention basins.
(12) Detention basins.
(13) Other methods as may be found in the BMP Manual.
E. Small projects are not required to provide for rate control.
A. Runoff from impervious areas shall be drained to pervious areas within
the development site, unless the site has 85% or more impervious cover
and is a redevelopment,119 in which case the portion of the site that
discharges to pervious areas shall be maximized.
B. Stormwater runoff from a development site to an adjacent property
shall flow directly into a natural drainageway, watercourse, or into an
118. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm. See
Table III-1 in § 184-18.
119. Reference: CSN Technical Bulletin No. 5, Stormwater Design for High Intensity
Redevelopment Projects in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed, version 2.0. Chesapeake
Stormwater Network, January 5, 2011, page 43.
§ 184-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-17
1:467
§ 184-18. Calculation methodology.
existing storm sewer system, or onto adjacent properties in a manner
similar to the runoff characteristics of the predevelopment flow.
C. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter,
including the establishment of a drainage easement. Copies of all such
notifications shall be included in SWM site plan submissions.
D. Existing on-site natural and man-made SWM facilities shall be used to
the maximum extent practicable.
E. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one subwatershed to
another unless they are subwatersheds of a common watershed that
join together within the perimeter of the development site and the
effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge onto adjacent
lands.
F. Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a
basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance systems
where ponding may occur shall be two feet above the one-hundred-year
water surface elevation. If basement or underground facilities are
proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of stormwater
ponding on the structure and waterproofing and/or floodproofing
design information shall be submitted for approval.
G. All stormwater conveyance facilities (excluding detention, retention,
and wetland basin outfall structures) shall be designed to convey a
twenty-five-year storm event.120 All stormwater conveyance facilities
(excluding detention, retention, and wetland basin outfall structures)
conveying water originating from off-site shall be designed to convey a
fifty-year storm event.121 Safe conveyance of the one-hundred-year
runoff event122 to appropriate peak rate control BMPs must be
demonstrated in the design.
H. Erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels, and at all
points of discharge. Flow velocities from any storm sewer may not
result in erosion of the receiving channel.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres and time of concentration (Tc) greater than 60 minutes,
including on- and off-site areas, shall use generally accepted calculation
techniques based on the NRCS soil-cover-complex method.
120. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm.
121. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm.
122. Note: A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational Method storm.
§ 184-17 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-18
1:468
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the modified rational method, a soil-cover-complex methodology,
or other method acceptable to the municipality. Table III-1 summarizes
acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all methods will be
selected by the design professional based on the individual limitations
and suitability of each method for a particular development site.
Table III-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model
is desirable or necessary.
Win TR-55 (or
commercial computer
package based on
TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of full
hydrologic computer model
is desirable or necessary.
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For development sites less
than 200 acres, Tc<60 min.
or as approved by the
municipality.
EFH2 USDA NRCS Applicable in rural and
undeveloped areas subject
to the program limits.
Other Methods Varies Other methodologies
approved by the
municipality.
C. If the SCS method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 is to be
used in areas of carbonate geology, and Antecedent Moisture Condition
2 is to be used in all other areas. A type II distribution shall be used in
all areas.
D. If the Rational Method is used, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 data (see Subsection B above) or
PennDOT Publication 584, "PennDOT Drainage Manual," 2008 Edition,
or latest, shall be used to determine the rainfall intensity in inches per
hour based on the information for the five through sixty-minute
duration storm events.
E. Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55,
TR20, or from use of the "modified" or "unit hydrograph" Rational
§ 184-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-18
1:469
Methods. If "modified" or "unit hydrograph" Rational Methods are used,
the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall have a length equal to three
times the time of concentration (3xTc) and the descending leg shall
have a length equal to seven times the time of concentration (7xTc) to
approximate an SCS Type II hydrograph.123
F. Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
indicating volume and velocities of flow and the grades, sizes, and
capacities of water-carrying structures, sediment basins, retention and
detention structures and sufficient design information to construct such
facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both predevelopment
and postdevelopment rates for peak discharge of stormwater runoff
from all discharge points.
G. For the purpose of calculating predevelopment peak discharges, all
runoff coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual
land use assuming summer or good land conditions. Postdevelopment
runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design conveyance
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land
conditions.
H. Criteria and assumptions to be used in the determination of stormwater
runoff and design of management facilities are as follows:
(1) Runoff coefficients shall be based on the information contained in
Appendix B-1 and B-2 if the actual land use is listed in those
appendixes.124 If the actual land use is not listed in these
appendixes, runoff coefficients shall be chosen from other
published documentation, and a copy of said documentation shall
be submitted with the SWM site plan.
(2) A sample worksheet for calculating Tc is provided in Appendix
B-4.125 Times of concentration (Tc) shall be based on the following
design parameters:
(a) Sheet flow. The maximum length for each reach of sheet or
overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel
flow develops is 150 feet. Flow lengths greater than 100 feet
shall be justified based on the actual conditions at each
development site. Sheet flow may be determined using the
nomograph in Appendix B-3, or the Manning's kinematic
solution shown in the sheet flow section of Worksheet No. 1 in
Appendix B-4.126
123. Reference: "Penn State Urban Hydrology Model User Manual" by Thomas A. Seybert, PE,
David F. Kibler, PE, and Elizabeth l. White, PE, August 1993, page 70, and VT/PSUHM help
screen.
124. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
125. Editor's Note: Appendix B-4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
126. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 184-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-18
1:470
§ 184-19. Riparian corridors.
(b) Shallow concentrated flow. Travel time for shallow
concentrated flow shall be determined using Figure 3-1 from
TR-55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as shown in
Appendix B-5.127
(c) Open channel flows. At points where sheet and shallow
concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales,
gutters, curbs, or pipe collection systems, the travel times to
downstream end of the development site between these design
points shall be based upon Manning's equation and/or
acceptable engineering design standards, as determined by
the Municipal Engineer.
(3) The developer may use stormwater credits for nonstructural BMPs
in accordance with the BMP Manual. The allowable reduction will
be determined by the municipality.
(4) Peak rate control is not required for off-site runoff. Off-site runoff
may be bypassed around the site, provided all other discharge
requirements are met. If off-site runoff is routed through rate
control facilities, runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to
design those rate control facilities shall be based on actual land use
assuming winter or poor land conditions.
I. Times of concentration shall be calculated based on the methodology
recommended in the respective model used. Times of concentration for
channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
Supporting documentation and calculations must be submitted for
review and approval.
A. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian corridor
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian corridor.
B. Except as otherwise required by Chapter 102, the riparian corridor
easement shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the onehundred-
year floodplain or 35 feet from the top of stream bank (on each
side).
C. Minimum management requirements for riparian corridors.
(1) Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian corridor easement.
(2) Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian corridor easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
127. Editor's Note: Appendix B-5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 184-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-19
1:471
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
D. The riparian corridor easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds
Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as
required by zoning, unless otherwise specified in Chapter 220, Zoning.
E. Any permitted use within the riparian corridor easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing onehundred-
year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian corridors:
(1) Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
(2) Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
G. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian corridor easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
§ 184-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-19
1:472
ARTICLE IV
Information To Be Included on or with Stormwater Management
Site Plans
§ 184-20. General plan requirements.
§ 184-21. Drafting standards.
§ 184-22. SWM site plan information.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. The SWM site plan shall consist of a narrative and all applicable
calculations, maps, plans and supplemental information necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
B. All landowners of land included in the SWM site plan shall be required
to execute all applications and final documents.
C. All SWM site plans shall be prepared by a qualified person.
D. Where the regulated activity constitutes subdivision or land
development as hereinabove defined, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted with and form an integral part of the plans required under
Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. The plan should be clearly and legibly drawn.
B. If the plan is prepared in two or more drawing sheets, a key map
showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed on
each sheet.
C. Each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
D. Drawings or maps of the project area shall be drawn at one inch equals
50 feet or larger scale (i.e., one inch equals 40 feet, one inch equals 30
feet, etc.) and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch
sheets.
E. SWM site plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements
for recording for the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster
County.
F. The total development site boundary and size with distances marked to
the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree
A. The date of the SWM site plan and latest revision, graphic scale, written
scale and North arrow.
B. The name of the development, the name and address of the owner of the
property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan.
C. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan.
§ 184-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-22
1:473
D. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the SWM
facilities to be permanent fixtures that cannot be altered or removed
unless a revised plan is approved by the municipality.
E. The following signature block for the municipality:
Borough of Columbia SWM Site Plan Approval Certification
At a meeting on __________, 20___, the Borough Council of the Borough
of Columbia approved this project, and all conditions have been met.
This approval includes the complete set of plans and information that
are filed with the municipality in File No. ______________, based upon its
conformity with the standards of the Borough of Columbia Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
Borough Council President
F. For SWM facilities located off-site:
(1) A note on the plan referencing a recorded Stormwater Operation
and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement that indicates the location and
responsibility for maintenance of the off-site facilities.
(2) All off-site SWM facilities shall meet the performance standards
specified in this chapter.
G. A note informing the owner that the municipality shall have the right of
entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater conveyance,
treatment, or storage facilities.
H. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals 2,000
feet, relating the plan to municipal boundaries, at least two
intersections of road center line or other identifiable landmarks.
I. Existing features.
(1) In areas of disturbance, contours at intervals of one or two feet. In
areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas undisturbed,
five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(2) The locations of all existing utilities (including on-lot disposal
systems and wells), sanitary sewers, and water lines and associated
easements.
(3) Physical features including flood hazard boundaries, wetlands,
sinkholes, streams, lakes, ponds and other water bodies, existing
drainage courses, karst features, areas of native vegetation
including trees greater than six inches diameter at breast height,
woodlands, other environmentally sensitive areas and the total
extent of the upstream area draining through the development site.
(4) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
§ 184-22 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-22
1:474
§ 184-23. Additional information.
(5) All existing man-made features within 200 feet of the development
site boundary.
J. Proposed features.
(1) Changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including final
proposed contours at intervals of one or two feet in areas of
disturbance. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas
undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(2) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, buildings and other
impervious and semi-impervious areas
(3) The location of any proposed on-lot disposal systems, replacement
drainfield easements, and water supply wells.
(4) A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
(5) Plan and profile drawings of all proposed SWM facilities, including
BMPs, drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(6) Where pervious pavement is to be installed, pavement material and
construction specifications shall be included.
(7) The location of all existing and proposed easements, including
drainage easements, access easements and riparian corridor
easements.
(8) A planting plan shall be provided for all vegetated BMPs in
accordance with § 184-14N.
K. The location of all E&S control facilities.
A. General description of the development site, including a description of
existing natural and hydrologic features and any environmentally
sensitive areas.
B. General description of the overall SWM concept for the project,
including a description of permanent SWM techniques, nonstructural
BMPs to be employed and construction specifications of the materials to
be used for structural SWM facilities. The narrative shall include a
description of any treatment trains and how the facilities are meant to
function with each other to manage stormwater runoff.
C. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality and
peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal
stormwater management facilities that may receive runoff from the
development site.
D. Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
SWM facilities.
§ 184-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-23
1:475
§ 184-24. Supplemental information.
E. Expected project time schedule.
A. In areas of carbonate geology, a detailed geologic evaluation prepared
by a registered professional geologist (PG) must be submitted as part of
the SWM site plan. The report shall include, but not limited to the
following:
(1) The location of the following karst features;
(a) Sinkholes.
(b) Closed depressions.
(c) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(d) Fracture traces.
(e) Caverns.
(f) Intermittent lakes.
(g) Ephemeral disappearing streams.
(h) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
(2) A plan for remediation of any identified karst features.
(3) Impacts of stormwater management facilities on adjacent karst
features, and impacts of karst features on adjacent stormwater
management facilities.
B. An E&S plan, including all approvals, as required by 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, shall be provided to the municipality prior to
unconditional final plan approval.
C. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application and are
regulated under Chapter 105 or Chapter 106, require a Penn DOT
Highway Occupancy Permit, or require any other permit under
applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the
SWM site plan and must be obtained prior to unconditional final plan
approval.
D. An Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan that addresses the
requirements of § 184-36.
§ 184-23 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-24
1:476
ARTICLE V
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 184-25. Small projects.
§ 184-26. Exemption from plan submission requirements.
A. Anyone proposing a small project, shall submit three copies of the small
project application to the municipality.
B. A complete small project application shall include:
(1) Small project application form (Appendix A).128
(2) Small project sketch plan including the following:
(a) Name and address of landowner (and/or) developer.
(b) Date of small project application submission.
(c) Name of individual and/or firm that prepared the sketch if
different than the landowner and/or developer.
(d) Location and square footage of proposed impervious area or
land disturbance.
(e) Approximate footprint and location of all structures on
adjacent properties if located within 50 feet of the proposed
impervious area or land disturbance.
(f) Approximate location of existing stormwater management
facilities if present.
(g) Location and description of proposed stormwater management
facilities.
(h) Direction of proposed stormwater discharge (e.g., with
arrows).
(i) Scale and North arrow.
(3) Filing fee (in accordance with the municipality's current fee
schedule).
C. The small project application shall be submitted in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat and well organized.
A. The following regulated activities are specifically exempt from the
SWM site plan preparation and submission requirements articulated in
§ 184-14A and Articles IV and V of this chapter:
128. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 184-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-26
1:477
(1) Agricultural activity (see definitions) provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102.
(2) Forest management and timber operations (see definitions),
provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
(3) Conservation practices being installed as part of the
implementation of a conservation plan written by an NRCS
certified planner.
(4) The installation of 1,000 or fewer square feet of impervious surface
coverage proposed after (municipality selects the effective date of
the ordinance or an earlier date), provided that the activities meet
the criteria of Subsection C below and are conducted in accordance
with all requirements of this chapter.
B. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
C. An applicant proposing the cumulative installation of 1,000 square feet
or less of impervious surface coverage may be exempt from the design,
plan submittal, and processing requirements of Articles III, IV, and V of
this chapter if the proposal meets the criteria in the Subsection C. No
person or activity is exempted from compliance with § 184-38 and
Articles VII, VIII, and IX of this chapter.
(1) Any applicant desiring exemption from design, plan submission,
and plan processing requirements shall complete an application for
exemption in the form set forth in Appendix D129 and pay any
applicable filing fee.
(2) The applicant for exemption under this Subsection C shall provide
the municipality with all information necessary for the municipality
to determine that:
(a) There shall be no disturbance of land within floodplains,
wetlands, environmentally sensitive areas, riparian forest
buffers, or slopes greater than 15%.
(b) No impervious surface coverage shall be installed and no
grading or excavation shall be conducted within any existing
drainage or stormwater easement created by or shown on any
recorded plan.
(c) The applicant shall minimize soil disturbance, take steps to
minimize erosion during construction activity, and promptly
reclaim all disturbed areas with topsoil and vegetation.
129. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 184-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-26
1:478
§ 184-27. Preapplication meeting.
Applicants are encouraged to schedule a preapplication meeting to review
the overall stormwater management concept with municipal staff/engineer.
The preapplication meeting is not mandatory and shall not constitute formal
filing of a plan with the municipality. Topics discussed may include the
following:
§ 184-28. Stormwater management site plan submission.
(d) The applicant shall take steps that runoff be directed to
pervious areas on the subject property. No runoff shall be
directed onto an abutting street or neighboring property.
(e) The proposed impervious surface shall not adversely impact
any existing known problem areas or downstream property
owners or the quality of runoff entering any municipal separate
storm sewer system.
(f) The proposed impervious surface shall not create accelerated
erosion.
(3) If the proposed activity does not meet all of the criteria set forth in
Subsection C(2) above, the applicant shall follow the small project
processing procedure in § 184-25.
(4) No applicant and no activity is exempt from complying with any
state or federal requirements applicable if the subject property is
located in a high quality (HQ) or exceptional value (EV) watershed.
(5) No applicant and no activity shall violate or cause to be violated:
the Federal Clean Water Act or any regulation issued thereunder,
an NPDES permit, any recorded stormwater management or
operations and maintenance agreement, or any requirement
applicable to a municipal separate storm sewer system.
A. Available geological maps, plans and other available data.
B. Findings of the site analysis, including identification of any
environmentally sensitive areas, wellhead protection areas, riparian
corridors, hydrologic soil groups, existing natural drainageways, karst
features, areas conducive to infiltration to be utilized for volume
control, etc.
C. Results of infiltration tests.
D. Applicable provisions in Chapter 290 Subdivision and Land
Development, and/or Chapter 200, Zoning.
E. The conceptual project layout, including proposed structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
§ 184-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-28
1:479
§ 184-29. Municipal review.
A. When a stormwater management site plan is required, the applicant
shall submit the following to the municipality:
(1) Five copies to the SWM site plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Article IV of this chapter.
(2) Two copies of all supplemental data.
(3) A filing fee (in accordance with the municipality's current fee
schedule).
B. The SWM site plan shall be submitted in a format that is clear, concise,
legible, neat and well organized.
C. The applicant is responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies
such as the Lancaster County Conservation District, PennDOT, DEP, etc.
when permits from these agencies are required. Final approval shall be
conditioned upon the applicant obtaining all necessary permits.
D. Incomplete submissions as determined by the governing body or its
designee, shall be returned to the applicant within seven days, along
with a statement that the submission is incomplete, and stating the
deficiencies found. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed
accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance of the
application shall not, however, constitute an approval of the plan or a
waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal
the municipality's decision not to accept a particular application in
accordance with § 184-46 of this chapter.
E. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM
site plan is found to be deficient, the Borough of Columbia may either
disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of
minor deficiencies, the Borough of Columbia may accept submission of
revisions.
A. When the regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land
development as defined in Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land
Development, the SWM site plan and subdivision/land development
plan shall be processed concurrently according to the plan processing
procedure outlined in Article IV of Chapter 190..
B. When the regulated activity constitutes a small project, the municipality
shall review and take action on the small project application within 14
days of filing.
C. When the regulated activity does not constitute a subdivision or land
development or small project, the Municipal Engineer shall review the
SWM site plan for conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Following receipt of the Municipal Engineer's report and within 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the governing body
§ 184-28 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-29
1:480
§ 184-30. Revision of plans.
§ 184-31. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
Approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed two
years. This time period shall commence on the date that the municipality
approves the SWM site plan. If a certificate of completion as required by
§ 184-32 of this chapter has not been submitted within the specified time
period, then the municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved
and may revoke any and all permits issued by the municipality. SWM
site plans that are considered disapproved by the municipality may be
resubmitted in accordance with § 184-28 of this chapter.
§ 184-32. Certificate of completion.
after the date the application is filed, the governing body will schedule
the SWM site plan application for action at a regularly scheduled public
meeting.
E. Within 15 days of the meeting at which the SWM site plan application is
acted upon by the governing body, written notice of the governing
body's action shall be sent to the following individuals:
(1) Landowner or his agent.
(2) Applicant.
(3) Firm that prepared the plan.
(4) Lancaster County Planning Commission.
(5) Lancaster County Conservation District.
F. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing. Such conditional
approval shall be contingent upon the applicant's written acceptance of
the conditions.
A. Revisions to a SWM site plan after submission but before municipal
action shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan
consistent with § 184-28 of this chapter and be subject to review as
specified in § 184-29 of this chapter.
B. For the purposes of review deadlines, each resubmission required
under Subsection A (after submission but before approval) shall
constitute a new submission for the purposes of time limits as set forth
in the MPC and this chapter.
C. Any substantial revisions to a SWM site plan after approval shall be
submitted as a new plan to the municipality, accompanied by the
applicable review fee.
§ 184-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-32
1:481
§ 184-33. Plan recordation.
A. At the completion of the project, and as prerequisite for the release of
the financial security, the applicant shall provide certification of
completion from an engineer, landscape architect, surveyor or other
qualified person verifying that all permanent SWM facilities have been
constructed according to the plans and specifications and approved
revisions thereto.
B. Upon receipt of the certificate of completion, and prior to release of the
remaining financial security the municipality shall conduct a final
inspection to certify compliance with this chapter.
A. Upon completion of the plan improvements, the applicant shall submit
an as-built plan for recordation in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds.
The as-built plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and be sealed by a registered
professional engineer. When a digital submission of an as-built plan is
required, all coordinates as depicted on the plan shall be based on the
Pennsylvania South Zone State Plane Coordinate System (NAD83 for
horizontal and NAVD88 for vertical).
B. Concurrently with the recordation of the as-built plan, the applicant
shall submit the SWM site plan for recordation in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds, unless the site plan has already been recorded.
§ 184-32 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-33
1:482
ARTICLE VI
Operation and Maintenance
§ 184-34. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 184-35. Operation and maintenance agreements.
§ 184-36. Operation and maintenance (O&M) plan contents.
A. The landowner, successor and assigns shall maintain all stormwater
management facilities in good working order in accordance with the
approved O&M plan.
B. The landowner shall convey to the municipality easements to assure
access for inspections and maintenance, if required.
C. The landowner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address and telephone number of the person or company responsible
for maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information
will be submitted to the municipality within 10 days of the change.
D. Enumerate permanent SWM facilities as permanent real estate
appurtenances and record as deed restrictions or easements that run
with the land.
E. The record owner of the development site shall sign and record an
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement covering all stormwater
management facilities, including riparian buffers and riparian forest
buffers, which are to be privately owned. Said agreement, designated
as Appendix C, is attached and made part hereto.130 The O&M plan and
agreement shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant agreement that
runs with the land.
A. The operation and maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
B. The municipality is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
O&M agreement.
A. The O&M plan shall clearly establish the operation and maintenance
necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
B. The following shall be addressed in the O&M plan:
(1) Description of maintenance requirements, including, but not
limited to, the following:
(a) Regular inspection of the SWM facilities. To assure proper
implementation of BMPs, maintenance and care SWM BMPs
130. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 184-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-36
1:483
§ 184-37. Maintenance of facilities accepted by municipality.
should be inspected by a qualified person, which may include
the landowner, or the owner's designee (including the
municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following minimum frequencies:
[1] Annually for the first five years.
[2] Once every three years thereafter.
[3] During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm.
[4] As specified in the O&M agreement pursuant to § 184-35.
(b) All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of
any debris or other obstruction and in original design
condition.
(c) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment in order to keep the material from building up in
grass waterways, pipes, detention or retention basins,
infiltration structures, or BMPs, and thus reducing their
capacity to convey or store water.
(d) Reestablishment of vegetation of scoured areas or areas where
vegetation has not been successfully established. Selection of
seed mixtures shall be subject to approval by the municipality.
(2) Riparian forest buffer management plan prepared in accordance
with 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102, § 14(b)(4), if required.
(3) Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association
or other entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary
and permanent stormwater management and erosion and
sedimentation control facilities.
(4) Establishment of suitable easements for access to all facilities.
A. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject any proposal to
dedicate ownership and operating responsibility of any SWM facilities
to the municipality.
B. If SWM facilities are accepted by the municipality for dedication, the
landowner/developer shall be required to pay a specified amount to the
Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. This fee shall be provided to the
municipality prior to unconditional plan approval. The amount of the
deposit shall be determined as follows subject to the approval of the
municipal governing body:
§ 184-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-37
1:484
§ 184-38. Maintenance of existing facilities/BMPs.
(1) The deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and
inspections for 25 years. The municipality will establish the
estimated costs according to the O&M requirements outlined in the
approved O&M plan.
(2) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values.
(3) If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation
facility (e.g., ballfield, lake), the municipality may reduce or waive
the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value
of the land for public recreation purpose.
C. If at any time a dedicated storage facility is eliminated due to the
installation of storm sewers or other storage facility such as a regional
detention facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
D. All dedicated facilities shall be inspected by the municipality according
to the following minimum frequencies:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
(4) As specified in the O&M agreement pursuant to § 184-35.
E. Maintenance shall be conducted as necessary to provide for the
continued functioning of the facility. Costs of inspections, maintenance
and repairs are recoverable from the Municipal Stormwater
Maintenance Fund.
A. SWM facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter, which have
not been accepted by the municipality or for which maintenance
responsibility has not been assumed by a private entity, such as a
homeowners' association, shall be maintained by the individual
landowners. Such maintenance shall include at a minimum those items
set forth in § 184-36B(1) above. If the municipality determines at any
time that any permanent SWM facility has been eliminated, altered,
blocked through the erection of structures or the deposit of materials,
or improperly maintained, the condition constitutes a nuisance and the
municipality shall notify the landowner of corrective measures that are
required, and provide for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30
days, within which the property owner shall take such corrective action.
§ 184-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-38
1:485
If the landowner does not take the required corrective action, the
municipality may either perform the work or contract for the
performance of the work and bill the landowner for the cost of the
work plus a penalty of 10% of the cost of the work. If such bill is
not paid by the property owner within 30 days, the municipality may
file a municipal claim against the property upon which the work was
performed in accordance with the applicable laws. The municipality
shall have the right to choose among the remedies and may use one or
more remedies concurrently.
§ 184-38 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-38
1:486
ARTICLE VII
Fees and Expenses
§ 184-39. General.
The municipality may include all costs incurred in the review fee charged to
an applicant.
§ 184-40. Expenses covered by fees.
The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following:
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Review of the stormwater operation and maintenance plan and
stormwater agreement by the Municipal Solicitor/staff.
D. Inspections.
E. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 184-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-40
1:487

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 184-41. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
Subsection D below.
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter a municipal separate
storm sewer (if applicable), or waters of this commonwealth, and
any connections to the storm sewer from indoor drains and sinks;
and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the municipal separate storm sewer (if
applicable) which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records, and approved by the municipality.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except: as provided in Subsection D below; and discharges allowed
under a state or federal permit.
C. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a SWM facility or within a drainage easement that will limit or diminish
the functioning of the facility in any manner.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
§ 184-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-41
1:489
§ 184-42. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the
municipality.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(15) Diverted stream flows.
(16) Rising groundwaters.
E. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D above significantly contribute to
pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the municipality or DEP
will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 184-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-42
1:490
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 184-43. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within
the municipality to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject
property in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 184-44. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 184-45. Violations and penalties.
§ 184-46. Appeals.
A. Any permit or approval issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violation that caused the suspension;
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
A. Any person who or which has violated any provisions of this chapter,
shall, upon a judicial determination thereof, be subject to civil judgment
for each such violation of not less than $500 or more than $1,000, for
each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day that a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense. All fines shall be paid to Borough of
Columbia. The Borough may modify or change the penalties from time
to time by resolution passed by Borough Council.
B. In addition, the Borough of Columbia may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter, and may request any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 184-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-46
1:491
§ 184-47. Modification of ordinance provisions.
A. Any person aggrieved by any administrative action of the Borough of
Columbia may appeal to Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia
within 30 days of that action. Any such appeal shall be governed by the
procedures of Article V of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 401 et
seq.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia may appeal to the Lancaster County Court of
Common Pleas, in accordance with Article VII of Local Agency Law, 2
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq., the Local Agency Law, within 30 days of that
decision.
A. The provisions of this chapter not relating to water quality are intended
as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare. The municipality reserves the right to modify or to extend
them conditionally in individual cases as may be necessary in the public
interest; provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the
applicant shows that to the satisfaction of the municipality that the
applicable regulation is unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or
that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results. The
list of such modifications, along with an explanation of and justification
for each modification, shall be included on the plan. This section does
not apply during an enforcement action.
B. In granting waivers/modifications for provisions of this chapter not
relating to water quality, the municipality may impose such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
§ 184-46 COLUMBIA CODE § 184-47
1:492
Chapter 186
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Trees — See Ch. 202.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 184-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-47
1:493

ARTICLE I
Construction of Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-13-1948 by Ord. No. 218 (Ch. 73, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 186-1. License required. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
From and after the approval of this article, any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the construction of sidewalks, curbings and gutters for another
person on any of the public streets or alleys of the Borough of Columbia
shall obtain from the Borough Secretary/Treasurer of Columbia a sidewalk,
curb and gutter contractor's license, which license shall be for the period
of one year from January 1 through December 31, at which time the license
shall expire unless sooner revoked.
§ 186-2. Surety required. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
The person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to obtain a sidewalk,
curb and gutter contractor's license shall, prior to the issuance of the
license, file with the Borough Secretary/Treasurer a bond, with good and
sufficient surety, in an amount equal to his/her/its estimated cost of
construction, to be approved by the Borough Solicitor, payable to the
Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania, as a guarantee for the correct
construction of every piece of sidewalk, curb or gutter under his/her/its
charge, in strict accordance with the law, the ordinances, regulations and
specifications of the Borough and its proper officials; said bond to be for a
period of three years.
§ 186-3. Permit fee; lines and grades. [Amended 9-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 625]
Prior to the construction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter, a sidewalk, curb
and gutter permit shall be obtained from the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.
The applicant for said sidewalk, curb and gutter permit shall pay a fee as
set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Should the
replacement or repair of asphalt become necessary, the applicant shall pay
a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council. No
construction of any sidewalk, curb or gutter shall be undertaken until the
proper line and grade has been given by the Borough Engineer or other
properly designated official.
§ 186-4. Issuance of permits; records. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or other properly
designated official to issue all sidewalk, curb and gutter contractor licenses
upon the filing of a properly approved bond and to issue the sidewalk, curb
and gutter permit upon the payment of the proper fee and to keep an exact
and accurate record of all such licenses and permits issued.
§ 186-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-5
1:495
§ 186-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No.
284]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions hereof shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, forfeit and pay to the Borough
of Columbia, Pennsylvania, a fine of not more than $600 for each offense,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
such person or persons shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Each day that the said violation continues after notice
thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 186-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-5
1:496
ARTICLE II
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 9-9-1963 by Ord. No. 370 (Ch. 73, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 186-6. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord.
No. 702]
§ 186-7. Excavating restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any street in the Borough of Columbia except in and upon those
portions thereof established for the use of vehicles.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for
immediate action to protect or safeguard life or property.
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the Borough right-of-way of any
street, which involves cutting, breaking or disturbance of the surface
thereof or any and all facilities and/or appurtenances located within
the street (by way of example only: curbing, sidewalk, storm sewers,
utilities and traffic control devices).
OPEN — Any cutting or excavating of the surface or soil of any street,
sidewalk area or public Borough property.
OPENING — For purposes of this article, activity which revises or
changes in any way an ingress or egress point to any existing or
proposed Borough street. By way of example only, revised or changed
ingress or egress shall include construction of a new access point,
physically revising an existing access point and changing the use of an
existing access point.
PERMIT — A license issued by the recognized official or authoritative
agency, as specified in the respective regulations, which permits the
applicant to proceed with the work certified by said official or
authoritative agency in the permit application.
PERMITTEE — The person obtaining a permit, or his duly authorized
representative.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association
or corporation.
STREET — Any Borough public street, avenue, road, square, alley,
highway or other public place located in the Borough of Columbia and
established for the use of vehicles.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 186-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-8
1:497
§ 186-8. Permit required. [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 676;
4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or make any excavation of
any kind in any of the streets in the Borough without first securing a
permit therefor as hereinafter provided. Such permit shall be granted
through the Borough Highway Committee Chairman, or his designee,
when the person applying for permit files an application with the
Borough's Highway Supervisor in compliance with the provisions of this
article and pays into the Borough Treasury the amounts hereinafter
provided.
B. Permits shall only be issued to persons furnishing public utility services
or owning real property adjoining the location where the opening or
excavation is to be made.
C. The obtaining of street opening permits by Borough departments and
municipal authorities shall be waived when work is to be performed
completely by their own personnel.
D. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant for the permit shall
submit to the Borough's Highway Supervisor a plan(s) providing the
level of detail required by the Borough Engineer to adequately show the
proposed activities' conformance with the ordinances of the Borough of
Columbia. Any such plan(s) shall be kept on the job site at all times by
the applicant once the permit is granted. Any permit issued hereunder
shall specify the exact location where the opening or excavation is to be
made, the approximate permitted size or depth thereof and the time
within which the work for which the permit is granted is to be
completed.
E. Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant must submit to the
Borough proof of general liability insurance covering the excavation or
opening proposed in an amount not less than $1,000,000.
F. Except in emergency situations, a permit shall be issued to the
applicant by the Borough Highway Committee Chairman or his
designee within five working days after all requirements for the
issuance thereof have been completed. If the application is
disapproved, written notice of disapproval together with the reasons
therefor shall be given to the applicant.
G. Emergency excavations.
(1) In the event that street openings are necessitated by emergencies,
street opening permits shall be obtained within five regular
business days following the emergency street opening, and said
permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work began.
(2) A person performing street openings for an emergency must certify
the emergency nature of the circumstance in writing to the
§ 186-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-8
1:498
§ 186-9. Application. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any
of the streets in the Borough of Columbia shall make application to the
Code Enforcement Officer in writing for the purpose. Such application shall
be made upon blanks to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth
the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or
excavation and the approximate size or depth thereof, and shall contain
an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the
Commonwealth in relation thereto and that the applicant shall well and
truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from and indemnify it
against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges
for or by reason of the proposed opening or excavation, and all damages
to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom, or occurring in
the prosecution of the work connected therewith or from any other matter,
cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 186-10. Fees and bonding. [Amended 6-4-1999 by Ord. No. 676;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
Borough Highway Committee Chairman, or his designee, within
five regular business days following such emergency.
(3) A person performing street openings for an emergency must notify
the Borough Police Department (written or verbal) of the location
of the emergency street opening prior to commencing the
emergency operation, either en route or at the scene.
A. Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough, the applicant shall pay to the Borough a permit fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council for any opening or
excavation, regardless of size, within the Borough limits. This fee will
cover the cost of inspection and other services in connection therewith.
This permit fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. [Amended 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
B. When application shall be made to open or excavate any longitudinal
opening in a Borough street, before any permit shall be issued so to
open or excavate, the applicant shall pay to the Borough a trench fee
established by resolution of the Borough Council, which fee may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
[Amended 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
C. The applicant shall pay to the Borough upon receipt of a permit to open
or excavate a street in the Borough a degradation fee to defray a
percentage of the costs for resurfacing and reconstruction of Borough
streets associated with street openings and excavations. The
degradation fee shall be in accordance with the degradation fee
schedule attached hereto (see Exhibit A131) or any such schedule then in
§ 186-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-10
1:499
§ 186-11. Backfilling of trenches and restoration of roadway
surfaces and appurtenances. [Amended 6-4-1999 by Ord. No. 676;
4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
effect as may be adopted by resolution of Borough Council from time to
time.
D. Public utility companies desiring to open or excavate a street shall
provide the Borough with a bond of indemnity by a reputable surety
company licensed to do business in the commonwealth, in the amount
of $50,000 in one calendar year, which amount shall be the same for
each year thereafter unless changed by resolution of Council. A bond of
indemnity shall be furnished separately for each calendar year by a
public utility company and shall be in effect for 36 months. All other
persons or entities, including contractors performing work for the
Borough, desiring to open or excavate a street shall furnish to the
Borough a properly executed surety bond. All such bonds furnished
shall be executed by a reputable surety company licensed to do
business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such bonds shall
cover street opening or excavating work performed during one
calendar year and shall be in effect for a thirty-six-month period. The
amount of the surety bond shall be $5,000 unless any street excavation
and restoration work for a single project exceeds such amount. In that
case, a person must secure additional bonding in an amount equal to
$25 per square yard opened or excavated. The bonding amount may be
changed by resolution of Council adopted from time to time.
A. Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Borough shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation with
flowable backfill material, as to prevent any settling thereafter, and
shall restore the surface and appurtenances (appurtenances include,
but are not limited to, curbs, sidewalks, storm sewers, utilities and
traffic control devices) to no worse condition than they were before the
opening or excavation, with such restoration to be in accordance with
the Borough of Columbia Technical Specifications Standard Details
attached hereto as Exhibit B (which exhibit shall be kept on file in the
Borough offices) and to the satisfaction of the Borough Highway
Supervisor and the Borough Engineer. As restored, and unless
otherwise provided for in the said Borough of Columbia Technical
Specifications Standard Details, the surface shall conform to the proper
grade and be of the same surface covering as the part of the
thoroughfare immediately adjoining the opening. [Amended
3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
B. If, within five years after the restoration of the surface or appurtenance
as herein provided, defects shall appear therein resulting from
defective workmanship by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse
131. Editor's Note: Exhibit A (Ch. 186, Art. II) is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 186-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-11
1:500
§ 186-12. Applicant's expense; additional charges.
§ 186-13. Excavation specifications. [Amended 6-4-1999 by Ord. No.
676; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
the Borough for the cost of all necessary repairs to the restored surface
or appurtenances. [Amended 8-10-2015 by Ord. No. 864]
C. All work in connection with the permit as described above (including all
items shown on the plans and specifications submitted to obtain the
permit and any and all incidental work required to compete the work to
the satisfaction of the Borough Highway Supervisor and Borough
Engineer) shall be done by or for the person to whom the permit has
been issued at his or its expense.
D. The Borough of Columbia Technical Specifications Standard Details
referred to in this Code may be changed from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council. [Added 3-21-2006 by Ord. No. 764]
A. All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection and refilling, shall be done by the applicant at his
expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this
article and to the supervision and approval of the Borough Engineer or
the Borough foreman, provided that the Borough Engineer or the
Borough foreman may require that cutting of the surface of improved
streets and the backfilling of all excavations therein shall be done by
the Borough, and the charge therefor shall be paid by the applicant on
the basis of actual cost of the work plus 20%.
B. In addition, for every square foot of street surface opened in surfaced
streets and avenues pursuant to the above permit, and in addition to
said base charge, shall be fees as set from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council.
A. All work in Borough streets governed by this article and for which the
permit has been issued in accordance herewith shall be done in
accordance with and pursuant to the Borough of Columbia Technical
Specifications Standard Details attached hereto and incorporated
herein as Exhibit B.132
B. Any work authorized by a permit issued pursuant hereto and subject to
all provisions of the Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287 et
seq.,133 as amended or supplemented from time to time. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to contact the utilities that have recorded
their facilities in compliance with said act. A partial list of utilities
providing services in the Borough and their office addresses may be
obtained from the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
132. Editor's Note: Exhibit B (Ch. 186, Art. II) is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
133. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 186-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-13
1:501
C. Any person performing work pursuant to a permit issued hereunder
shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations, provisions, and policies governing health and safety,
including without limitation the Federal Construction Safety Act (Public
Law 91-54), Federal Register, Chapter XVII, Part 1926 of Title 29 Code
of Federal Regulations, Occupational Safety and Health Regulations for
Construction, and subsequent publications updating these regulations.
D. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway shall
be restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
E. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
F. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
any existing underground utility line or lateral or aboveground utility
line without first contacting the owner of such utility.
G. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Borough Engineer and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit.
The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Borough Engineer or an inspector designated by him,
and shall be done only in a method approved by him. Tunneling does not
include current trenchless technology procedures such as boring,
jacking, or other suitable techniques.
H. All openings and excavations shall be backfilled promptly. All such work
shall be performed in accordance with and pursuant to the Borough of
Columbia Technical Specifications Standard Details attached hereto as
Exhibit B.
I. In accordance with and in addition to the Borough of Columbia
Technical Specifications Standard Details attached hereto as Exhibit B,
during the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition,
both day and night, by flag persons, barricades, lights, signs, drums and
all other devices as required and in accordance with the most current
manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, MUTCD and PADOT
standards (Publication 203 - Work Zone Traffic Control) and all
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express
condition that the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify,
save and keep harmless the Borough from any loss in damages or
otherwise whatsoever which may or shall be occasioned at any time by
the said excavation or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any
pipes, apparatus, conduit or any other matter placed in the said
excavation.
J. The applicant shall notify the Borough Highway Supervisor when the
opening or excavation is ready for backfilling before commencing any
§ 186-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-13
1:502
§ 186-14. Subsurface accidents; emergencies. [Amended 3-21-2006
by Ord. No. 764]
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately, and not later
than the next business day thereafter, and that all other provisions of this
article are fully complied with. Failure to apply for the road opening permit
within the specified time period will result in a penalty established by the
Borough Council and may be changed from time to time by resolution of
the Borough Council. And if any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, the Borough Engineer, after such notice as
he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case,
shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such emergency
and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 186-15. Timely notice. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
The Borough Highway Committee Chairman or his designee shall give
timely notice to all persons owning property on or abutting to any street
within the Borough about to be resurfaced or reconstructed, and to all
public utility companies operating in the Borough, and all such persons
and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer connections as
backfilling in the case of unimproved streets and before temporary
paving in the case of improved streets; such notifications to allow for
inspections to be made.
K. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Borough Engineer or Highway Supervisor, be
unsatisfactory and the same shall not be corrected in accordance with
his instructions within the time fixed by him, or, in the event that the
work for which the permit was granted is not completed within the time
noted on the permit, the Borough may proceed to correct such
unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed and
charge the cost thereof, plus 20%, to the applicant.
L. The permission herein granted does not confer on the permit holder or
its contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery
within the legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations,
and conditions as the Highway Supervisor or Borough Engineer may
prescribe.
M. If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permit holder further agrees to
change or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this
permit which interfere with the improvements of the roadway at the
permit holder's own cost and expense.
§ 186-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-15
1:503
well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said
street within 30 days from the giving of such notice, unless such time is
extended in writing for cause shown by the Highway Committee Chairman.
New paving shall not be opened for a period of 10 years after the completion
thereof except in the case of emergency. If it is sought to excavate upon
or open a street within 10 years after the completion of the paving thereof
for any other reason than an emergency, the applicant shall make written
application to the Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall only
be issued after express approval of Council.
§ 186-16. Conditions for laying and extending utility lines.
[Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 676; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
No new water, sewer, steam or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such main or existing
line shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough until the exact
location hereto and the plan therefor shall have first been approved by
Borough Council. Borough Council shall not approve the locating of any
such main or line at a depth of less than 30 inches from the surface of the
street unless it shall be convinced that locating the same at a depth of more
than 30 inches from the surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 186-17. Payments; failure to pay. [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No.
676; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions
hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the
Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall
be collectible by the Borough by an action in assumpsit, in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims, or in any other
manner allowable at law.
§ 186-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No.
676; 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
In addition to the remedies set forth in § 186-17 of the Code of the Borough
of Columbia, Pennsylvania, any person, firm, or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, or suffer imprisonment not
exceeding two years, or both, in the discretion of the court. Every day that
a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 186-19. Nonapplicability. [Amended 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 702]
A. Refer to Article IV, General Provisions for Streets, Sidewalks and
Buildings, for information regarding the installation of sidewalks, curb,
and poles.
§ 186-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-19
1:504
B. Refer to Borough of Columbia Technical Specifications Standard Details
Exhibit B134 for specifications regarding the construction of curb and
sidewalks.
134. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 186-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-19
1:505

ARTICLE III
Protection of Streets
[Adopted 11-11-1963 by Ord. No. 373 (Ch. 73, Art. III, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 186-20. Nondestructive material required. [Amended 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 726]
It shall be unlawful for anyone, being the owner of a horse or other animal
or vehicle or one in who is in possession or control of said horse or other
animal or vehicle, to allow said horse or other animal or vehicle to be
ridden, led or driven on the streets of the Borough of Columbia without
said horse or animal being shod with shoes made of rubber or other
nondestructive material, or said vehicle being in conformity with all
applicable Pennsylvania Department of Transportation rules, ordinances
and regulations.
§ 186-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600 for each offense, plus costs of prosecution, to be
collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 186-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-21
1:507

ARTICLE IV
General Provisions for Streets, Sidewalks and Buildings
[Adopted 1-14-1908 (Ch. 73, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code)]
§ 186-22. Issuance of permits; penalties.
§ 186-23. Permit granting or refusal. [Added 12-7-1921]
§ 186-24. Application. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 269]
Such permit, when the object therefor is not in violation of any ordinance,
resolution or regulation of said Borough, shall be issued by the Borough
Secretary/Treasurer on application in writing and after payment of the
stipulated fee. Such application shall specify the character, material,
location, proximity to house line and extent and character of substructures
of the building; location and material of the sidewalk, curb or gutter, and
the size and location of the pipes, posts or poles to be built, laid or erected
and shall, in addition, set forth in detail all such measurements, data
A. No person shall occupy any street, lane, avenue or alley or any part
thereof with pipes, poles, lumber, stone, bricks, mortar beds or other
building material or accessories, or commence the erection,
construction, re-erection or reconstruction of or excavation for any
building, structure, wall, fence, pier, foundation, curb, sidewalk, gutter,
conduit, post, pole or gas, water or other pipe, main or sewer in,
through, on or along any street, lane, avenue or alley in the Borough of
Columbia unless a proper permit shall be first obtained.
B. Every person, including all and every owner, agent, builder and
contractor, who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be fined a sum for the use of the
Borough of Columbia not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, to
be recovered in like manner as other debts are by law recoverable, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days.
A. From and after the passage of this article, if any person file with the
Chairman of the Highway Committee any objection to the granting of
any permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction, repair or
alteration of any building, the said permit shall be withheld until the
matter of granting said permit shall be determined by the Borough
Council.
B. Should any request for any permit be for any building to be erected
within 20 feet of the building line of any street, or nearer the building
line of said street than the majority of the buildings on the same side of
the street in the same block, then the action of the Council in granting
or refusing said permit shall be final.135
135. Editor's Note: Former § 73-27C, regarding fines and penalties, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 186-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-24
1:509
and explanation as shall or may be necessary or desirable for the proper
information to determine the nature of the work and whether the same
is in conformity with the law and applicable ordinances, resolutions and
regulations. Such permit so issued shall not be valid or effective until
countersigned by the Borough Engineer, who shall thereon certify that the
applicant has obtained the proper lines and grades and that the purpose
and object for which such permit is granted does not interfere or conflict
with any planned or contemplated pipes, sewers or other public utilities.
§ 186-25. Numbering of permits.
Such permits shall be printed and bound in book form, each permit to be
numbered consecutively and attached to a stub of like size and number by
perforations, which stub shall be filed in duplicate of the permit issued and
detached. Such stubs shall be delivered to the Borough auditors for audit
at such time or times as other Borough books, records and accounts are
audited.
§ 186-26. Issuance. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 269]
Such permit shall be issued upon a form furnished by the Borough.
§ 186-27. Fees. [Amended 6-10-1931 by Ord. No. 136; 5-10-1971 by
Ord. No. 477]
Fees for the following shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council:
A. For issuing the several permits. All fees received for such permits shall
be for the use of the Borough of Columbia and shall be turned over to
the Borough Secretary/Treasurer monthly. [Amended 9-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 625]
B. For the erection, laying, alteration or reconstruction of every
continuous curb and sidewalk and/or gutter, including corner
properties, for the first 25 linear feet or fraction thereof of curb
measurement.
C. For each additional linear foot or fraction thereof.
D. For the erection, alteration or reconstruction of every wall, fence or set
of piers.
E. For excavating in streets and alleys and the laying of sewers, conduits
and gas, water and other pipes and mains (base charge).
F. For every square foot of street surface opened in surfaced streets and
avenues pursuant to the above permit, and in addition to said base
charge. [Amended 11-12-1956 by Ord. No. 307]
§ 186-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-27
1:510
§ 186-28. Material on streets. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No.
269]
No person to whom such permit shall be issued shall occupy with material
and accessories or with earth or refuse or otherwise close or obstruct
more than half of the street or sidewalk immediately in front of or nearest
to such building or excavation, except if such permit is granted for or
shall include the laying or relaying of a sidewalk or excavating beneath a
sidewalk for substructure when the privilege of closing or obstructing the
sidewalk for a period not exceeding eight days shall be included therein.
On or before the eighth day of such closing or obstructing, it shall be the
duty of the owner, agent, builder or contractor, and every one of them, to
have erected and completed a trestled or other walk or superstructure over
such excavation or sidewalk for the convenient resumption of foot traffic.
Such walk or superstructure shall be not less than five feet in width and
shall be provided with adequate siderails. Every person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof before any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days; provided that each day's
continuance of a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 186-29. Adequate lights and warning devices required. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
Every person who shall be granted a permit for the occupancy of any street,
lane, avenue or alley with building or other material and accessories or for
the closing or obstructing thereof in any manner whatsoever, shall, within 1/
2 hour after sunset of each day during such occupancy or obstructing, place
or cause to be placed on or at such obstruction signal lights of color, size
and shape as required by all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances of
the Borough of Columbia, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, which lights shall be of sufficient volume
G. For every square foot of street surface opened in unsurfaced streets
and avenues pursuant to the above permit, and in addition to said base
charge. [Amended 11-12-1956 by Ord. No. 307]
H. For excavating for the installation, substitution and/or removal of every
post or pole in sidewalks and alleys. [Amended 9-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 625]
I. For excavating for the installation, substitution and/or removal of every
house service pipe and/or stop of drain in sidewalks.
J. For occupancy of a street, alley or sidewalk with building material,
devices or accessories, provided that the privilege of such occupancy is
not included in a permit then in force, or with coal or refuse, for each
period of 24 hours or fraction thereof. [Amended 9-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 625]
§ 186-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-29
1:511
and number to give adequate warning to the public of the presence of such
obstruction and which lights shall be kept burning until 1/2 hour before
sunrise. Every person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be fined a sum for the use of the
Borough of Columbia not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, to
be recovered in like manner as other debts are by law recoverable, and,
in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days; and if damage or injury to persons or
property results from the failure or refusal of such person to comply with
the provisions hereof, such person shall be liable to the said Borough for all
and every loss and damage suffered and sustained by or recovered against
the Borough of Columbia by reason of such failure or refusal to comply with
the provisions hereof.
§ 186-30. Excavation for foundations and similar structures.
No person shall build, alter or repair or excavate for any foundation or other
wall, cellar entrance, coal chute, vault, arch or other substructure which
does or shall extend beyond the house line of any street, lane, avenue or
alley, unless such privilege shall be specifically mentioned and included in
the permit. Every person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be fined a sum for the use of the
Borough of Columbia not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, to be
recovered in like manner as other debts are by law recoverable, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 186-31. Interference with grade or safety of sidewalk.
No permit shall be issued for the building, altering or repairing of or
excavating for any foundation or other wall, cellar entrance, coal chute,
vault, arch or other substructure which does or shall extend beyond the
house line of any street, lane, avenue or alley, if such substructure is or
shall be higher than, or which does or shall interfere with, the grade,
construction or safety of the sidewalk over or in front of such substructure.
But if such substructure shall not be violation of the foregoing provisions
of this section, a permit therefor, subject to the provisions of § 186-24
hereof, may and shall be issued, provided the owner of the building or lot
in front of or from which such substructure is desired shall first satisfy the
Committee on Highways and the Borough Engineer of the safety, sufficiency
and adequacy of the construction thereof. And the person or persons who
shall be the owner or owners of every such building or lot in front of or
to which any such substructure shall be built or attached, at such time
as any final verdict for damages may or shall be recovered against the
Borough of Columbia for damage or injury to person or property by reason
of the faulty or insufficient construction, repair or maintenance of such
substructure, shall be liable to the said Borough for all and every loss and
damage sustained by or recovered against the said Borough by reason of
such damage or injury.
§ 186-29 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-32
1:512
§ 186-32. Projecting structures. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No.
269]
No person shall hereafter place, build or erect any porch, veranda, pillar,
pier, bulk or bay window, cellar door, railing or entrance or permanent
stand beyond the house line and above the grade of the sidewalk so that
the same shall project beyond the house line a greater distance than 4 1/
2 feet; and in any street in which the distance from the curbline to the
house line is eight feet or less, such porch, veranda, pillar, pier, bulk or
bay window, cellar door, railing or entrance or permanent stand shall not
project beyond the house line a greater distance than 1/2 the width of the
sidewalk. Every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
after 15 days' written notice from the Committee on Highways and upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30
days; provided each day's continuance of a violation of any of the provisions
of this section, after notice as provided herein, shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 186-33. Private residence.
No person shall build, erect or reset a private residence, the first or ground
floor of which shall be less than 12 inches above the grade of the sidewalk
at the house line in front of such residence.
§ 186-34. Building and lot numbers. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord.
No. 269]
A. With the exception of churches, schools and other public buildings not
customarily designated by number, the main building upon every lot
located within the Borough shall be assigned a proper street number or
numbers. The owner or agent of the said building shall place or cause to
be placed the said number or numbers conspicuously upon the said
building or lots as to be plainly visible from the street or alley upon
which such building faces. Such number or numbers shall and may be
obtained without charge or fee on application to the Borough Engineer,
whose duty it shall be within 15 days thereafter to ascertain and give to
such applicant the proper number or numbers applied for. The method
of ascertaining such number or numbers shall be as follows:
(1) A number shall be designated for every 15 lineal feet.
(2) Even numbers shall be used exclusively upon the south and west
sides of streets and alleys, and odd numbers shall be used
exclusively upon the north and east sides thereof.
(3) The numbering of streets and alleys extending eastwardly and
westwardly shall be computed by starting at Front Street with
number 100. Streets and alleys extending northwardly and
§ 186-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-34
1:513
§ 186-35. Construction, maintenance and replacement of sidewalks
and curbs; conformity; enforcement. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord.
No. 269; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
southwardly shall be numbered northwardly and southwardly from
Locust Street, commencing at Locust Street with number one.
(4) All squares shall be presumed to contain 100 numbers, and each
successive square shall be commenced with the hundred next
higher than the starting number of the preceding square.
(5) All numbers shall be maintained in a complete and legible condition
by the owner or agent of the properties numbered as herein
provided.
B. Any person who shall fail or refuse to properly number any building or
to maintain the said number or numbers as herein provided shall, after
30 days' written notice from the Committee on Highways to do so, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 30 days; provided, each week's continuance of a violation
of any of the provisions of this section, after notice, shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Construction of new sidewalks and curbs along existing Borough
streets or state highways. The owner or owners of all land or property
abutting a street located in the Borough of Columbia shall, upon written
notice from the Borough of Columbia, construct a new sidewalk and/or
curb within 60 calendar days from receipt of such notice. If said owner
or owners shall after 60 days from receipt of such notice fail or refuse to
construct such sidewalk and/or curb, of the Borough of Columbia may
cause such sidewalk or curb to be constructed at the owner or owners'
expense, which expense shall equal the reasonable and actual costs of
labor and materials, together with a ten-percent surcharge, which costs
and expenses, if not paid, shall be deemed to be municipal claims,
lienable in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania law.
B. Maintenance of existing sidewalks and curbs. All sidewalks and curbs
shall conform to the established line and grade and shall be kept and
maintained in good and safe order and repair by the owner or owners.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish
criteria to be used in evaluating the condition of sidewalks and curbs.
The Borough will provide written notice to each owner or owners to
repair or replace those sections of sidewalk and curb which are in
violation of the Borough's maintenance criteria. The owner or owners
shall make repairs within 60 calendar days from the date of such notice.
If said owner or owners shall after 60 days from receipt of such notice
fail or refuse to make such repairs to the sidewalks and/or curbs, the
Borough Council may cause such sidewalks or curbs to be repaired at
the owner or owners' expense, which expense shall equal the
§ 186-34 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-35
1:514
reasonable and actual costs of labor and materials, together with a
ten percent surcharge, which costs and expenses, if not paid, shall be
deemed to be municipal claims, lienable in accordance with applicable
Pennsylvania law.
C. Exceptions to the requirements of sidewalk and/or curb installation.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia may, from time to
time, by resolution, identify locations within the Borough of Columbia
where sidewalk or curb will not be required. Attached hereto and
incorporated herein as Exhibit A136 is a map of the Borough streets
identifying locations where sidewalks and curbs are not currently
required.
D. Replacement of sidewalk and curb by individual property owner or
owners. A property owner, upon his initiative and without notice from
any Borough authority, may construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk
and/or curb in front of his property, provided that such owner shall first
obtain from the Borough a permit for the same, the application for
which permit shall set forth the requirements for the proper installation
or replacement. Such owner shall conform to the requirements of this
article and the specifications as established and amended by the
Borough of Columbia from time to time regarding the installation,
repair and maintenance of curbs and sidewalks. If such work is not in
conformance with the Borough specifications, said owner or owners
shall perform such necessary repairs so as to make the work be in
compliance with the Borough specifications within 60 calendar days
from the date the Borough notifies the owner or owners of the same. If
said owner or owners shall, after 60 days from receipt of such notice,
fail or refuse to make such repairs to the work, the Borough may cause
such work to be performed at the owner or owners' expense, which
expense shall equal the reasonable and actual costs of labor and
materials, together with a ten-percent surcharge, which costs and
expenses, if not paid, shall be deemed to be municipal claims, lienable
in accordance with applicable Pennsylvania law.
E. Replacement of sidewalk and curb as part of the proposed street
reconstruction and resurfacing project.
(1) Except for properties listed on Exhibit A hereto, when the Borough
or PennDOT shall propose to reconstruct or resurface any street,
the Borough shall serve written notice of the same to all persons
owning property abutting the street about to be improved and to all
utility companies operating within the Borough of Columbia. Within
60 calendar days from the delivery of such notice all notified
persons shall complete or cause to be completed all necessary
repairs and replacement of sidewalk and curb as directed, except if
such property is listed on Exhibit A hereto. All utility companies
operating within the Borough shall also complete any utility or
upgrade any existing utility within the Borough right-of-way. All
136. Editor's Note: Exhibit A (Ch. 186, Art. IV) is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 186-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-35
1:515
§ 186-36. Sidewalk construction specifications. [Amended
11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 269; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 3-14-2005
by Ord. No. 747]
All sidewalks hereinafter constructed shall be constructed in accordance
with and in addition to the Borough of Columbia Technical Standard Details
attached hereto as Exhibit B and Penn DOT Standard (Publication
203—Work Zone Traffic Control), both as may be amended from time to
time.
§ 186-37. Paved sidewalks required; exceptions.
repairs, replacements and new installations shall be in first-class
condition so that the same cannot reasonably be expected to
require repair or renewal within a period of 10 years thereafter.
(2) Upon failure of any of the notified person or persons to comply with
the notice from the Borough to make such repairs or replacements,
the Borough shall be entitled to collect the cost of such renewals,
repairs, caulking, removal, installation, construction, or other work
from the aforesaid responsible person or persons, either by
invoicing the person or persons, or, in the case of water or sewer
house connections, by filing municipal liens therefor against the
abutting properties benefited by such connections.
F. All construction, maintenance and replacement of sidewalks and curbs
shall be performed in accordance with the Borough of Columbia
Technical Specification Standard Details attached hereto as Exhibit B137
and Penn DOT Standard (Publication 203—Work Zone Traffic Control),
both as amended from time to time, and in accordance with all other
local ordinances and applicable Pennsylvania law.
G. Borough financial incentive programs. From time to time the Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia may, by resolution, adopt financial
incentive programs to assist property owners within the Borough of
Columbia in financing the cost of curb and sidewalk installations and/or
repairs; which policies and incentive programs may be on such terms as
the Council may reasonably determine to be applicable and as may be
amended by the Council from time to time.
A. All sidewalks shall be paved from the house line to the curbline, except
in such streets or squares thereof as are essentially residential streets
in which the houses, or a majority of them, are set back from the house
line a distance of 4 1/2 or more feet. In such streets or squares thereof
the sidewalk may extend from the house line toward the curbline the
following minimum widths:
(1) Nine feet in streets 70 and 80 feet in width;
137. Editor's Note: Exhibit B (Ch. 186, Art. IV) is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 186-35 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-37
1:516
§ 186-38. Drains and gutters. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
Private drains or gutters shall not discharge directly onto the surface of any
sidewalk. The discharge shall be directed into a minimum four-inch PVC
conduit under the sidewalk or a trench drain designed to be flush with the
surface of the sidewalk. The actual construction shall be under the direction
of the Borough Highway Supervisor.
§ 186-39. Placement of poles, hitching posts, fire hydrants, utilities
and trees. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
All poles, hitching posts, fire hydrants and water, gas and other stop boxes
shall be placed 12 inches outside the curbline, and all trees where the
sidewalk is paved from the curbline to the house line shall be placed 18
inches outside the curbline. Where, under provisions of § 186-37 hereof, a
space between the end of the sidewalk and the curb is maintained as a lawn,
all approved street trees shall be placed in accordance with any plans for
streetscapes approved hereinafter by the Borough and in accordance with
any approvals granted by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 186-40. Signs and awnings projecting over sidewalks. [Amended
11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 269]
All signs and awnings and all limbs and branches of trees on, along or
projecting over any sidewalk lower than eight feet above the grade of
such sidewalk, and all grates, covers and water, gas or other stop boxes
and similar devices which shall extend or project above the grade of any
sidewalk shall be deemed and regarded as a nuisance. If the owner or
owners of any land or property in front of or along which such nuisance
exists shall not, within 10 days after written notice from the Committee
on Highways so to do, remove and abate such nuisance, the Borough shall
cause such nuisance to be removed and abated and shall collect from the
owner or owners of such land or property the reasonable and actual cost
thereof, with an additional charge of 10% in accordance with the Acts of
Assembly in such cases made and provided.
§ 186-41. Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs; repairs. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
All sidewalks and curbs shall conform to the established grade and shall
be kept and maintained in good and safe order and repair by the owner
or owners of the land or property abutting thereon, and if or when any
(2) Eight feet in streets 66 feet in width;
(3) Seven feet in streets 50 and 60 feet in width;
(4) Four feet in streets 40 feet in width;
B. Provided, that the space between the end of the sidewalk and the curb
be maintained as a lawn.
§ 186-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-41
1:517
sidewalk or curb does not conform to the established grade or is not, in the
judgment of the Borough (or the Borough's designee which may include,
but shall not be limited to, the Borough Council Highway Committee, the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough Manager), in good
and safe order and repair, the said Code Enforcement Officer, after 60 days'
written notice to such owner or owners to raise, lower, repair or reconstruct
such sidewalk or curb, shall cause such raising, lowering, repairing or
reconstruction to be done at the cost of such property owner, which cost
shall include the reasonable cost of all labor and materials with an
additional ten-percent surcharge, together with all other actual charges
and expenses, which charges and expenses shall and may, if not paid,
be treated as municipal claims, lienable under the applicable laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 186-42. Private driveways over sidewalks. [Amended 8-6-1912;
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
Private driveways over sidewalks and approaches across sidewalks to
private alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough of
Columbia Technical Specifications and Standard Details, as described
hereinabove, from the building line to the outer edge of the gutter and
shall be subject to the same municipal control and regulation as are other
sidewalks and gutters. Such driveways and approaches shall be laid and
constructed in such manner and with such shape and conformity as the
Borough shall in every instance determine and prescribe. Approaches
across sidewalks to private alleys shall be paved and maintained jointly
by the owners of all land abutting on such alley, the cost thereof to be
borne and assessed in accordance with the foot-front rule. All construction
within the Borough right-of-way shall be in accordance with the Borough of
Columbia Technical Specifications and Standard Details.
§ 186-43. Alignment of curblines.
§ 186-44. New sidewalks; concrete curbing. [Amended 11-23-1954
by Ord. No. 269; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
Every new sidewalk and every sidewalk which shall be relaid or
reconstructed shall be provided with concrete curbing, which shall be
placed, laid or erected in conformity with such specifications as Council
A. The alignment of curblines and all streets or parts thereof to be opened
and in all streets or squares thereof in which sidewalks have not been
laid, and in all streets or squares thereof which shall or may be paved
with brick, asphalt or other similar material shall be in such dimensions
as directed from time to time by the Borough Engineer and/or by
resolution of Borough Council. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No.
747]
B. Provided, that in streets in which a railway track has been located, the
width of the driveway shall in no instance be less than 36 feet.
§ 186-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-44
1:518
shall from time to time adopt as standard. If any sidewalk shall be laid,
relaid or reconstructed in violation of any of the provisions of this section,
the Committee on Highways, after 90 days' written notice to the owner or
owners of the land abutting on such sidewalk, shall cause a proper curb to
be placed, laid and constructed, and the Borough shall collect from such
owner or owners the reasonable and actual cost of all labor and materials,
with 10% advance thereon, together with all charges and expenses, in
accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such cases made and provided.
§ 186-45. Curbing specifications. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 747]
All curbing hereafter constructed shall be constructed in accordance with
and in addition to the Borough of Columbia Technical Specifications
Standard Details attached hereto as Exhibit B and Penn DOT Standard
(Publication 203—Work Zone Traffic Control), both as amended from time
to time.138
§ 186-46. Nuisance declared. [Amended 11-23-1954 by Ord. No.
269]
All poles, stepping-stones, hitching posts and other obstructions erected,
projecting or existing beyond the curbline of any street shall be deemed
and regarded as a nuisance. If the owner or owners of any land or property
in front of or along which such nuisance exists shall not, after 10 days'
written notice from the Committee on Highways so to do, remove and abate
such nuisance, the said Committee on Highways shall cause such nuisance
to be removed and abated and the Borough shall collect the reasonable
and actual cost thereof, with 10% advance thereon, from such owner or
owners in accordance with the Acts of Assembly in such cases made and
provided.139
§ 186-47. Obstructing street restricted. [Amended 11-23-1954 by
Ord. No. 269]
No person, firm or corporation shall, for any length of time or for any
purpose whatsoever, by ditches or openings or by the deposit or placement
of earth or other material, thing or matter, close or obstruct more than 2/
3 of the width of the driveway of any street, or close or obstruct the
intersection of any two or more streets in such manner that vehicles or
pedestrians are denied a safe and continuous course on and to any of
such intersecting streets. Every person or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof before
any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding $600, plus costs of
138. Editor's Note: Former § 73-50, Curbing of cement concrete; specifications, and § 73-51,
Gutters along sidewalks, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
139. Editor's Note: Original § 73-53, Openings in street, as amended, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 186-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-47
1:519
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 186-48. Heated water or liquids on streets prohibited. [Amended
11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 269]
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged
on the surface or into the surface drainage of any street or alley by means
of a direct or sheltered pipe or covered, buried or protected drain or in
any other direct manner any heated water or other liquids issuing from or
poured, pumped or emptied out of any steam or other boiler, water heater,
wash machine or any other machine or apparatus wherein or whereby water
or other liquids are heated. Every person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate the provisions of this section shall, for every such offense, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be fined a sum for the use of the
Borough of Columbia not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, to be
recovered in like manner as other debts are by law recoverable, and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 186-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-48
1:520
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 2-8-1971 by Ord. No. 475 (Ch. 73, Art. V, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 186-49. Removal requirements. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726; 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 887]
Each tenant, owner or person in charge of any property fronting on or
adjoining any street in the Borough of Columbia shall clear a pathway of
at least three feet in width on the sidewalk in front of or adjoining such
property within 24 hours after the snow which is the cause thereof has
ceased to fall, or to be formed, or after the same as been deposited thereon
in any manner. The snow cleaned from the pathway shall not be deposited
in the street after the street has been plowed. As used herein, "snow"
shall mean any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the street and
sidewalks, such as snow, sleet, hail, ice and freezing rain.140
§ 186-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before any District Justice
having jurisdiction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
140. Editor's Note: Regarding enforcement, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II, Enforcement
of Certain Ordinances.
§ 186-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-50
1:521
Chapter 190
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Historic district — See Ch. 130.
Nonstormwater discharges — See Ch. 153.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Trees — See Ch. 202.
Zoning — See Ch. 220.
§ 186-50 COLUMBIA CODE § 186-50
1:522
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Columbia" (hereinafter
"chapter").
§ 190-2. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted to regulate and manage the subdivision and
development of land within the Borough of Columbia with the intent to
encourage infill and redevelopment while retaining community character
and promoting quality reinvestment in the Borough.
§ 190-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended
and reenacted by Act 170 of 1988, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and as
subsequently amended. The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia
designates the Planning Commission of the Borough of Columbia as its
agency to administer and enforce this chapter as permitted by Section 501
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.141
§ 190-4. Applicability.
A. Territorial application. With the exception of Subsections D and E
below, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions and
land developments within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Columbia.
B. General application. No subdivision or land development of any lot,
tract or parcel of land located within the Borough of Columbia shall be
effected and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened,
or dedicated for travel or public use, or for the common use of
occupants of buildings thereon, unless and until a final subdivision or
land development plan has been approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed herein. Furthermore, no building shall be erected and no
site improvements shall be completed except in strict accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. General prohibition. No lot in a subdivision may be sold or transferred;
no permit to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued; and no building may be
erected in a subdivision or land development, unless and until a final
subdivision or land development plan has been approved and recorded,
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:523
§ 190-5. Reenactment.
In order that land may be subdivided and/or subjected to a land
development in accordance with the policies and purposes of these
regulations (see §§ 190-2, 190-39 and 190-49), this chapter is hereby
adopted and made effective as of November 10, 2014.
§ 190-6. Interpretation, conflict and severability.
and until construction of any required site improvements in connection
therewith has been completed or guaranteed in the manner prescribed
herein.
D. Pending applications. Per Article V, as revised of PMPC, the provisions
of this chapter shall not affect an application for approval of a
subdivision and/or land development plan which is pending action at
the time of the effective date of this chapter, in which case applicant
shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the governing
ordinances as they stood at the time when the application for such plan
was duly filed. Additionally, this chapter shall not affect any suit or
prosecution, pending or to be instituted, to enforce any provision of this
chapter, as amended, or any applicable predecessor regulations on an
act done, contract executed, or liability incurred prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
E. Previously approved plans. If an applicant has received approval of a
preliminary or final plan prior to the effective date of this chapter, no
provision of this chapter shall be applied to adversely affect the right of
the applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved
preliminary or final plan in accordance with the PMPC.
F. Existing improvements. If existing improvements, including stormwater
management facilities, on the subject tract do not meet the
requirements of this chapter and/or are not functioning properly, then
such improvements must be designed and upgraded to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
A. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall be
construed to achieve the purposes for which this chapter was adopted.
B. Conflict with public and private provisions.
(1) Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute,
or other provision of law except as provided in this chapter. Where
any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, the
§ 190-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-6
1:524
§ 190-7. Effect on prior provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision or land development
regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm
or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Borough under any section or
provision existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or as vacating or
annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation by lawful
action of the Borough, except as shall be expressly provided for in this
chapter.
§ 190-8. Repeal of previous ordinance.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, all provisions of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Columbia, as amended, are
expressly repealed in their entirety.
§ 190-9. Ordinance amendments.
§ 190-10. Enforcement and penalties.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager, Borough Zoning Officer,
Council, and/or any person authorized by Council to enforce this chapter
provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall
control.
(2) Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of this chapter are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern.
C. Severability. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application of
this chapter to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the
controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered. It shall not affect
or impair the validity and continued enforcement of any other parts or
provisions of this chapter or the application of them to other persons or
circumstances.
A. Purpose. For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare, amendments to this chapter may, from time to time, be
proposed.
B. Procedure. All proposals for amendments shall be made in accordance
with the PMPC.
§ 190-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:525
and issue penalties for violation of this chapter in accordance with the
PMPC.
§ 190-10 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-10
1:526
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 190-11. Word usage.
The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. Tense and form. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall
include other tenses or derivative forms.
B. Number. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
The feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter
gender shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. Person. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships,
joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, limited liability
companies, associations, and any other similar entities.
E. Building. The word "building" includes the word "structure" and shall
be construed as if followed by the words "or a part thereof."
F. Lot. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "tract," and "parcel."
G. Watercourse. The word "watercourse" includes the words "drain,"
"ditch" and "stream."
H. Shall and may. The words "shall," "must" and "will" are mandatory in
nature and establish an obligation or duty to comply with the particular
provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
I. Time. The time within which any act required by this chapter is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania
General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word "day" shall mean
a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
J. Undefined terms. Any words not defined in this article, Chapter 220,
Zoning, or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,142 as
amended, shall be construed as defined in standard dictionary usage.
K. Illustrations and tables. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this chapter and any caption,
illustration or table, the text shall control. No caption, illustration or
table shall be construed to limit the scope or intent of the text of this
chapter.
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:527
§ 190-12. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with, or being separated from such
common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement.
ACCESS DRIVE — A public or private drive providing vehicular access to
and between parking areas for more than two parking spaces within a land
development; or any drive servicing two or more units of occupancy on a
single lot.
ADJOINING LOT — A lot that shares all or part of a common point or line
with another lot.
AGRICULTURAL LAND/AREAS — Land used exclusively for the cultivation
of the soil, the production of crops or livestock, or the science of forestry;
also, land diverted from agricultural use by an active federal farm program,
provided the diverted land has a conservation cover of grass, legume,
trees or wildlife shrubs. Agricultural land may include, to a minor degree,
farmsteads inhabited by the cultivator of the land, housing for farm
employees, and land used for preparation of agricultural products by the
cultivator of the land.
APPLICANT — A landowner and/or developer, as hereinafter defined,
including his heirs, successors and assigns, who filed an application for
subdivision and/or land development.
APPLICATION — An application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development, including, but not limited to, an application
for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan, or for
the approval of a development plan.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) — Computed by application of a day of
the week by month factor to an average twenty-four-hour traffic count. Such
information is available in the latest volume of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation Traffic Data Collection and Factor Development Report.
BLOCK — Land surrounded on all sides by streets (measured at the right-ofway)
or other transportation or utility rights-of-way, or by physical barriers
such as bodies of water or public open spaces.
BMPs — Best management practices.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Borough.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:528
BOROUGH SOLICITOR — The licensed attorney designated by the Borough
Council to furnish legal assistance for the administration of this chapter.
BUFFER — A strip of land with landscaping, fences and/or walls located
between two uses, or between one use and a public right-of-way, that is
intended to mitigate negative impacts, such as visual and noise, of the more
intense use on the less intense use or on the public right-of-way.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land within a public right-of-way which may
include signage, street trees, and curbs, gutters, or swales.
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and walls and that
is intended for the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles, equipment or materials and that has a total area under
roof of greater than 50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including
"or part thereof." See the separate definition of "structure." Any structure
involving a permanent roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that
is attached to a principal building shall be considered to be part of that
principal building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a Lot, designated on a plan
as the minimum required distance between any structure and the adjacent
street center line, or right-of-way line as specified by any applicable zoning
ordinance.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached, subordinate Building, the use of
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the use of the principal
building, which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal
building and/or principal use. Farm buildings not intended for habitation
are considered to be accessory buildings. An accessory building is any
accessory structure that meets the definition of a "building." See definition
of "structure, accessory."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of the lot, and that is enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, and
is built, erected and framed of component structural parts. The principal
building is also designed for housing, shelter, enclosure and support of
individuals, animals or property of any kind, is a main structure on a given
lot, and is not an accessory building.
CAPACITY — The maximum number of vehicles that can be expected to pass
over a given section of roadway or on a specific lane.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or unpaved,
customarily used by motorized and non-motorized vehicles in the regular
course of travel over the Street.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and the water, within the development
site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:529
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set
aside for public facilities.
COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY — A utility operated by a Borough or a
company, regulated by the Public Utility Commission, which supplies
potable, domestic water for use by more than one household, business or
institution.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared and
adopted in accordance with the PMPC, consisting of maps, charts and
textual material, that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the
physical and social development of the Borough.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership of real property, as defined in
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980,143 which includes a
multiple unit land development in which there is a system of separate
ownership of individual units of occupancy and undivided interest of land
and common facilities.
CONTIGUOUS — Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of
one lot touches a boundary line or lines of another lot.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for
general public use.
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed.
DETENTION BASIN — A reservoir that temporarily contains stormwater
runoff and releases it gradually into a watercourse or stormwater facility.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, including a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual, for
whom subdivision or land development plans are being or have been made.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a subdivision plat or plan and/or a land
development plat or plan, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and public
facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan," when used in
this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — The land required for the installation of storm
sewer or drainage facilities, or required along a natural stream or
143. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:530
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein, or to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIPLINE — A line marking the outer edges of the branches of the tree.
DRIVEWAY — A private drive providing vehicular access between a street
or access drive and a parking area for four or less residential units of
occupancy.
EASEMENT — A strip of land granted for limited use of property by the
landowner for a public or quasi-public or private purpose, and within which
the owner of the property shall not have the right to make use of the land in
a manner that violates the right of the grantee.
ELEVATION — The vertical alignment of a surface, as it exists or as it is
made by cut and/or fill.
ENGINEER — An engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL COVENANT — A servitude arising under an
environmental response project which imposes activity and use limitation.
[On December 18, 2007, Governor Ridge signed the Uniform Environmental
Covenants Act (UECA) into law as Act 68 of 2007. Section 6517(a)(1) of
UECA requires the use of environmental covenants whenever engineering
controls or institutional controls are necessary to demonstrate attainment
of an Act 2 remediation standard for any cleanup conducted under any
applicable Pennsylvania environmental law. The covenant provides a tool to
ensure that the conditions allowing for a risk-based cleanup will continue in
the future.]
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area not suitable for
development that includes floodplains, floodplain soils, steep slopes,
wetlands, and riparian areas.
EXISTING WOODED AREA — A biological community dominated by trees
and other woody plants covering a land area of 1/4 acre or more. Existing
wooded areas includes areas that have at least 25 trees per 1/4 acre with
at least 50% of those trees having a two-inch or greater caliper at 4.5 feet
above the ground and larger.
FLAGPOLE — A narrow extension of property on a lot or parcel from the
buildable area of a lot to the public right-of-way, and which is not part of the
lot area, but serves as access to the lot or parcel. See also "lot" definition.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of inundation which functions as a storage or
holding area for floodwater to a width required to contain a base flood of
which there is a 1% chance of occurring in any given year. The floodplain
also contains both the floodway and the flood fringe. The floodway is the
channel of a watercourse and the adjoining land area that are required to
carry and discharge the base flood. The flood fringe is the adjoining area
that may be covered by water of the base flood. The location of a floodplain
may include an area of greater magnitude than the base flood if a greater
flood hazard area is designated by a Borough ordinance.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:531
FLOOR ELEVATION — The Elevation of the lowest level of a particular
building, including the basement.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot
and measurable with an illuminance meter or light meter.
FRONTAGE — That portion of the property which abuts and is measured
along the street right-of-way line.
FULLY SHIELDED — A light constructed in such a manner that all light
emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element,
or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is
projected below the horizontal.
FUTURE ACCESS STRIP — A right-of-way reserved for the future
improvement of a street.
GEOLOGIST — A geologist registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
GLARE — The sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility to the eye.
HISTORIC FEATURE — Any district, site, building structure, or object that
meets one or more of the following criteria:
HORIZON YEAR — The anticipated opening year of a development,
assuming full buildout and occupancy.
ILLUMINANCE — The quantity of light measured in footcandles or lux.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material that is impenetrable and unable to
absorb water, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures and paved
areas.
IMPROVEMENT — Physical changes to the land, including, but not limited
to, buildings, streets, curbs, gutters, streetlights and signs, water mains,
hydrants, sanitary sewer mains, including laterals to the street right-of-way
lines, storm drainage lines, stormwater management structures, walkways,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, shade trees, buffer or
screen plantings, and all other additions to the tract which are required by
A. Is located within the Historic District of the Borough of Columbia.
Is listed or may be determined to be eligible to be listed on the National
Register of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing
resource.
B.
Is listed on the Lancaster County Historic Sites Survey or on any
officially adopted Borough inventory of historic resources and is
determined by a qualified historic preservation professional to retain
the historic characteristics that qualified it for said list.
C.
Is determined by the Borough of Columbia's appointed historic
preservation professional to be historically or architecturally
significant.
D.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:532
ordinance or are deemed necessary to result in a complete subdivision or
land development in the fullest sense of the term.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — Improvements for which the Borough may
ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may effect an improvement for which Borough responsibility is
established.
INDIGENOUS SPECIES — Plants which have not been introduced by man
and thrive in an area where it is considered native.
INFILL — Development of land that is generally surrounded by development
and has been bypassed, remained vacant, and/or is underused.
INFLUENCE AREA — An area that contains 80% or more of the trips that
will be attracted to a development site.
INVASIVE SPECIES — Plants which grow quickly and aggressively,
spreading, and displacing other plants. Invasive species are typically
introduced into a region far from their native habitat.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The development of property as specified below:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential Buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" shall not include:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, as defined in Chapter 220,
Zoning, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to an
existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise that would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subdefinition, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
(3)
C.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:533
LANDOWNER — The legal, equitable, or beneficial owner or owners of
land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition, a lessee, if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other
person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPING — Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria
regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover, buffers and shade
trees.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A measure of the effect of traffic on the capacity of
a road.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting installation which extends
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcel of land, excluding space within the street right-of-way. The lot area
includes the area of any utility easement or stormwater management
facility, but does not include the "flagpole" of a flag lot unless otherwise
specified in Chapter 220, Zoning.
LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets
with frontage on two or more adjacent sides.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — An interior lot with front and rear street
frontage, where vehicular access occurs on either street [see § 190-41C(6)].
LOT, FLAG — A parcel of land created by a subdivision or partition which
includes a narrow projection or "flagpole" to the public right-of-way.
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:534
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot abutting on the street right-of-way
and regarded as the front of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot whose side lot lines do not abut upon any street.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the
abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed the street or alley line.
LOT-LINE MARKER — A metal plate, pin, permanent stone or concrete
monument used to identify lot line intersections.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plan of which
was recorded, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the
office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of
this chapter.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — An interior lot with front and rear street
frontage, where vehicular access occurs on only the street of lesser
intensity [see § 190-41C(6)].
LUMINANCE — The physical and measurable quantity of light that
corresponds to the brightness of a surface (e.g., a lamp, luminaire,
reflecting material) in a specific area and measurable with a luminance
meter or light meter.
LUX — A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square meter. There is
approximately 10.7 lux per footcandle.
MANUFACTURED HOME or MOBILE HOME — A transportable, singlefamily
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation, including any addition or accessory structure, such
as porches, sheds, decks or additional rooms. All manufactured or mobile
homes shall meet construction standards set by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erections thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PAD — That part of a mobile home lot that is being reserved
for the placement of the mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODIFICATION — A process for alleviating specific requirements imposed
by this chapter, as described in § 190-13.
MONUMENT — A concrete or stone monument used to identify street line
intersections.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:535
MULTIMODAL — Accommodation of various modes of power-assisted
surface transportation, including but not limited to bicycles, nonmotorized
scooters, and horse-drawn buggies.
NATIVE PLANT — A plant which grew in a defined region prior to European
settlement. Indigenous species and naturalized nonnative plants may be
included as a native plant if it has been brought into the region and has
become established into the wild and is not considered invasive or displaces
native plants. Naturally occurring hybrids and cultivars (cultivated
varieties) of native genetic parent species which may or may not have been
present prior to European settlement are considered native plants.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — A project involving the construction,
reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of land. New
developments have the potential of increasing the requirements for capital
improvements, requiring either approval of a plan pursuant to this chapter,
the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the Borough water
system.[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 878]
NONNATIVE/INTRODUCED PLANT — Any plant species that has been
introduced by humans and now grows independently of cultivation. A subset
of nonnative/introduced species are the invasive species.
NON-SITE TRAFFIC — Vehicle trips passing within the study area as
defined in the traffic impact study that do not enter or exit the site and
are generally the result of through traffic and traffic generated by other
developments.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to the PMPC and
recorded in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
OFF-SITE — Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided or developed, whether or not in the common ownership of the
applicant for subdivision or land development approval.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PEAK HOUR — The hour during which the heaviest volume of traffic occurs
on a road.
PEDESTRIANWAY — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended
for human movement by walking.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (PMPC) — Adopted
as Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended.144 This act enables
municipalities to plan for, and regulate community development with
subdivision and land development ordinances. The code also contains
guidelines for subdivision and land development ordinance content. For the
purpose of this chapter, the Code may be referred to as "PMPC" and is
intended to include the current code and any further amendments thereto.
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:536
PERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any material that would allow water to pass
through at a rate at least equal to the pervious ground cover (e.g., porous
pavement, stone parking areas, and preformed or prefabricated blocks
which would permit water to penetrate) and as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
PHASES — As defined under PMPC, Article V, as stages or sections of
development.
PLAN — A drawing, together with supplementary data, that describes a
subdivision or land development.
AS-BUILT PLAN — Engineering documents drawn to scale showing
the constructed dimensions and materials of a structure or other land
improvement. An as-built drawing differs from design drawings and
construction drawings, which are design-oriented documents prepared
prior to construction rather than a depiction of what has been
constructed.
A.
CENTER-LINE SEPARATION PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision
plan that creates two lots by using a street center line as the common
boundary, which meets the criteria specified in § 190-20, and is
designed in accordance with the requirements of § 190-26.
B.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
development plan, including all supplementary data, designed in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 190-19 and 190-25.
C.
LOT ADD-ON PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision plan, the sole
purpose of which is to increase the lot area of an existing lot or tract,
designed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 190-20 and 190-26.
D.
LOT CONSOLIDATION PLAN — A plan for the consolidation of two or
more existing lots or tracts to create fewer lots or tract with revised lot
lines, designed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 190-20 and
190-26.
E.
MINOR PLAN — A final plan which has an expedited process when
designed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 190-21 and 190-27.
F.
MODIFIED FINAL PLAN — A final plan modified to reflect a change
to the site or its surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan
approval as per § 190-19A(3).
G.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A subdivision and/or land development plan
which is designed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 190-18 and
190-24, and is prepared for consideration prior to submission of a final
plan.
H.
RECORD PLAN — A final plan that contains the approval of the
Planning Commission of the Borough of Columbia and any plan sheets
deemed necessary for recordation by the Borough, which is recorded
with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
I.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:537
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Columbia.
PLANNING COMMISSION, COUNTY — The Lancaster County Planning
Commission.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice made pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
REDEVELOPMENT — Public and/or private investment made to re-create
the fabric of an area by renovating previously built-on land; such as by
replacing, remodeling, or reusing existing buildings and structures to
accommodate new development.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir designed to retain stormwater runoff
with its primary release of water being through the infiltration of said water
into the ground.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, or pedestrianway.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge and rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a full rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off
the surface of the land.
SCREENING — Planted (or having equivalent natural growth) shrubs or
trees, earthen mounds, or fencing.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which soil or other surface material is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity.
SETBACK LINE — See "building setback line."
SEWAGE — A substance that contains the waste products or excrement or
other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals and noxious or
deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to the public health, or to
animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic water supply or
for recreation. The term includes any substance which constitutes pollution
under the Clean Streams Law.145
REVISED SUBDIVISION AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — Any
revised plan due to survey corrections prepared in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 190-20 and 190-26.
J.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings,
with the general layout of proposal prepared in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 190-17 and 190-23.
K.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:538
SEWAGE FACILITIES — A system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment, and disposal which will prevent the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage or other waste into waters of this
commonwealth or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment
and disposal of sewage or other waste as recognized by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
SHARED TRIPS — Vehicle trips entering and exiting the site that were using
the facility on the adjacent streets and therefore did not generate new trips
on the road.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of road visible to the driver of a vehicle at
any given point in the road when viewing is unobstructed by traffic.
SIGNIFICANT TREE — Noninvasive trees with eighteen-inch minimum
caliper measured five feet above grade located outside an existing wooded
area.
SITE — The existing lot of record proposed for land development, including
subdivision.
STEEP SLOPE — An area with a ratio of vertical distance to horizontal
distance of greater than 15%, based on two-foot contour interval, and
measured over a minimum of three contours and 500 square feet of area.
Such areas shall be subject to standards contained in Chapter 220, Zoning.
PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM — A publicly owned system of piping, tanks,
or other facilities serving two or more lots, which uses a method
of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal other than
renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a retaining tank.
A.
PRIVATE COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — A privately owned system
of piping, tanks, or other facilities serving two or more lots, which uses
a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal
other than renovation in a soil absorption area, or retention in a
retaining tank.
B.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage facility serving
two or more lots, which uses a system of piping, tanks, or other facilities
for collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into a soil absorption
area or retaining tank.
C.
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — An individual sewage
system which uses a system of piping, tanks or other facilities for
collecting, treating or disposing of sewage into a soil absorption area or
spray field or by retention in a retaining tank.
D.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into waters of this commonwealth or by
means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.
E.
145. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:539
STORMWATER — Water that surfaces, flows, or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Those controls and
measures (e.g., storm sewers, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, basins,
infiltration systems, swales, watercourses and floodplains) used to
implement a stormwater management program.
STREAM — A body of water flowing in a channel within a defined bed and
banks.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, publicly or
privately owned, serving primarily as a means of motorized and
nonmotorized vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing access to
abutting properties. This term shall include the terms avenue, boulevard,
road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other way
used for similar purposes. Streets shall conform to one of the following
categories:
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of any given street.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not accepted for dedication to the Borough.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having a stationary location on, below
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Any structure shall
ALLEY (SERVICE STREET) — A service road that provides secondary
means of access to lots. Alleys are on the same level as a local street,
and are used in cases of narrow lot frontages. Alleys shall be designed
to discourage through traffic. Alleys may be designed as one-lane
streets.
A.
ARTERIAL — An interregional road in the street hierarchy system that
carries vehicle traffic to and from the region as well as any through
traffic. Arterials are intended to provide for a greater degree of mobility
than land access, hence, individual driveway intersections with
arterials should occur sparingly.
B.
COLLECTOR — A street that provides for medium length travel
distances and serves as a connection with local and arterial streets.
Major collectors provide land access to major land uses, such as
regional shopping centers, large industrial parks, major subdivisions,
and community-wide recreation facilities.
C.
MINOR COLLECTOR — A street that provides for equal amounts of
mobility and land access. These streets serve as the main circulation
roads within the Borough's neighborhoods.
D.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single means of ingress and egress and
having a turnaround. The design of the turnaround may vary.
E.
LOCAL — This classification provides direct access to adjacent land and
includes connections to farms, individual residences and commercial
properties, and to higher classes of highway systems.
F.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:540
be shall be subject to the principal or accessory setbacks of Chapter 220,
Zoning, as applicable, unless specifically exempted or unless a specific
setback is established for that particular type of structure by Chapter 220,
Zoning.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure serving a purpose customarily
incidental to and subordinate to the use of the principal use and located on
the same lot as the principal use. Accessory structures include but are not
limited to a household garage, household storage shed, detached carport,
a household swimming pool, or an accessory storage building to a business
use. See definition of "building, accessory."
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a single lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devises, transfer of ownership, or building, or lot development.
SUBJECT TRACT — The site proposed for land development, including
subdivision.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements
for which financial security was posted) of those improvements required
as a condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended use.
SUPERELEVATION — The distance in height (elevation) between the inside
and outside edge of a banked cartway.
SURVEYOR — An individual registered with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land,
establish locations, and perform the requirements of a survey.
SWALE — A wide shallow ditch that gathers or carries surface water.
TIE BAR — The symbol on a survey, plan, or plat shown as "Z" indicating
common ownership of two adjacent lots or tracts.
TOPOGRAPHY — The relief features or surface configurations of an area of
land.
TRACT — Is used interchangeably with the term "lot," particularly in the
context or subdivision, where a "tract" is subdivided into several lots,
parcels, units, plots, condominiums, tracts or interests.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in
which no construction activity shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be
the distance from the trunk to the dripline (a line marking the outer edges
of the branches of the tree).
TRIP — A single or one-directional motorized and/or nonmotorized vehicle
movement.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:541
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY — An allocation of space within a building or
structure that is independent of other such space and that constitutes a
separate use. This shall include both fee simple ownership and leaseholds.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent topographic feature, whether natural or
man-made, that serves to gather and carry flowing surface water such as a
permanent or intermittent stream, a river, creek, brook, run or swale; and
which measured by the width of the channel during normal high water.
WATERSHED — All land and water within the confines of a drainage basin.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturate soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as
the subject structure or use and which is measured inward from a lot line.
Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal and accessory structures
within specified required minimum yard setbacks.
YARD, FRONT or MINIMUM FRONT SETBACK — A yard measured from
along the front lot line (which is the existing street right-of-way line where
it abuts a street) and that extends the full width of the lot from side lot line
to side lot line. Additionally:
YARD, REAR or MINIMUM REAR SETBACK — A "yard" extending the full
width of the lot and which is always measured from along the rear line and
which establishes the minimum setback for the subject structure, and which
stretches between the side lot lines parallel to the rear lot line. Additionally:
YARD, SIDE or MINIMUM SIDE SETBACK — A "yard" which establishes the
minimum setback for the closest portion of the subject structure, and which
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever on public street abuts the lot.
A.
When a lot abuts two or more streets, the applicant may choose which
is the front yard, unless the Zoning Officer determines that the front
yard should follow the clearly predominant front yard orientation of the
development of abutting lots.
B.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in Chapter 220, Zoning.
C.
D. Every lot shall include at least one front lot line.
A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard setback
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in
Chapter 220, Zoning.
A.
B. Every lot shall include a rear lot line.
§ 190-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-12
1:542
is measured from along the entire length of the side lot line, and which
extends from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Additionally:
A structure shall not extend into the applicable minimum side yard
setback, except as provided for in Chapter 220, Zoning.
A.
B. See "corner lot" provision in Chapter 220, Zoning.
Every lot shall include at least one side lot line, although such lot line
may be regulated as a front yard as provided in Chapter 220, Zoning.
C.
§ 190-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-12
1:543

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 190-13. Modifications.
The requirements of this chapter are minimum standards for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. The regulations
preserve public order and establish interactions among citizens in a way
that prevents a conflict of rights. The regulations ensure the uninterrupted
enjoyment of rights by all of the citizenry by guiding development and
growth and to permit the Borough to minimize such problems as may
presently exist or which may be foreseen. Modifications should only be
granted to encourage flexibility and ingenuity in the layout and design of
subdivisions and land developments when meeting the intent and purpose
of this chapter; when literal compliance would be unreasonable, cause
undue hardship, or when an alternative standard is demonstrated to provide
equal or better results; and if the modification would not be contrary to the
public interest.
A. Purpose. The provisions of these regulations are intended as a
minimum standard for the protection of the public health, safety and
general welfare. If the literal compliance with any mandatory provision
of these regulations is demonstrated by the applicant to be
unreasonable and to cause undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the particular property, and if the applicant
demonstrates that an alternative proposal will provide equal or better
results, the Planning Commission may grant a modification from such
mandatory provision, so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured while permitting the reasonable utilization of
the property. However, the granting of a modification shall not have the
effect of making null and void the purpose and/or intent of this chapter.
B. Procedure. All requests for modifications shall be made in accordance
with Section 512.1 of the PMPC, as amended,146 and considered by the
Planning Commission. The request shall be accompanied by a plan
prepared at least to the minimum standards of a sketch plan (see
§ 190-23). The applicant shall demonstrate that the alternative proposal
represents the minimum modification necessary, or that an alternative
standard will provide equal or better results, provided that such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that the
purpose and intent of this chapter is observed. If the Planning
Commission determines that the applicant has met his burden, it may
grant a modification from the literal compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
C. Authority to impose conditions. In granting a modification, the Planning
Commission may impose such conditions, as will, in its judgment,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements
of this chapter.
146. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10512.1.
§ 190-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-13
1:545
§ 190-14. Acceptance of conditions of plan approval.
When a plan, whether preliminary or final, has been approved subject to
conditions, and when the applicant rejects one or all of the conditions, the
applicant shall so notify the Borough in writing within 30 days of the date
of the Planning Commission's action. Such notification of rejection of one
or more of the conditions of approval shall serve to automatically rescind
the approval of the plan. Failure by the applicant to notify the Borough of
rejection of one or more of the conditions of approval within the time so
specified shall serve as notice of acceptance of the conditions of approval
and that the applicant intends to fully comply with the conditions unless
such condition is invalidated by final order of court upon appeal thereto by
the applicant.
§ 190-15. Challenges and appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Planning Commission with respect to the approval or disapproval of a plan
or request for modification may appeal as provided for in the PMPC and
other relevant statutes and rules.
§ 190-16. Fees.
D. Time extension modifications. In instances where the applicant requires
additional time to resolve outstanding conditions of approval, a written
request shall be submitted for consideration of review by the Planning
Commission prior to the deadline for plan recordation. The written
request must include an explanation necessary to justify the time
extension.
A. Review fee. Each subdivision, land development, or sketch plan
application shall be accompanied by the required review fee as
established and adopted by ordinance or resolution from time to time
by Council. Fees shall be payable to the Borough at the time of
application (unless otherwise noted herein) and plan processing,
approval and recording shall not be completed until all required fees
are paid. There shall be no refund or credit of fees or a portion of any
fee should the applicant withdraw the plan during the review process or
fail to receive plan approval.
B. Professional service fees. In addition to the required review fee, it is
anticipated that additional expenses will be incurred by the Borough in
processing the preliminary and/or final plans which are submitted or
which may be required to be submitted under this chapter, for
engineering, legal or other professional consultant expenses. If the fees
are not sufficient to cover these expenses incurred in the review of said
plans, the Borough shall notify the applicant of the additional expense
and request payment of the same. All payment requested by the
Borough for engineering, legal or other professional expense shall be
the actual cost of the services incurred by the Borough and shall be paid
§ 190-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-16
1:546
for by the applicant. These services shall be billed at the normal
established rate for engineering or legal services provided to the
Borough.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:547

ARTICLE IV
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 190-17. Sketch plan.
A. General. All applicants for subdivision or land development may submit
a sketch plan to the Borough for review prior to submission of a formal
application; however, submission of a sketch plan is not mandatory.
Submission of a sketch plan does not constitute a formal subdivision or
land development application.
B. Plan information.
(1) Sketch plan reviews are not required to be consistent with
procedures of the PMPC. Sketch plans prepared for review and
discussion should include those items listed in § 190-23.
(2) If the development accesses a collector, arterial, or state road, the
sketch plan shall depict the proposed access and frontage
improvements.
C. Submission, meeting, and consultant review. The applicant shall submit
sufficient copies of the sketch plan, along with any required
supplemental data and an application form, to the Borough; the
requisite number of copies shall be as determined by the Planning
Commission. The applicant shall schedule a review meeting with the
Borough staff, including the Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, and/or
County Planning Commission Community Planner. The applicant may
request that the Borough planning, engineering, and/or legal
consultant perform a written review of the sketch plan, at the
applicant's sole cost and expense. In such case, the written review shall
be provided to the applicant with copies to Borough staff and the
Planning Commission.
D. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review the sketch plan submission and, as applicable, consultant's
reviews, and advise the applicant how the proposed subdivision or land
development may conform or fail to conform to the requirements and
objectives of this chapter and other applicable plans and ordinances.
The Planning Commission may then submit its written comments and
recommendations to the applicant. Said comments shall not be deemed
to be an approval of any application or to vest any rights in the
applicant.
E. Completion of the sketch plan process. After completion of the sketch
plan process, the applicant may proceed to one of the following:
(1) Preliminary plan submission per § 190-18 and then final plan
submission per § 190-19.
(2) Final plan submission per § 190-19.
§ 190-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:549
§ 190-18. Preliminary plan.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to protect the plan from
changes in Borough ordinances in accordance with PMPC Section
508(4), as amended,147 phase development, and provide additional time
to complete conditions of approval.
B. Plan requirements. All preliminary plans shall be prepared in
conformance with the provisions of § 190-24 and any other applicable
requirements of law.
C. Submission. Official submission of the preliminary plan application to
the Borough shall consist of:
(1) Preliminary plan. One standard-size copy, 10 eleven-inch-byseventeeen-
inch copies, and one electronic (e.g., PDF) format copy
of the preliminary plan shall be submitted; plus one additional
standard-sized copy if the subject site is adjacent to a municipal
boundary, and one additional standard-size copy when the subject
site abuts or is adjacent to a state road.
(2) Supplemental data. Two paper copies and one electronic format
copy (e.g., PDF) of all reports, notifications and certifications that
are not provided on the preliminary plan, including stormwater
management plans and calculations, deeds, easements, and other
agreements.
(3) Application form. One application form completely and correctly
executed, with all information legible, and bearing all required
signatures.
(4) Filing fee. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current
fee schedule) consisting of a check or money order drawn to the
Borough of Columbia.
(5) Application completeness review. All required plans and documents
and the required filing fee shall accompany a preliminary plan
application. The Borough shall have 10 business days from the date
of submission to check the plans and documents to determine if, on
their face, they are in proper form and contain all the information
required by this chapter. If the plan submission package is
incomplete for any reason, the Borough may reject the application
in writing and all materials returned to the applicant.
(6) Filing deadline. Preliminary plans may be filed with the Borough on
any business day; however, the Planning Commission will review a
plan at a scheduled and advertised meeting only if the application,
plan, supplemental data, and filing fee was filed at least 15
business days prior to that meeting.
147. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508(4).
§ 190-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-18
1:550
D. Notification. The Borough shall refer the application to the Planning
Commission for review of the application, and shall notify the Borough
Engineer of the preliminary plan application and provide a copy of the
plan and application. Additionally, the applicant shall submit the plan
and any associated reports to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission in accordance with that body's procedures.
E. Planning Commission action. The Borough shall schedule the
preliminary plan application for action at a public meeting of the
Planning Commission and communicate said action in accordance with
Section 508 of the PMPC, as amended.148
F. Compliance with Planning Commission action. If the Planning
Commission conditions its preliminary plan approval upon receipt of
additional information, changes and/or notifications, such information
shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to
be submitted to the Borough for review.
G. Planning Commission approval and certification.
(1) Preliminary plan approval. Approval of a preliminary plan
application shall constitute approval of the proposed subdivision
and/or land development as to the character and intensity of
development and the general arrangement of streets, lots,
structures and other planned facilities, but shall not constitute final
plan approval. The preliminary plan may not be recorded in the
office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
(2) Time period of approval. Preliminary plan approval will be effective
for a five-year period from the date of the Planning Commission's
approval of the preliminary plan application; therefore,
construction of a project must be substantially completed within
five years of said date unless the Planning Commission grants a
waiver by extending the effective time period of the approval.
H. Improvement construction from preliminary plan. An applicant may
commence construction of the required public improvements prior to
approval and recordation of a final plan in accordance with Section 509
of the PMPC, as amended.149
(1) Requirements.
(a) The applicant shall indicate in writing the intent to construct
the improvements prior to final plan approval to the Planning
Commission as part of the preliminary plan application
process.
(b) Plans must also receive approval, when applicable, from all
authorities having jurisdiction including by way of example but
148. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
149. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:551
§ 190-19. Final plan.
not limited to, highway occupancy permit, erosion and
sedimentation control approval, building permit, stormwater
management permit, etc.
(c) The applicant may, after receipt of acknowledgment from the
Planning Commission of the satisfactory completion of all
conditions of preliminary plan approval, proceed to construct
the improvements required by this chapter and shown on the
approved preliminary plan.
(d) The applicant shall complete and enter into the appropriate
Memorandum of Understanding (Appendix D).150 The applicant
shall indicate the timetable for the construction of the
improvements including a schedule and plan of the proposed
phasing of sections of the plan.
(e) An as-built plan will be required to be recorded as the final
plan after constructing improvements from each phase of a
preliminary plan.
(2) Limitations. Construction and completion of the improvements
shall not constitute permission to sell lots or occupy proposed
buildings shown on the plan.
A. General.
(1) Final plan submission. Applications for final plan approval can be
submitted only after the following, when required, have been
completed:
(a) When the applicant has satisfied any conditions of preliminary
approval which the Planning Commission's preliminary plan
approval has required to be completed prior to the submission
of a final plan.
(b) When a preliminary plan is not required.
(c) When a preliminary plan has been approved with conditions to
be resolved during the final plan review process and the
applicant has not chosen to construct and complete the
subdivision/land development improvements pursuant to
§ 190-18H.
(2) Final plan submitted in phases. The final plan may be submitted in
phases, each phase covering a reasonable portion of the entire
proposed subdivision or land development as shown on the
approved preliminary plan; provided that each phase, except for
the last, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of
150. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-18 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-19
1:552
dwelling units as depicted on the approved preliminary plan unless
the Planning Commission specifically approves a lesser percentage
for one or more phases.
(3) Modified final plan. The Planning Commission may accept a final
plan modified to reflect a change to the site or its surroundings that
occurs after the preliminary plan review. The Planning Commission
shall determine whether a modified final plan will be accepted or
whether a new preliminary plan shall be submitted.
B. Purpose. The purpose of the final plan is to record the subdivision and
or land development according to the PMPC, insure formal approval by
the Planning Commission before plans are recorded, and to provide
sufficient information so that the Borough can assure construction
according to the requirements of this chapter.
C. Plan requirements. All final plans shall be prepared in conformance
with the provisions of § 190-25 and any other applicable requirements
of law.
D. Submission. Official submission of the final plan application to the
Borough shall consist of:
(1) Final plan. One standard-size copy, 10 eleven-inch-by-seventeeninch
copies, and one electronic (e.g., PDF) format copy of the final
plan; plus one additional standard-sized copy if the subject site is
adjacent to a municipal boundary, and one additional standard-size
copy when the subject site abuts or is adjacent to a state road.
(2) Supplemental data. Two copies and one electronic (e.g., PDF)
format copy of all reports, notifications and certificates that are not
provided on the final plan, including stormwater management
plans and calculations, deeds, easements, and other agreements.
(3) Application form. One application form completely and correctly
executed, with all information legible, and bearing all required
signatures.
(4) Filing fee. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current
fee schedule) consisting of a check or money order drawn to the
Borough of Columbia.
(5) Application completeness review. All required plans and documents
and the required filing fee shall accompany a final plan application.
The Borough shall have 10 business days from the date of
submission of an application to check the plans and documents to
determine if, on their face, they are in proper form and contain all
the information required by this chapter. If the plan submission
package is incomplete for any reason, the Borough may reject the
application in writing and all materials returned to the applicant.
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-19
1:553
(6) Filing deadline. Final plans may be filed with the Borough on any
business day; however, the Planning Commission will review a plan
at a scheduled and advertised meeting only if the application, plan,
supplemental data, and filing fee was filed at least 15 business days
prior to that meeting.
E. Notification. The Borough shall refer the application to the Borough
Planning Commission for review of the application. Additionally, the
applicant shall submit the plan and any associated reports to the
Lancaster County Planning Commission in accordance with that body's
procedures.
F. Planning Commission action. The Borough shall schedule the final plan
application for action at a public meeting of the Planning Commission
and communicate such action in accordance with Section 508 of the
PMPC, as amended.151
G. Compliance with Planning Commission action. If the Planning
Commission conditions its final plan approval upon receipt of additional
information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be submitted
and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be submitted to the
Borough for review.
H. Plan certification. After the final plan has been approved by the
Planning Commission and the required changes, if any, are made, the
applicant shall prepare two record copies and two paper copies of the
approved version of the final plan. One full-set paper copy of the plan
shall be provided to the Borough and one paper copy of the plan shall be
provided to the County Planning Commission. Both record copies of the
plan shall be certified in accordance with the provisions of this section.
I. Planning Commission and municipal secretary signatures required.
Two record copies and two paper copies of the approved version of the
final plan shall be presented to the Planning Commission and Borough
Secretary for signature.
J. County Planning Commission signature required. After obtaining the
required Borough signatures, two record copies and one paper copy of
the approved version of the final plan shall be presented to the County
Planning Commission for signature.
K. Recordation.
(1) Recording of final plan. Upon approval and certification of a final
plan, the applicant shall record the plan in the office of the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. Unless all required
improvements have been constructed and completed in accordance
with § 190-18H above, the final plan shall not be released for
recording until the applicant has provided an improvement
construction guarantee in accordance with § 190-30.
151. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 190-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-19
1:554
§ 190-20. Center-line separation plan; lot consolidation plan;
revised subdivision plan; lot add-on plan.
The following plans shall be processed as a single submission and handled
as a final plan: center-line separation plans, lot consolidation plans, lot addon
plans, and revised subdivision plans.
(2) Time period of approval. The developer shall record the plan in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds within the period of time
established by Section 513 of the PMPC, as amended.152 In the
event the plan is not recorded as stated, the Borough's action is
null and void unless the Planning Commission has granted a time
extension for the approval.
(3) Recording number required. A recording number and a complete
set of plans with all signatures, stamps and seals must be provided
to the Borough before any resulting permits are issued for
construction.
(4) Reporting to GIS. A compact disc in CAD or GIS format of the
approved final plan including parcel boundaries, roads, water,
sewer, utility, and building locations shall be provided to Lancaster
County at the time of plan recording.
L. Prior conveyance of lots prohibited. The final plan shall be filed with the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds before proceeding with the
conveyance of lots. Lots may be placed under agreement of sale prior to
plan recording but not conveyed.
M. Dedication by recording the final plan. After approval of the final plan
by the Planning Commission, the act of recording the final plan shall
have the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other
areas designated for public use, unless reserved by the landowner as
provided in Subsection N. However, the approval of the Planning
Commission shall not impose any duty upon the commonwealth, county,
or Borough concerning acceptance, maintenance or improvement of
any such dedicated areas or portion of same until proper authorities of
the commonwealth, county, or Borough actually accept same by
ordinance or resolution, or by entry, use, or improvement.
N. Notice of reservation from public dedication. The landowner shall place
a notation on the final plan when there is no offer of dedication to the
public of certain designated areas, in which event the title to such areas
shall remain with the owner.
A. Definition of plan types.
(1) Center-line separation plan. The division of an existing tract along
the center line of an existing road to create two lots whose common
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:555
boundary is said center line if it is in conformance with the criteria
specified in § 190-26.
(2) Lot consolidation plan. The consolidation of two or more existing
tracts to create one lot with revised lot lines if it is in conformance
with the criteria specified in § 190-26.
(3) Revised subdivision plan. Any replatting of recorded plans due to
survey corrections or revision due to survey corrections of
approved final plans which have not yet been recorded can be
made if it is in conformance with the criteria specified in § 190-26.
(4) Lot add-on plan. The alteration of lot lines between existing lots of
separate ownership or under the same ownership with separate
deeds for the sole purpose of increasing lot size if it is in
conformance with the criteria specified in § 190-26.
B. Plan criteria. Plans shall only be permitted when all of the following
criteria are satisfied:
(1) The resultant lots meet all requirements of the applicable zoning
district.
(2) The resultant lots shall retain adequate access to accommodate
potential development in accordance with the current zoning
district regulations.
(3) Drainage easements or rights-of-way are not altered.
(4) Access to the affected parcels is not altered or modified.
(5) Street alignments are not changed.
(6) The resultant lots meet all previously approved sewage module
requirements, including minimum lot size.
C. Plan requirements. Where the above conditions are satisfactorily
proven to exist, a plan shall be prepared in conformance with the
provisions of § 190-26 and any other applicable requirements.
D. Submission. Official submission of the plan application to the Borough
shall consist of:
(1) Plan. One standard-size copy, 10 evelen-inch-by-seventeen-inch
copies, and one electronic (e.g., PDF) format copy of the plan sets;
plus one additional standard-sized copy if the subject site is
adjacent to a municipal boundary, and one additional standard-size
copy when the subject site abuts or is adjacent to a state road.
(2) Deeds and agreements. Two copies and one electronic (e.g., PDF)
format copy of all deeds, easements, and other agreements.
§ 190-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-20
1:556
(3) Application form. One application form completely and correctly
executed, with all information legible, and bearing all required
signatures.
(4) Filing fee. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current
fee schedule) consisting of a check or money order drawn to the
Borough of Columbia.
(5) Application completeness review. All required plans and documents
and the required filing fee shall accompany a final plan application.
The Borough shall have 10 business days from the date of
submission of an application to check the plans and documents to
determine if, on their face, they are in proper form and contain all
the information required by this chapter. If the plan submission
package is incomplete for any reason, the Borough may reject the
application in writing and all materials returned to the applicant.
(6) Filing deadline. Final plans may be filed with the Borough on any
business day; however, the Planning Commission will review a plan
at a scheduled and advertised meeting only if the application, plan,
supplemental data, and filing fee was filed at least 15 business days
prior to that meeting.
E. Planning Commission action. The Borough shall schedule the plan
application for action at a public meeting of the Planning Commission
and communicate such action in accordance with Section 508 of the
PMPC, as amended.153
F. Compliance with Planning Commission action. If the Planning
Commission conditions its plan approval upon receipt of additional
information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be submitted
and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be submitted to the
Borough for review.
G. Plan certification. After the plan has been approved by the Planning
Commission and the required changes, if any, are made, the applicant
shall prepare two record copies and two paper copies of the approved
version of the plan. One paper copy of the plan shall be provided to the
Borough and one paper copy of the plan shall be provided to the County
Planning Commission. Both record copies of the plan shall be certified
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
H. Planning Commission and Borough Secretary signatures required. Two
record copies and one paper copy of the approved version of the plan
shall be presented to the Planning Commission and Borough Secretary
for signature.
I. County Planning Commission signature required. After obtaining the
required Borough signatures, two record copies and one paper copy of
153. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 190-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-20
1:557
§ 190-21. Minor plan.
the approved version of the plan shall be presented to the County
Planning Commission for signature.
J. Recordation of plan and deed.
(1) Recording of the plan. Upon approval and certification of a plan,
the applicant shall record the plan in the office of the Lancaster
County Recorder of Deeds. In the event that public improvements
are required, the final plan shall not be released for recording until
the applicant has provided an improvements construction
guarantee in accordance with § 190-30.
(2) Deeds. A copy of the deeds to be recorded for the subject tract or
receiving and conveying tracts shall be submitted prior to
recording the plan. Recordation of such plan does not serve to join
the receiving tract with the acreage to be conveyed. To reflect the
descriptions as provided on the recorded plan, deeds must be
recorded for the receiving and conveying tracts.
(3) Time period of approval. The developer shall record the plan in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds within the period of time
established by Section 513 of the PMPC, as amended.154 In the
event the plan is not recorded as stated, the Borough's action is
null and void unless the Planning Commission has granted a time
extension for the approval.
(4) Recording number required. A recording number and a complete
set of plans with all signatures, stamps and seals must be provided
to the Borough before any resulting permits are issued for
construction.
(5) Reporting to GIS. A compact disc in CAD or GIS format of the
approved final plan including parcel boundaries, roads, water,
sewer, utility, and building locations shall be provided to Lancaster
County at the time of plan recording.
K. Future development. Any land development proposed on any lot
created or modified through this process must follow standard plan
processing procedures as specified in this chapter.
A. Plan purpose. The purpose of a minor plan is to facilitate one of the
following actions with a streamlined approval process:
(1) Subdivision of one lot into two lots to accommodate the
construction of a single-family residence.
(2) Construction of a second residential dwelling unit on a subject tract
in a new structure.
154. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
§ 190-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-21
1:558
B. Plan criteria. A minor plan shall be permitted only when all of the
following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The proposed lots are designed in accordance with the provisions
of the applicable zoning district.
(2) All lots shall front on a public or private street and shall provide for
vehicular access which does not interfere with the normal
movement of traffic.
(3) No new point discharge of runoff will result from the proposal.
C. Plan requirements.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate by the submission of a stormwater
management report and a grading plan that post development peak
stormwater flows from the site do not exceed the predevelopment
peak flows from the site and leave the site in the same manner as in
predevelopment condition.
(2) Where the above is satisfactorily demonstrated, a plan shall be
prepared in conformance with the provisions of § 190-27 and any
other applicable requirements of law.
D. Submission. Official submission of the minor plan application to the
Borough shall consist of:
(1) Plan. One standard-size copy, 10 eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch
copies, and one electronic (e.g., PDF) format copy of the plan sets;
plus one additional standard-sized copy if the subject site is
adjacent to a municipal boundary, and one additional standard-size
copy when the subject site abuts or is adjacent to a state road.
(2) Deeds and agreements. Two copies and one electronic (e.g., PDF)
format copy of all deeds, easements, and other agreements.
(3) Application form. One application form completely and correctly
executed, with all information legible, and bearing all required
signatures.
(4) Filing fee. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current
fee schedule) consisting of a check or money order drawn to the
Borough of Columbia.
(5) Application completeness review. All required plans and documents
and the required filing fee shall accompany a final plan application.
The Borough shall have 10 business days from the date of
submission of an application to check the plans and documents to
determine if, on their face, they are in proper form and contain all
the information required by this chapter. If the plan submission
package is incomplete for any reason, the Borough may reject the
application in writing and all materials returned to the applicant.
§ 190-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-21
1:559
(6) Filing deadline. Final plans may be filed with the Borough on any
business day; however, the Planning Commission will review a plan
at a scheduled and advertised meeting only if the application, plan,
supplemental data, and filing fee was filed at least 15 business days
prior to that meeting.
E. Planning Commission action. The Borough shall schedule the minor
plan application for action at a public meeting of the Planning
Commission and communicate such action in accordance with Section
508 of the PMPC, as amended.155
F. Compliance with Planning Commission action. If the Planning
Commission conditions its plan approval upon receipt of additional
information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be submitted
and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be submitted to the
Borough for review.
G. Plan certification. After the plan has been approved by the Planning
Commission and the required changes, if any, are made, the applicant
shall prepare two record copies and two paper copies of the approved
version of the plan. One paper copy of the plan shall be provided to the
Borough and one paper copy of the plan shall be provided to the County
Planning Commission. Both record copies of the plan shall be certified
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
H. Planning Commission and Borough Secretary signatures required. Two
record copies and one paper copy of the approved version of the plan
shall be presented to the Planning Commission and Borough Secretary
for signature.
I. County Planning Commission signature required. After obtaining the
required Borough signatures, two record copies and one paper copy of
the approved version of the plan shall be presented to the Lancaster
County Planning Commission for signature.
J. Recordation of plan and deed.
(1) Recording of the plan. Upon approval and certification of a plan,
the applicant shall record the plan in the office of the Lancaster
County Recorder of Deeds. Unless all required improvements have
been constructed and completed in accordance with § 190-18H
above, the plan shall not be released for recording until the
applicant has provided an improvement construction guarantee in
accordance with § 190-30.
(2) Deeds. A copy of the deeds to be recorded for the lots shall be
submitted prior to recording of the plan, where applicable.
(3) Time period of approval. The developer shall record the plan in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds within the period of time
155. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 190-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-21
1:560
established by Section 513 of the PMPC, as amended.156 In the
event the plat is not recorded as stated above, the Planning
Commission's action is null and void unless the Planning
Commission granted a waiver by extending the effective time
period of the approval.
(4) Recording number required. A recording number and a complete
set of plans with all signatures, stamps and seals must be provided
to the Borough before any resulting permits are issued for
construction.
(5) Reporting to GIS. A compact disc in CAD or GIS format of the
approved final plan including parcel boundaries, roads, water,
sewer, utility, and building locations shall be provided to Lancaster
County at the time of plan recording.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10513.
§ 190-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-21
1:561

ARTICLE V
Information To Be Included on or With Plans
§ 190-22. General.
All plans shall be prepared by an engineer, a surveyor or a landscape
architect. The plans shall show, be accompanied by, and be prepared in
accordance, with this article and shall provide sufficient design information
to demonstrate conformance with the requirements of Article VIII, Article
IX, and Article X.
§ 190-23. Sketch plan.
A. Drafting standards.
(1) Scale. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard
scale of 20 to 200 feet to the inch.
(2) Sheets. If the plan is prepared in two or more drawing sheets, a key
map showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be
placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary, each
sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship
to the total number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
(3) Presentation. Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent,
and organized manner.
B. Plan information.
(1) Location and identification.
(a) The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract (or an
authorized agent), the developer/subdivider and the firm that
prepared the plan.
(b) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared
the plan, the plan date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(c) A North arrow and a graphic scale.
(d) A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch
equals 2,000 feet, relating the subdivision to at least two
intersections of road center lines. The approximate distance to
the intersection of the center lines of the nearest improved
street intersection shall be identified.
(e) If the tract of land is located within 200 feet of a Borough or
zoning district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary
shall be shown and labeled accordingly.
(f) The source of title (including the deed, lot, and plan of record
number) to the subject tract.
(g) The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
§ 190-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-23
1:563
(h) If applicable, a plan note indicating the subject property is
enrolled in the clean and green preferential assessment
program.
(i) In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant, the plan shall include a plan note
indicating the recording information of the environmental
covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa. C.S.
§§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as amended.
(j) If the subject tract is identified on the Official Map of the
Borough of Columbia, the plan shall include a plan note
stipulating the same.
(k) If the subject tract is located within the Historic District, the
plan shall include a plan note stipulating the same.
(l) The latitude/longitude location information of the center of all
vacant lots and/or the center of the most significant building,
either existing or proposed, on a lot containing structures.
(m) The height above sea level of each lot.
(n) Include a note acknowledging that the proposal demonstrates
compliance with the Airport District Overlay of Chapter 220,
Zoning.
(2) Existing features.
(a) Existing contours. Lancaster County Geographic Information
System (GIS) Topography may be accepted.
(b) The following items when located within the subject tract:
[1] The name and approximate location and approximate
dimensions of existing rights-of-way or easements relating
to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways or service
streets, public utilities, stormwater management facilities,
telecommunications, electric, gas, and oil transmission
lines.
[2] The approximate location of railroads, buildings,
environmental and topographic features, including, but
not limited to, floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites,
woodlands, habitats for threatened and endangered
species, solid waste disposal areas, historic features,
cemetery or burial sites, archeological sites, or areas with
highly erosive soils.
(c) When available, the following items when located within 200
feet of the subject tract as inventoried in the Lancaster County
GIS:
§ 190-23 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-23
1:564
§ 190-24. Preliminary plan.
[1] The name and approximate location and approximate
dimensions of existing rights-of-way or easements relating
to streets, cartways, access drives, driveways or service
streets, public utilities, stormwater management facilities,
telecommunications, electric, gas, and oil transmission
lines. The approximate location of railroads, buildings,
floodplains, and wetlands.
(d) In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant executed pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act No.
68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as amended,
the plan shall include the boundary limits of any contamination
remaining on site. The application shall include a copy the
environmental covenant agreement and any required
engineering and institutional controls.
(3) Additional information.
(a) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(b) The zoning district and lot size and/or density requirements of
the applicable zoning regulations.
(c) The approximate layout of lots, with approximate dimensions.
(d) The total number of lots, units of occupancy, density and
proposed land use (if multiple land uses are proposed, the
location of each land use shall be indicated).
(e) The approximate layout of streets, including cartway and rightof-
way widths (Appendix G for reference).157
(f) The approximate location and configuration of proposed
buildings, parking compounds, streets, access drives,
driveways, and general stormwater facility locations.
(g) Building setback lines.
(h) A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water
facilities to be provided.
(i) Identification of any modifications intended to be requested.
(j) A copy of any applicable zoning decisions.
(k) Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic
features.
A. Drafting standards.
157. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:565
(1) Scale. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard
scale of 20 to 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Dimensions and bearings. The subject tract boundary dimensions
shall be in feet and decimals; bearings shall be in degrees, minutes
and seconds. The description shall read in a clock wise direction.
(3) Survey closure. The survey shall not have an error of closure
greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(4) Sheets. If the plan is prepared in two or more sheets, a key map
showing the location of the phases shall be placed on each sheet. If
more than one sheet is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size
and numbered to show the relationship to the total number of
sheets in the Plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
(5) Presentation. Plans shall be presented in a clear, legible, coherent
and organized manner.
B. Plan information.
(1) Location and identification.
(a) The proposed project name.
(b) The name and address of the owner(s) of the tract (or an
authorized agent), the developer/subdivider and the firm that
prepared the plan.
(c) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared
the plan, the plan date, and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(d) A North arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
(e) A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch
equals 2,000 feet relating the subdivision to at least two
intersections of road center lines. The approximate distance to
the intersection of the center lines of the nearest improved
street intersection shall be identified.
(f) If the tract of land is located within 200 feet of a Borough or
zoning district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary
shall be shown and labeled accordingly.
(g) The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and
distances. (If a landowner is to retain a single lot with a lot area
in excess of 10 acres, the boundary of that lot may be identified
as a deed plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale; if the
remaining lot has a lot area of 10 or less acres, it must be
described to the accuracy requirements of this chapter.)
(h) The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record
number) to the subject tract.
§ 190-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-24
1:566
(i) The (tax) parcel identification number(s) for the subject tract.
(j) In the case of a plan for which the subject property is enrolled
in the Clean and Green Preferential Assessment Program, the
inclusion of the following plan note:
"NOTICE: According to County records, the subject property
may be subject to the Pennsylvania Farmland and Forest Land
Assessment Act of 1974, (a.k.a. the Clean and Green Act),
Act 319 of 1974, P.L. 973; 72 P.S. § 5490.1, as amended,
and as further amended by Act 156 of 1998, as amended.
These acts provide for preferential property tax assessment
and treatment. It is the property owner's responsibility to be
aware of the laws, rules and regulations applicable to his
or her property, including the provision that: (a) preferential
property tax assessment and treatment will remain in effect
continuously until the landowner changes the agricultural use
from the approved category, or if a transfer, split-off or
separation of the subject land occurs; (b) if a change in use
occurs, or if a conveyance, transfer, separation, split-off or
subdivision of the subject land occurs, the property owner
will be responsible for notifying the County Assessor within
30 days; (c) the payment of rollback tax, plus interest, for
the period of enrollment, or a period not to exceed seven
years, whichever is less, may be required; (d) if the property
owner fails to notify the County Assessor within the thirty-day
period, prior to the land conveyance, the property owner may
be subject to a $100 civil penalty; (e) if the property owner
fails to pay the rollback tax, a Borough lien could be placed on
the property under existing delinquent tax law."
(k) In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant, the plan shall include a plan note
indicating the recording information of the environmental
covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as amended.
(l) If the subject tract is identified on the Official Map of the
Borough of Columbia, the plan shall include a plan note
stipulating the same.
(m) If the subject tract is located within the Historic District, the
plan shall include a plan note stipulating the same.
(n) The latitude/longitude location information of the center of all
vacant lots and/or the center of the most significant building,
either existing or proposed, on a lot containing a structure.
(o) The height above sea level of each lot.
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:567
(p) Include a note acknowledging that the proposal demonstrates
compliance with the Airport District Overlay of Chapter 220,
Zoning.
(2) Existing features.
(a) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the
names and plan book record numbers of all previously
recorded plans for adjacent projects.
(b) The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the
datum used.
(c) Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two feet for
land with slope of 15% or less and at a minimum vertical
interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land. Contours
plotted from the United States Geodetic Survey will not be
accepted, and Lancaster County Geographic Information
System (GIS) Topography will not be accepted in areas where
improvements are proposed but should be used beginning 50
feet outside the improvement boundary.
(d) The following items when located within the subject tract:
[1] The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-ofway
or easements relating to streets, cartways, access
drives, driveways or service streets.
[2] The location and size of the following features and related
rights-of-way or easements: buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be
used to convey storm flows within and from the subject
tract.
[5] The preliminary plan shall indicate any proposed
disturbance, encroachment or alteration to such features,
including: floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites, woodlands,
significant trees, habitats for threatened and endangered
species, solid waste disposal areas, Superfund
contaminations, historic features, cemetery or burial sites,
archeological sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
[6] In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant executed pursuant to the
§ 190-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-24
1:568
Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as
amended, the plan shall include if applicable the specific
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site.
The application shall include a copy of the environmental
covenant agreement and any required engineering and
institutional controls.
(e) The following items when located within 200 feet of the subject
tract:
[1] The location and name of existing rights-of-way or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives,
driveways or service streets.
[2] As available, the location of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities including the location and size of
related easements.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the
existing stormwater management system and any other
facility that may be used to convey storm flows from the
subject tract.
[5] The location of woodlands, habitats for endangered and
threatened species, and highly erosive soils.
(3) Additional information.
(a) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(b) Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic
features.
(c) The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking
compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, landscaping and
all other significant facilities (Appendix G).158
(d) Building setback lines, with distances from the street center
line or street right-of-way line, whichever requirement is
applicable under the zoning regulations.
(e) Existing and proposed easements.
158. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:569
(f) A typical street cross-section for each proposed street and
typical cross-section for any existing street that will be
improved as part of the application. Each cross-section shall
include the entire right-of-way width.
(g) A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water
facilities to be provided.
(h) Identification of any modifications granted by the Planning
Commission, if applicable.
(i) The zoning district and lot size and/or density requirements of
the applicable zoning regulations.
(j) The street center line profile for each proposed street shown
on the preliminary plan.
(k) The location and material of existing lot line markers along the
perimeter of the entire existing tract.
(l) The layout of lots, with approximate dimensions.
(m) The total number of lots, units of occupancy, net density, gross
density, and proposed land use (if multiple land uses are
proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated).
(n) The layout of streets, including cartway and right-of-way
widths, and the proposed street names.
(o) Stormwater management plans and data designed in
accordance with Chapter 184. Stormwater Management.
(p) In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under
the jurisdiction of PennDOT (Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation), the inclusion of the following plan note:
A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), as
amended, known as the "State Highway Law," before driveway
access to a state highway is permitted. Access to the state
highway shall only be as authorized by a highway occupancy
permit, and the Planning Commission's approval of this plan
in no way implies that such permit can be acquired.
(q) A copy of any applicable zoning decisions.
(r) In the case for the phased installation of improvements:
[1] A schedule shall be filed delineating all proposed sections
as well as deadlines within which applications for final
plan approval of each section are intended to be filed.
[2] Each section in any subdivision or land development,
except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25%
§ 190-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-24
1:570
of the total number of dwelling units unless the Planning
Commission specifically approves a lesser percentage for
one or more of the sections.
[3] Sections of the development shall be sequenced in such a
manner that each section [together with the previously
approved and completed section(s)] shall be physically
built to be in full compliance with the ordinance and not be
dependent on the construction completed at future
phases, including, but not limited to stormwater
management facilities, streets, and utilities.
[4] Except for staged construction of streets intended to be
extended in subsequent phases, all improvements for each
section shall be installed in their permanent configuration.
The final wearing course shall be carried in an
improvement guarantee until it is finally installed and
inspected.
[5] It is not necessary for construction in one section to be
completed for the next section to be submitted.
[6] All subsequent phased final plans shall be submitted
within five years of the date of Planning Commission
action on the preliminary plan unless otherwise agreed
upon by the applicant and Borough. The developer shall
take the responsibility to provide the Planning Commission
with reasonable notice of delays in the filing of final plans.
[7] The applicant shall annually update the Planning
Commission regarding the schedule on or before the
anniversary date of the preliminary plan approval.
(4) Certificates, notifications and reports.
(a) Certificate, signature and seal of the surveyor to the effect that
the survey is correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect that prepared the
plan that all other information shown on the plan is accurate.
(b) Provide a note to be placed on the plan indicating that all
zoning approvals, including zoning variances, special
exceptions or conditional uses, have been obtained, if
applicable, and the conditions imposed.
(c) Any improvement that encroaches upon an electric
transmission line, telecommunications line, gas pipeline,
petroleum or petroleum products transmission line, fiber
optics, public sewer, public water, etc. located within the tract,
the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the
owner or lease of such right-of-way stating any conditions on
§ 190-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-24
1:571
§ 190-25. Final plan.
the use of the land and the minimum building setback and/or
right-of-way lines.
(d) Where the subdivision or land development proposal will
generate 50 or more additional trips to or from the site during
the development's anticipated peak hour, or the Planning
Commission indicates a need for one, a traffic impact study as
required by § 190-34 shall be submitted with the preliminary
plan.
(e) Where the land included in the subject application has an
agricultural, woodland, or other natural resource easement
located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any
conditions on the use of the land.
(f) Where areas are reserved for future access strip usage,
provide a plan note indicating that future access strip
reservations are intended to be used in the future.
(g) Certification that the consultant that prepared the plan has
reviewed all prior recorded plans relating to the property at
issue and that the subject plan is in full compliance with all
notes and restrictions set forth on such recorded plans.
C. Construction from preliminary plan.
(1) An appropriately executed Memorandum of Understanding
(Appendix D).159
(2) Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
(a) Notification from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) that approval of the Highway
Occupancy Permit (HOP) has been granted.
(b) Notification from LCCD (Lancaster County Conservation
District) that an acceptable erosion and sedimentation control
plan/NPDES plan has been submitted and approved by that
agency.
(c) Notification from DEP (Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection) that either approval of the Sewer
Facility Plan Revision (or Plan Revision Module for Land
Development) or Supplement has been granted or that such
approval is not required.
A. Drafting standards. The same drafting standards shall be required for a
final plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 190-24A.
159. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-25
1:572
B. Plan information.
(1) Location and identification. The same location and identification
standards shall be required for a final plan as specified for a
preliminary plan in section § 190-24B(1).
(2) Existing features.
(a) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the
names and plan book record numbers of all previously
recorded plans for adjacent projects.
(b) The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the
datum used. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval
of two feet for land with slope of 15% or less and at a minimum
vertical interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land.
Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic Survey will
not be accepted, and Lancaster County Geographic
Information System (GIS) Topography will not be accepted in
areas where improvements are proposed but should be used
beginning 50 feet outside the improvement boundary.
(c) The following items when located within the subject tract:
[1] The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-ofway
or easements relating to streets, cartways, access
drives, driveways or service streets.
[2] The location and size of the following features and related
rights-of-way or easements: buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities. This information may be provided
on separate sheets and need not be recorded with the final
plan.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be
used to convey storm flows from the subject tract.
[5] The final plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance,
encroachment or alteration to such features including;
floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites, woodlands, significant
trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species,
solid waste disposal areas, Superfund contaminations,
historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:573
[6] In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant executed pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as
amended, the plan shall include if applicable the specific
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site.
The application shall include a copy of the environmental
covenant agreement and any required engineering and
institutional controls.
(d) The following items when located within 200 feet of the subject
tract:
[1] The location and name of existing rights-of-way or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives,
driveways or service streets.
[2] As available, the location of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities including the location and size of
related easements.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the
existing stormwater management system and any other
facility that may be used to convey storm flows from the
subject tract.
[5] As available, the location of woodlands, habitats for
threatened and endangered species, and highly erosive
soils.
(3) Additional information.
(a) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(b) Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic
features.
(c) The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking
compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, landscaping,
and all other significant facilities (Appendix G for reference).160
(d) Building setback lines, with distances from the street center
line or street right-of-way line, whichever requirement is
applicable under the zoning regulations.
160. Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-25 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-25
1:574
(e) Existing and proposed easements.
(f) A typical street cross-section for each proposed street and a
typical cross-section for any existing street that will be
improved as part of the application. Each cross-section shall
include the entire right-of-way width.
(g) A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water
facilities to be provided.
(h) Identification of any modifications granted by the Planning
Commission, if applicable.
(i) The zoning district, applicable zoning regulations, net and
gross density, the total number of lots, units of occupancy, and
proposed land use (if multiple land uses are proposed, the
location of each land use shall be indicated).
(j) A complete description of the center line and the right-of-way
line for all new streets. This description shall include distances
and bearings with curve segments comprised of radius,
tangent, arc, and chord.
(k) The location and material of all proposed and existing
permanent monuments and lot line markers, including a note
that all proposed monuments and lot line markers are set or
indicating when and by whom they will be set.
(l) Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas
for all parcels. Curve segments shall be comprised of arc,
chord, bearing and distance. Along existing street rights-ofway,
the description may utilize the existing deed lines or road
center lines; along all proposed street rights-of-way, the
description shall be prepared to the right-of-way lines.
(m) The final vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed
street and access drive. All profiles shall show at least the
existing (natural) profile along the center line, proposed grade
at the center line, and the length of all proposed vertical
curves. This information may be provided on separate sheets
and is not subject to recording with the final plan.
(n) A grading plan, which shall include finished land contours and
grades, directions of water movement, type of soils, location of
water bars or silt fences and ground floor elevations. This
information may be provided on separate sheets and is not
subject to recording with the final plan.
(o) Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for
public, semipublic or community use.
(p) The final street names as approved by Lancaster County-Wide
Communications.
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:575
(q) A copy of any applicable zoning decisions.
(r) In the case for the phased installation of improvements:
[1] A schedule shall be filed delineating all proposed sections
as well as dates within which applications for final plan
approval of each section are intended to be filed.
[2] Each section in any subdivision or land development,
except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25%
of the total number of units unless the Planning
Commission specifically approves a lesser percentage for
one or more of the sections.
[3] Sections of the development shall be sequenced in such a
manner that each section [together with the previously
approved and completed section(s)] shall be physically
built to be in full compliance with the ordinance and not be
dependent on the construction completed at future
phases. For example, but not limited to, stormwater
management facilities.
[4] Except for staged construction of streets intended to be
extended in subsequent phases, all improvements for each
section shall be installed to the extent where they provide
their intended services. The final wearing course shall be
carried in an improvement guarantee until it is finally
installed and inspected.
[5] It is not necessary for construction in one section to be
completed before the next section to be submitted or
constructed.
[6] In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation
of improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule
shall be filed by the landowner with the preliminary plat
delineating all proposed sections as well as deadlines
within which applications for final plat approval of each
section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on, or before, the
anniversary of the preliminary plat approval until final plat
approval of the final section has been granted and any
modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of the Planning Commission in its discretion.
(4) Certificates, notifications and reports.
(a) Certificate, signature and seal of the surveyor to the effect that
the survey is correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect that prepared the
plan that all other information shown on the plan is accurate.
§ 190-25 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-25
1:576
(b) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized
to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner,
to the effect that the subdivision or land development shown on
the plan is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those
signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey
and plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such.
This statement shall be signed and dated on or after the last
change or revision to said plan.
(c) Certificate for approval by the Planning Commission.
(d) Certificate of notification to be signed by the Lancaster County
Planning Commission.
(e) Certificate to accommodate the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds information.
(f) A note to be placed on the plan indicating that all zoning
approvals, including zoning variances, special exceptions or
conditional uses, have been obtained, if applicable, and the
conditions imposed.
(g) Written notice from Lancaster County-Wide Communications
stating that the proposed Street names are acceptable (see
Appendix E).161
(h) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property, if
applicable.
(i) A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not
to be offered for dedication, if applicable.
(j) In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under
the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the inclusion of the following plan note:
A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), as
amended, known as the "State Highway Law," before driveway
access to a state highway is permitted. Access to the state
highway shall only be as authorized by a highway occupancy
permit, and the Planning Commission's approval of this plan
in no way implies that such permit can be acquired.
(k) Any improvement that encroaches upon an electric
transmission line, telecommunications line, gas pipeline,
petroleum or petroleum products transmission line, fiber
optics, public sewer, public water, etc. located within the tract,
the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the
owner or lessee of such right-of-way stating any conditions on
161. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-25
1:577
the use of the land, the minimum building setback and/or rightof-
way lines, and the center line of such line.
(l) Where the land included in the subject application has
agricultural, woodland, or other natural resource Easement
located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a copy of the agreement from the party holding the
easement stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(m) Where areas are reserved for future access strip usage,
provide a plan note indicating as much.
(n) When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer
system is proposed, written notification from the authority
providing sanitary sewer and/or water service indicating that
sufficient capacity to service the proposed development has
been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with current
authority standards).
(o) Certification that the consultant that prepared the plan has
reviewed all prior recorded plans relating to the property at
issue and that the subject plan is in full compliance with all
notes and restrictions set forth on such recorded plans.
C. As condition of recording a final plan.
(1) An appropriately executed Memorandum of Understanding
(Appendix D and D-1).162
(2) Posting of all appropriately executed financial securities (§ 190-30).
(3) Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
(a) When applicable, notification from the Department of
Environmental Protection that either approval of the sewer
facility plan revision (or plan revision module for land
development) or supplement has been granted or that such
approval is not required.
(b) When required, notification from the Lancaster County
Conservation District that an acceptable erosion and
sedimentation control plan/NPDES plan has been submitted
and approved by that agency:
(c) When applicable, notification from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) that approval of the
highway occupancy permit (HOP) has been granted.
(4) A controlling agreement when an application proposes to establish
a street which is not offered for dedication to the public use.
162. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-25 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-26
1:578
§ 190-26. Center line separation plans/lot add-on plans/lot
consolidation plans/revised subdivision plans.
A. General. Plans shall be prepared by a registered surveyor and shall be
subject to the requirements of this section.
B. Drafting standards.
(1) Scale and sheet size. The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at
a standard scale of 20 to 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Dimensions. Dimensions shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds
with an error of closure no greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
C. Plan information. The following information shall be provided on the
sheet to be recorded:
(1) Location and identification.
(a) The project name.
(b) The names and address of the owner(s) of the tracts and all
adjacent landowners affected by the proposed conveyance.
(c) The name and address of the firm that prepared the plan, the
file or project number assigned by the firm, the plan date, and
the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(d) A North arrow, a graphic scale and a written scale.
(e) A location map, at a scale not less than one inch equals 2,000
feet, with sufficient information to locate the specific property
involved. All existing roads in the vicinity of the subject tract
shall be identified.
(f) If the tract of land is located in the vicinity of a Borough or
zoning district boundary line(s), the location of such boundary
shall be shown and labeled.
(g) The source of title (including the deed, lot and plan of record
number) to both the receiving and conveying tracts.
(h) In the case of a plan for which the subject property is enrolled
in the Clean and Green Preferential Assessment Program, the
inclusion of the following plan note:
§ 190-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:579
NOTICE: According to County records, the subject property
may be subject to the Pennsylvania Farmland and Forest Land
Assessment Act of 1974, (a.k.a. the Clean and Green Act),
Act 319 of 1974, P.L. 973; 72 P.S. § 5490.1, as amended,
and as further amended by Act 156 of 1998, as amended.
These acts provide for preferential property tax assessment
and treatment. It is the property owner's responsibility to be
aware of the laws, rules and regulations applicable to his
or her property, including the provision that: (a) preferential
property tax assessment and treatment will remain in effect
continuously until the landowner changes the agricultural use
from the approved category, or if a transfer, split-off or
separation of the subject land occurs; (b) if a change in use
occurs, or if a conveyance, transfer, separation, split-off or
subdivision of the subject land occurs, the property owner
will be responsible for notifying the County Assessor within
30 days; (c) the payment of rollback tax, plus interest, for
the period of enrollment, or a period not to exceed seven
years, whichever is less, may be required; (d) if the property
owner fails to notify the County Assessor within the thirty-day
period, prior to the land conveyance, the property owner may
be subject to a $100 civil penalty; (e) if the property owner
fails to pay the rollback tax, a Borough lien could be placed on
the property under existing delinquent tax law.
(i) Tie bars indicating parcels to be joined-in-common.
(j) In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant, the plan shall include a plan note
indicating the recording information of the environmental
covenant executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform
Environmental Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as amended.
(k) If the subject tract is identified on the Official Map of the
Borough of Columbia, the plan shall include a plan note
stipulating the same.
(l) If the subject tract is located within the Historic District, the
plan shall include a plan note stipulating the same.
(m) The latitude/longitude location information of the center of all
vacant lots and/or the center of the most significant building,
either existing or proposed, on a lot containing a structure.
(n) The height above sea level of each lot.
(o) Include a note acknowledging that the proposal demonstrates
compliance with the Airport District Overlay of Chapter 220,
Zoning.
§ 190-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-26
1:580
(2) Existing features.
(a) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the
names and plan book record numbers of all previously
recorded plans for projects adjacent to either the receiving or
conveying tract.
(b) The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives,
driveways or service streets on or adjacent to both the
receiving and conveying tracts.
(c) The location of the following features and any related rights-ofway
on both the receiving and conveying tracts: buildings,
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal systems
and related recharge areas, stormwater management facilities,
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission lines,
and railroads.
(d) In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant executed pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act No.
68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as amended,
the plan shall include if applicable the specific boundary limits
of any contamination remaining on site. The application shall
include a copy of the environmental covenant agreement and
any required engineering and institutional controls.
(3) Additional information.
(a) The total acreage, total number of lots, density of development,
present zoning classification and minimum lot area
requirements.
(b) An accurate description of the parcel to be conveyed. If the
remainder of the conveying tract has a lot area of 10 acres or
less, it must also be described to the accuracy requirements of
this chapter. If the remaining acreage is in excess of 10 acres,
its boundary and the boundary of the receiving tract shall be
described by deed plottings drawn at a legible scale.
(c) Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
markers, including a note indicating when they will be set.
(d) Identification of any modifications granted by the Planning
Commission, if applicable.
(e) The location of sight triangle easements and safe stopping
distance at all street and driveway intersections in accordance
with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual.
(4) Certificates and notifications.
§ 190-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-26
1:581
§ 190-27. Minor plans.
(a) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized
to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner of
the receiving tract, to the effect that the conveyance as shown
on the plan is in accordance with the intent of the landowner,
that all those signing are all the owners of the property shown
on the survey and plan, and that they desire the same to be
recorded as such. This statement shall be signed and dated on
or after the last change or revision to said plan.
(b) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized
to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner of
the conveying tract, to the effect that the conveyance as shown
on the plan is in accordance with the intent of the landowner,
that all those signing are all of the owners of the property
shown on the plan, and that they desire the same to be
recorded as such. This statement shall be signed and dated on
or after the last change or revision to said plan.
(c) Certificate, signature and seal of the surveyor to the effect that
the survey is correct and that all Plan information is accurate.
(d) Certificate for approval by the Planning Commission.
(e) Certificate of notification to be signed by the Lancaster County
Planning Commission.
(f) Certificate to accommodate the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds information.
A. Drafting standards. The same drafting standards shall be required for a
Minor Plan as specified for a Preliminary Plan in § 190-24A.
B. Plan information.
(1) Location and identification. The same location and identification
standards shall be required for a Minor plan as specified for a
preliminary plan in § 190-24B(1).
(2) Existing features.
(a) A deed plotting of the subject tract at a scale not less than one
inch equals 400 feet which accurately identifies the
configuration and acreage, as well as the location of all
structures, floodplain, drainage easements, points of ingress
and egress, easements, and sewer and water facilities.
(b) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the
names and plan book record numbers of all previously
recorded plans for adjacent projects.
§ 190-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-27
1:582
(c) The location of the benchmark and a notation indicating the
datum used. Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval
of two feet for land with slope of 15% or less and at a minimum
vertical interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land.
Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic Survey will
not be accepted, and Lancaster County Geographic
Information System (GIS) Topography will not be accepted in
areas where improvements are proposed but should be used
beginning 50 feet outside the improvement boundary.
(d) The following items when located within the subject tract:
[1] The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-ofway
or easements relating to streets, cartways, access
drives, driveways or service streets.
[2] The location and size of the following features and related
rights-of-way or easements: buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities. This information may be provided
on separate sheets and need not be recorded with the final
plan.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater
management system and any other facility that may be
used to convey storm flows from the subject tract.
[5] The minor plan shall indicate any proposed disturbance,
encroachment or alteration to such features including;
floodplains, wetlands, quarry sites, woodlands, significant
trees, habitats for threatened and endangered species,
solid waste disposal areas, Superfund contaminations,
historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archeological
sites, and areas with highly erosive soils.
[6] In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an
environmental covenant executed pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act
No. 68 of 2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 to 6517 (UECA), as
amended, the plan shall include, if applicable, the specific
boundary limits of any contamination remaining on site.
The application shall include a copy of the environmental
covenant agreement and any required engineering and
institutional controls.
(e) The following items when located within 200 feet of the subject
tract:
§ 190-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-27
1:583
[1] The location and name of existing rights-of-way or
easements relating to streets, cartways, access drives,
driveways or service streets.
[2] As available, the location of buildings, public utilities, onlot
utilities, on-lot water supplies, on-lot sewage disposal
systems and related recharge areas, and stormwater
management facilities including the location and size of
related easements.
[3] The location of existing rights-of-way for
telecommunications, electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
[4] As available, the size, capacity, and condition of the
existing stormwater management system and any other
facility that may be used to convey storm flows from the
subject tract.
[5] As available, the location of woodlands, habitats for
threatened and endangered species, and highly erosive
soils.
(3) Additional information.
(a) The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(b) Identification and disposition of existing buildings and historic
features.
(c) The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking
compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, landscaping,
and all other significant facilities.
(d) Building setback lines, with distances from the street center
line or street right-of-way line, whichever requirement is
applicable under the zoning regulations.
(e) Existing and proposed easements.
(f) A note on the plan indicating the types of sewer or water
facilities to be provided.
(g) Identification of any modifications granted by the Planning
Commission, if applicable.
(h) The zoning district, applicable zoning regulations, net and
gross density, the total number of lots, units of occupancy, and
proposed land use (if multiple land uses are proposed, the
location of each land use shall be indicated).
(i) The location and material of all proposed and existing
permanent monuments and lot line markers, including a note
§ 190-27 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-27
1:584
that all proposed monuments and lot line markers are set or
indicating when and by whom they will be set.
(j) Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas
for all parcels. Curve segments shall be comprised of arc,
chord, bearing and distance. Along existing street rights-ofway,
the description may utilize the existing deed lines or road
center lines; along all proposed street rights-of-way, the
description shall be prepared to the right-of-way lines.
(k) On and within 200 feet of the lots proposed for development,
identify the location of all proposed structures, existing
floodplain, drainage easements, points of ingress and egress,
easements, and sewer and water facilities.
(l) The capacity and condition of all stormwater management
facilities located on, and within, 200 feet of the lots included in
the plan must be identified. Any adverse impact to such
facilities resulting from increased flows from the site must be
addressed in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 184,
Stormwater Management.
(m) Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for
public, semipublic or community use.
(4) Certificates, notifications and reports.
(a) Certificate, signature and seal of the surveyor to the effect that
the survey is correct, and certificate, signature and seal of the
surveyor, engineer or landscape architect that prepared the
plan that all other information shown on the plan is accurate.
(b) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized
to take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner,
to the effect that the subdivision or land development shown on
the plan is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those
signing are all the owners of the property shown on the survey
and plan, and that they desire the same to be recorded as such.
This statement shall be signed and dated on or after the last
change or revision to said plan.
(c) Certificate for approval by the Planning Commission.
(d) Certificate of notification to be signed by the Lancaster County
Planning Commission.
(e) Certificate to accommodate the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds information.
(f) A note to be placed on the plan indicating that all zoning
approvals, including zoning variances, special exceptions or
conditional uses, have been obtained, if applicable, and the
conditions imposed.
§ 190-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-27
1:585
(g) Written notice from Lancaster County-Wide Communications
stating that the proposed street names are acceptable.
(h) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property, if
applicable.
(i) A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not
to be offered for dedication, if applicable.
(j) In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under
the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the inclusion of the following plan note:
A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section
420 of the Act of June 1, 1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), as
amended, known as the "State Highway Law," before driveway
access to a state highway is permitted. Access to the state
highway shall only be as authorized by a highway occupancy
permit, and the Planning Commission's approval of this plan
in no way implies that such permit can be acquired.
(k) Any improvement that encroach upon an electric transmission
line, telecommunications line, gas pipeline, petroleum or
petroleum products transmission line, fiber optics, public
sewer, public water, etc. located within the tract, the
application shall be accompanied by a letter from the owner or
lessee of such right-of-way stating any conditions on the use of
the land, the minimum building setback and/or right-of-way
lines, and the center line of such line.
(l) Where the land included in the subject application has
agricultural woodland or other natural resource easement
located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a copy of the agreement from the party holding the
easement stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(m) Where areas are reserved for future access strip usage,
provide a plan note indicating as much.
(n) When connection to an existing water and/or sanitary sewer
system is proposed, written notification from the authority
providing sanitary sewer and/or water service indicating that
sufficient capacity to service the proposed development has
been reserved shall be provided (in accordance with current
authority standards).
C. Conditions of recording a minor subdivision plan.
§ 190-27 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-27
1:586
(1) An appropriately executed memorandum of understanding
(Appendix D) and, if applicable, financial security (Appendix D-1)163
in accordance with § 190-30.
(2) Written notices of approval by outside agencies, if applicable:
(a) When applicable, notification from the Department of
Environmental Protection that either approval of the Sewer
Facility Plan Revision (or Plan Revision Module for Land
Development) or supplement has been granted or that such
approval is not required.
(b) When required, notification from the Lancaster County
Conservation District that an acceptable Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan/NPDES Plan has been submitted
and approved by that agency.
163. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-27
1:587

ARTICLE VI
Assurance for Completion and Maintenance of Improvements
§ 190-28. Improvements required.
In lieu of the completion of any improvements required as a condition
for the final approval of a plat, the deposit with the Borough of financial
security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such required
improvements shall be made in accordance with Section 509 of the PMPC,
as amended.164 If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along
with apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility
or Borough authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial
security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be
posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
Borough authority and shall not be included within the financial security as
otherwise required by this article.
§ 190-29. Improvement construction guarantee.
§ 190-30. Inspection of improvements.
A. Form of financial security. Without limitation as to other types of
financial security which the Borough may approve, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered
lending institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow
accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable
financial security for the purposes of this section. Such financial
security shall be posted with a bonding company or federal or
commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the party
posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth. The financial security shall provide for, and secure to
the public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
B. Amount of guarantee. The amount of financial security to be posted for
the completion of the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of
the cost of completion, as estimated and readjusted annually in
accordance with Section 509 of the PMPC, as amended.165
A. The developer shall contact the Borough to coordinate a construction
observation schedule, notification procedures, and other related
improvement guarantee administration topics and to determine the
need for an on-site, preconstruction meeting to the satisfaction of
Borough Staff and/or the Borough Engineer. The developer shall
164. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 190-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-30
1:589
§ 190-31. Release of funds.
§ 190-32. Dedication of improvements.
If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
contact the Borough Engineer prior to the construction of site
improvements in order to create an inspection schedule to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
B. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough in writing. The
Borough shall direct and authorize the inspection of the aforesaid
improvements in accordance with Sections 509 and 510 of the PMPC,
as amended.166 If any portion of said improvements shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Borough, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as set forth in the PMPC shall be followed.
A. Partial release of funds. As the work of installing the required
improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security may
request in writing that the Borough to release or authorize the release,
from time to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for
payment to the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any
such requests shall made and processed in accordance with the PMPC.
B. Final release. A request for the final release of financial security for
completion of improvements for a subdivision or land development shall
be made in writing in accordance with the PMPC.
C. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. In the event that any
improvements which may be required have not been installed as
provided in the subdivision and land development ordinance or in
accord with the approved final plat, the Borough is hereby granted the
power to enforce any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate
legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond, or other
security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs
or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the
Borough may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or
part of the subdivision or land development and may institute
appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary
to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds,
whether resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable
action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely for
the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other Borough purpose.
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 and 10510, respectively.
§ 190-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-32
1:590
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements depicted
upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been
provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following: the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or buildings to
a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, as well as the
completion of all other improvements as depicted upon the approved plat,
either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such
improvements are necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the
building or buildings. Any ordinance or statute inconsistent herewith is
hereby expressly repealed.
§ 190-33. Maintenance guarantee.
Where the Borough accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Borough may require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements as
well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed 18
months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security
shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this article with regard to
installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial security
shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
§ 190-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-33
1:591

ARTICLE VII
Supplemental Requirements, Tests, and Studies
§ 190-34. Traffic impact study.
A. Study required.
(1) Abbreviated traffic impact study. Whenever a proposed project will
generate 50 to 99 new vehicle trips in the peak direction (inbound
or outbound) during the site peak traffic hour, the applicant shall
perform an abbreviated traffic impact study. Based on this study,
certain improvements may be identified as necessary to provide
safe and efficient access to the development. The abbreviated
traffic impact study shall include:
(a) A capacity analysis report prepared under the supervision of a
qualified and experienced transportation engineer.
(b) The study area for the capacity analysis report shall only
include all proposed intersections.
(2) Comprehensive traffic impact study.
(a) Whenever a proposed project will generate 100 or more new
vehicle trips in the peak direction (inbound or outbound)
during the site peak traffic hour, the applicant shall perform a
comprehensive traffic impact study. Based on this study,
certain improvements may be identified as necessary to
provide safe and efficient access to the development.
(b) Transportation demand management measures such as
staggered start and end work times, telecommuting, utilization
of transit, greenway or trail linkages, park-and-ride lots, etc.
may be used to reduce trip generation for the proposed
development. If such measures will reduce the new vehicle
trips in the peak direction during the peak traffic hour to less
than 100, then an abbreviated traffic impact study may be
performed in lieu of a comprehensive study. When such trip
reduction measures are used to justify performance of an
abbreviated study as permitted by this section, a developer and
successors shall be bound by a recorded agreement to
implement such measures. The terms and form of agreement
shall be as mutually agreed upon by the Borough and the
developers.
(3) In addition, a comprehensive traffic impact study shall be prepared
at the discretion of the Borough whenever either of the following
conditions exists within the impact study area:
(a) Current traffic problems exist in the local area, such as a high
crash location, confusing intersection, or a congested
intersection that directly affects access to the development.
§ 190-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-34
1:593
(b) The ability of the existing roadway system to handle increased
traffic or the feasibility of improving the roadway system to
handle increased traffic is limited.
B. Traffic impact study requirements.
(1) Area of traffic impact study. The traffic impact study area shall be
based on the characteristics of the surrounding area. The
intersections to be included in the study shall be adjacent to the
site or have direct impact upon the access to the site. The
intersections shall be mutually agreed upon by the Borough and the
transportation engineer preparing the study. The Lancaster County
Planning Commission shall be called upon to resolve any disputes
between the Borough and the transportation engineer.
(2) Preparation by transportation engineer required. Traffic impact
studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of qualified
and experienced transportation engineers with specific training in
traffic and transportation engineering and at least two years of
experience related to preparing traffic studies for existing or
proposed developments.
(3) Horizon year. The traffic forecasts shall be prepared for the
anticipated opening year of the development, assuming full buildout
and occupancy. This year shall be referred to as the "horizon
year."
(4) Non-site traffic estimates. Estimates of non-site traffic shall be
made, and will consist of through motorized and nonmotorized
traffic and motorized and nonmotorized traffic generated by all
other developments within the study area for which preliminary or
final plans have been approved. Non-site traffic may be estimated
using any one of the following three methods: "build-up" technique,
area transportation plan data or modeled volumes, and trends or
growth rates.
(5) Trip generation rates required. The traffic impact study shall
include a table showing the land use categories and quantities,
with the corresponding trip generation rates or equations (with
justification for selection of one or the other), and resulting number
of trips. The trip-generation rates used must be either from the
latest edition of trip generation by ITE, or from a local study of
corresponding land uses and quantities. All sources must be
referenced in the study.
(6) Consideration of pass-by trips. If pass-by trips or shared trips are a
major consideration for the land use in question, studies should be
referenced and interviews should be conducted and documented at
similar land uses.
§ 190-34 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-34
1:594
(7) Rate sums. Any significant difference between the sums of singleuse
rates and proposed mixed-use estimates must be justified and
explained in the study.
(8) Explanations required. The reasoning and data used in developing
a trip generation rate for special/unusual generators must be
justified and explained in the report.
(9) Definition of influence area.
(a) Prior to trip distribution of site-generated trips, an influence
area must be defined which contains 80% or more of the trip
ends that will be attracted to the development. A market study
can be used to establish the limits of an influence area, if
available. If no market study is available, an influence area
should be estimated based on a reasonable documented
estimate. The influence area can also be based on a reasonable
maximum convenient travel time to the site, or delineating
area boundaries based on locations of competing
developments.
(b) Other methods, such as using trip data from an existing
development with similar characteristics or using an existing
origin-destination survey of trips within the area, can be used
in place of the influence area to delineate the boundaries of the
impact.
(10) Estimates of trip distribution required.
(a) Trip distribution can be estimated using any one of the
following three methods:
[1] Analogy.
[2] Trip distribution model.
[3] Surrogate data.
(b) Whichever method is used, trip distribution must be estimated
and analyzed for the horizon year. A mixed-use development
may require more than one distribution and coinciding
assignment for each phase (for example, residential and retail
phases on the same site). Consideration must also be given to
whether inbound and outbound trips will have similar
distributions.
(11) Trip assignments.
(a) Assignments must be made considering logical routings,
available roadway capacities, left turns at critical
intersections, and projected (and perceived) minimum travel
times. In addition, multiple paths should often be assigned
between origins and destinations to achieve realistic estimates
§ 190-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-34
1:595
rather than assigning all of the trips to the route with the
shortest travel time. The assignments must be carried through
the external site access points and in large projects (those
producing 500 or more additional peak direction trips to or
from the site during the development's peak hour) through the
internal roadways. When the site has more than one access
driveway, logical routing and possible multiple paths should
be used to obtain realistic driveway volumes. The assignment
should reflect conditions at the time of the analysis.
Assignments can be accomplished either manually or with
applicable computer models.
(b) If a thorough analysis is required to account for pass-by trips,
the following procedure should be used:
[1] Determine the percentage of pass-by trips in the total trips
generated.
[2] Estimate a trip distribution for the pass-by trips.
[3] Perform two separate trip assignments, based on the new
and pass-by trip distributions.
[4] Combine the pass-by and new trip assignment.
(c) Upon completion of the initial site traffic assignment, the
results should be reviewed to see if the volumes appear logical
given characteristics of the road system and trip distribution.
Adjustments should be made if the initial results do not appear
to be logical or reasonable.
(12) Total traffic impacts. Motorized and nonmotorized traffic estimates
for any site with current traffic activity must reflect not only new
traffic associated with the site's redevelopment, but also the trips
subtracted from the traffic stream because of the removal of a land
use. The traffic impact study should clearly depict the total traffic
estimate and its components.
(13) Capacity analysis.
(a) Capacity analysis must be performed at each of the major
street and project site access intersection locations (signalized
and unsignalized) within the study area. In addition, analyses
must be completed for roadway segments deemed sensitive to
site traffic within the study area as determined by the Borough.
These may include such segments as weaving sections, ramps,
internal site roadways, parking facility access points, and
reservoirs for vehicles queuing on- and off-site. Other locations
may be deemed appropriate depending on the situation.
(b) The recommended level-of-service analysis procedures
detailed in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity
§ 190-34 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-34
1:596
Manual must be followed. The operational analyses in the
Highway Capacity Manual should be used for analyzing
existing conditions, traffic impacts, access requirements, or
other future conditions for which traffic, geometric, and
control parameters can be established.
(14) Required levels of service. The recommendations of the traffic
impact study shall provide safe and efficient movement of traffic to
and from and within and past the proposed development, while
minimizing the impact to non-site trips. The current levels of
service must be maintained if they are Levels C or D, not allowed to
deteriorate to worse than Level C if they are currently Levels A or
B, and improved to Level D if they are Levels E or F.
(15) Documentation required. A traffic impact study report shall be
prepared to document the purpose, procedures, findings,
conclusions, and recommendations of the study.
(a) The documentation for a traffic impact study shall include, at a
minimum:
[1] Study purpose and objectives.
[2] Description of the site and study area.
[3] Existing roadway conditions in the area of the
development.
[4] Recorded or approved development(s) within the traffic
impact study area.
[5] Trip generation, trip distribution, and modal split.
[6] Projected future motorized and nonmotorized traffic
volumes.
[7] An assessment of the change in roadway operating
conditions resulting from the development traffic.
[8] Recommendations for site access and transportation
improvements needed to maintain and/or improve
motorized and non-motorized traffic flow to, from, within,
and past the site at an acceptable and safe level of service.
[9] Transit location, availability of bike routes, connection to a
park and/or trail system.
(b) The analysis shall be presented in a straightforward and logical
sequence. It shall lead the reader step by step through the
various stages of the process and resulting conclusions and
recommendations.
(c) The recommendations shall specify the time period within
which the improvements should be made (particularly if the
§ 190-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-34
1:597
§ 190-35. Historic and cultural resources.
improvements are associated with various phases of the
development construction), and any monitoring of operating
conditions and improvements that may be required. The
recommendations shall also identify who will be responsible
for making the improvements.
(d) Data shall be presented in tables, graphs, maps, and diagrams
wherever possible for clarity and ease of review.
(e) To facilitate examination by the Borough, an executive
summary of one or two pages shall be provided, concisely
summarizing the purpose, conclusions, and recommendations.
(f) The study documentation outlined above provides a framework
for site traffic access/impact study reports. Some studies will
be easily documented using this outline. However, the specific
issues to be addressed, local study requirements, and the study
results may warrant additional sections.
C. Improvements. The applicant shall be responsible for the improvements
required to provide safe and convenient ingress and egress to the
development site.
A. Archaeological investigations.
(1) Specific state and federal guidelines and procedures for review
procedures as well as pertinent legislation may be obtained by
contacting the Bureau for Historic Preservation (BHP) and
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC). Specific
state and federal guidelines and procedures are outlined in detail
in "A Summary of Major Relevant Federal and State Legislation and
Regulations," Appendix A, and "Procedures for Compliance with
Federal and Commonwealth Preservation Law," Appendix H. PHMC
administers both the state and federal regulations.
(2) Projects affecting or potentially affecting historical and
archaeological properties are subject to review by the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission, Bureau for Historic
Preservation under the provisions of both Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and Section 10 of the
1978 Pennsylvania Historic Preservation Act.167 No land
development should take place on a site identified by the PHMC as
containing or likely to contain features of archaeological or historic
significance until procedures for compliance with federal and state
regulations have been realized and the review process has been
completed.
167. Editor's Note: See 37 Pa.C.S.A. § 510.
§ 190-34 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-35
1:598
§ 190-36. Parks and open space.
(3) All subdivisions and/or land development plans which meet the
above-mentioned requirements shall provide a letter of
determination and/or report from PHMC, BHP addressing the
following:
(a) BHP letter of determination. The BHP letter of determination.
(b) Additional required action. The BHP letter may recommend
one or more of the following activities:
[1] Phase I Survey.
[2] Phase II Survey.
[3] Phase III (Mitigation).
B. Preservation of historic features. Compliance with Chapter 130,
Historic District, of the Code of the Borough of Columbia is required for
all subdivisions and land developments, where applicable.
C. Retention of local names. Applicants are encouraged to perpetuate
historic names or geographic references that are traditionally
associated with the area, in which a project is located, rather than
proposing project names that are not consistent with the Borough or
Lancaster County traditions or culture.
A. Dedication. All plans for residential subdivision of land or residential
land developments shall provide for the dedication of land for park and
open space uses, and/or, upon agreement by the applicant, the
construction of recreation facilities, the payment of fees in lieu thereof,
the private reservation of land, or any combination thereof. All
dedications of land for park and open space purposes shall be
consistent with standards contained within the officially adopted park
and recreation plan or parks and recreation chapter of the Borough
Comprehensive Plan, if such chapter meets the intent and criteria of the
PMPC, and is officially adopted by the Planning Commission.
B. General requirements. When the Borough has an officially adopted park
and recreation plan or qualifying Borough Comprehensive Plan,
applicants shall designate areas of residential subdivisions or
residential land developments for parks, playgrounds, or other public
open space and recreational uses in accordance with the provisions of
such plans. The applicant shall make an irrevocable offer of dedication
for such land to the Borough, as required by the Planning Commission.
Title to such land shall be good and marketable, free of liens or other
defects, and acceptable to the Borough Solicitor. The Planning
Commission may, upon agreement of the applicant, authorize the
transfer of the land to a homeowner's association or to a nonprofit
corporation whose purpose is the conservation or preservation of land.
§ 190-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-36
1:599
C. Amount of land to be dedicated.
(1) Park and open space land shall be dedicated at a rate of 0.075 acres
per lot or dwelling unit proposed by the plan.
(2) If the applicable plan specifically designates a future park site
within the acreage of the tract proposed for development, all
subdivision plans shall be designed in conformance with such
designation in that all land required to be dedicated shall
correspond to the location of the future park site.
(a) Should the amount of land required to be dedicated exceeds
the acreage of the future park site as designated within the
applicable plan, the development proposal shall provide for
such additional area to be located in a manner that best serves
future residents of the proposed development.
(b) Should the amount of land required to be dedicated falls short
of the acreage of the future park site as designated within the
applicable plan or if the proposed development involves only a
portion of the development rights afforded to the tract, the
applicant shall reserve that portion of the future park site
which will best serve the immediate development. In addition,
a sketch plan shall be prepared to depict how full build-out of
the site will be accomplished in a manner that respects the
location of the future park site and ensures its accessibility to
all future dwellings on the tract. As an alternative to such
piecemeal dedication, the Borough may opt to purchase that
portion of the future park site. In which case, the future
dedication of land associated with the development of the tract
would proceed in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
I.
D. Fee in lieu of dedication. The applicant may, with the consent and
approval of the Planning Commission, elect to pay a fee to the Borough
in lieu of the park and open space dedication and so note on the plans.
(1) The amount of any fee to be paid in lieu of dedication of land shall
be equal to the average fair market value of the land (based on the
unimproved land value) otherwise required by this section or shall
be in accordance with any existing, Borough-adopted flat fee-in-lieu
schedule which establishes a fixed price per lot, unit, or acre. If no
formula is provided in any other Borough planning documents, the
formula to be used in computing the fee based upon fair market
value shall be:
N x (average FMV of 1 acre) = fee
§ 190-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-36
1:600
Where:
N = The number of acres required to be dedicated for
park and open space purposed, calculated in
accordance with Subsection C(1)
FMV = Fair market value based on the unimproved land
value
(2) The applicant shall provide the Planning Commission with all
information necessary to determine the fair market value of the
land, including, but not limited to, the following:
(a) If the applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in
fee simple less than two years prior to the preliminary or final
plan submission, a copy of the agreement of sale or real estate
transfer tax affidavit of value.
(b) If the applicant is the equitable owner, or purchased the land in
fee simple more than two years prior to the preliminary or final
plan submission, an opinion of value of the property by a state
certified appraiser acceptable to the Planning Commission.
Any applicant aggrieved by the fee established shall have the
right to secure a second opinion of value of the property by a
state certified appraiser acceptable to the Planning
Commission. The two estimated values shall be averaged, with
the result being the amount upon which the fee will be based.
(3) Such fee shall be payable to the Borough prior to the recording of
each final phase of the plan and shall be in an amount equal to the
percentage of the total number of dwelling units in the phase.
E. Parkland acquisition fund. All fees paid by the developer in lieu of
dedication of park and open space land shall be paid to the Borough and
upon its receipt shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing
account. Fees deposited to this account shall be administered as
required by the PMPC.
F. General design criteria. Except as provided in Subsections G and H, the
type of areas to be dedicated for park and open space land within a
subdivision or land development plan shall principally involve
neighborhood parks which are defined as "those parks providing
primarily active outdoor recreational opportunities located within 1/2
mile radius from a majority of the residences to be served thereby."
Exceptions to this will be when dedications are made to a community
park which serves the subdivision and is located within a two-mile
radius of the majority of the residences to be served, or a County park
which serves residences located within a ten-mile radius. The land set
aside for park and open space uses shall meet the following design
criteria:
§ 190-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-36
1:601
(1) The park and open space land shall be reasonably located so as to
serve all of the residents of the subdivision or land development.
(2) The park and open space land shall be accessible from a street
either directly or by pedestrian connection or shall adjoin and
become a part of an already existing public park or open space area
that is accessible from a street. Where access to the park is by
public road, the width of the frontage shall be a minimum length
deemed necessary by the Borough for access, visibility of the site,
and public safety.
(3) No more than 25% of the park and open space land shall contain
detention basins or other stormwater management facilities, or be
located within a floodplain or wetland unless such area is part of a
linear trail or greenway along an existing watercourse. In all cases,
land containing detention basin or other stormwater management
facilities, floodplains, or wetlands, must be suitable for public
recreation use without compromising the function of these areas.
(4) The park and open space land shall be compact and contiguous
unless the land is located adjacent to and combined with existing
park and open space land, or specific topographic features require
a different configuration. An example of such topographic features
would be the provision of linear public open space along a scenic
creek.
(5) When public park and open space land exists adjacent to the tract
to be subdivided or developed, the park and open space land shall
be located to adjoin and enlarge the presently existing park and
open space land.
(6) The park and open space land shall be accessible to utilities such as
sewer, water, and power that are provided within the subdivision,
and if so, the developer shall extend such utilities to the park and
open space land.
(7) If the developer is planning to construct facilities for recreation on
the dedicated property as an amenity for the development, such
facilities shall be constructed in accordance with current standards
established by the National Recreation and Park Association.
Where applicable, facilities constructed shall also comply with the
accessibility guidelines of the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990, as amended. Playground equipment constructed or placed on
parkland shall be in compliance with guidelines from the Consumer
Products Safety Commission.
G. Existing trails.
(1) When a subdivision or land development is traversed by or abuts an
existing public trail, the applicant shall make provision for the
continued recreational use of the trail, subject to alterations of the
§ 190-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-36
1:602
course of the trail within the boundaries of the development under
the following conditions:
(a) The points at which the trail enters and exits the tract shall
remain unchanged.
(b) The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according
to the generally accepted principles of landscape architecture.
(c) The proposed alteration does not run coincidentally with the
paved road intended for use by motorized vehicles.
(2) The land set aside for the continuation of such existing trail shall be
counted towards the amount of park and open space land.
H. Trails and linear parks. The trail or linear park shall conform to any
applicable Borough master park and open space plan, any countywide
trail and recreation master plan, and appropriate Borough and County
Comprehensive Plans. The Planning Commission may require, as a
condition of final plan approval, the dedication and improvement of
trails and linear parks, which may be credited toward the park and open
space land requirement. Trails and linear parks constructed and
dedicated for public use may be credited toward the park and open
space land requirement.
I. Borough fund reimbursement. The Borough may from time-to-time
decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of actual or
potential development. If the Borough does purchase park and open
space land within a distance of 1/2 mile, subsequent park and open
space land dedications within that area may, upon agreement with the
applicant, be in cash only and shall be calculated on a percentage basis
to reimburse the Borough's actual cost of acquisition and/or cost of
development of such land for park and open space purposes. The cash
amount shall be equal to the sum of the average price per acre of such
land plus the actual costs of adjacent streets and on-site utilities (or an
estimate of such actual costs provided by the Borough Engineer)
divided by the number of lots or dwelling units in the development.
J. Additional recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards and shall not be construed as prohibiting a
developer, with the approval of the Planning Commission, from
dedicating or reserving other land for recreation purposes in addition
to the requirements of this chapter.
K. Private reservation of land. Notwithstanding anything contained in the
above sections, the applicant may, with the consent and approval of the
Planning Commission, elect to fulfill the open space requirements
through the private reservation of a recreation area.
(1) Any project that proposes the private reservation of land shall be
accompanied by an agreement, which is acceptable to the Borough
§ 190-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-36
1:603
§ 190-37. Aquifer study.
Lots which would be served by individual wells or community water systems
when prior to the subdivision of land into lots or land development an
aquifer study may be required in areas or in proximity to areas of known
groundwater contamination or problems, in areas of known inadequate
yields of potable supplies, or a hydrogeologic report was completed on site,
an aquifer study shall be performed.
Solicitor, and which shall be recorded prior to or concurrent with
the preliminary plan approval. Such agreement shall stipulate:
(a) That maintenance of the designated open space is the
responsibility of the applicant, a homeowners' association, a
condominium unit owners' association, or other recognized
conservation organization.
(b) The availability of such private open space to nonresidents of
the development.
(c) The method by which the private reservation may be offered
for public dedication.
(d) That the land cannot be used for anything other than open
space purposes.
(e) That the land cannot be sold or disposed of by the association
except to another organization formed to own and maintain
said open space and without first offering to dedicate the land
and improvements to the Borough.
(2) If such lands are to become common elements of a homeowners' or
condominium unit owners' association of any type, then such
association's organizational bylaws must conform to the
requirements of applicable state law.
L. Construction of recreation facilities. Notwithstanding anything
contained in the above subsections, the applicant may, with the consent
and approval of the Planning Commission, elect to fulfill the open space
requirements through the construction of recreational facilities. All
approved recreation facilities constructed in lieu of land dedication
shall be included within the cost estimate for the improvement
guarantee.
A. Areas of known groundwater problems. Areas of known groundwater
problems shall include:
(1) Areas underlain by serpentinic or schistostic geologic formations or
formations otherwise known to have low yields.
(2) Areas in proximity 200 feet of sinkholes, ghost lakes, or drainage
entering the ground.
§ 190-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-37
1:604
(3) Areas with environmental covenants related to known groundwater
contamination including sites that have been voluntarily cleaned up
under the Pennsylvania Land Recycling and Environmental
Remediation Standards Act (Act 2).168 For approved cleanup sites,
this test will verify the site meets the approved standard.
(4) Other areas with documented water quantity or quality problems,
including pollutants in excess of federal safe drinking water
standards.
B. Aquifer study standards and procedures. No person shall conduct a
land development within an area of known groundwater quantity
problems without administering and passing on said land the aquifer
test required by this section:
(1) Water quantity report.
(a) Water quantity test standard.
[1] The proposed individual well shall produce not less than
400 gallons of water in a two-hour period, at least once
each day.
[a] If the sustained yield of the individual well or
individual well system is not capable of meeting the
standard, sufficient storage shall be required through
borehole capacity and/or a storage tank. Borehole
storage shall be measured from the pump level to the
top of the static water column.
[2] The individual well shall yield a minimum of one gallon per
minute.
[a] For wells with yields of four gallons per minute or less,
a minimum of 400 gallons of storage capacity shall be
provided. Borehole storage shall be measured from
the pump level to the top of the static water column.
[b] Multiple wells may be dug on the lot and the combined
yield of the well system shall meet the minimum of one
gallon per minute.
(b) Test supervision and evaluation. The test shall be conducted
under the supervision of a qualified geologist licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or professional engineer, using
testing procedures hereinafter set forth. The geologist or
engineer shall be responsible for notifying the Planning
Commission five working days prior to the start of the test. He
or she will also summarize the test, and its significance and
make recommendations as to the suitability of the well or wells
168. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6026.101 et seq.
§ 190-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:605
for the intended uses. The final report shall include an opinion
as to whether the proposed use of the well will have an impact
upon other existing wells in the immediate surrounding area.
The supervising person shall provide the Planning Commission
with a copy of all field notes and test results.
(c) Test method. An test shall be conducted for a minimum of 12
hours at a constant rate of pumping. The pumped well shall be
the one proposed for the specific subdivision or land
development for which the test is conducted. Two observation
wells that have hydraulic continuity with the pumped well are
required. The preferred method of analysis of the aquifer test
data is the non-equilibrium formula, although other methods
are available and may be used. These include various methods
of analysis of either the drawdown or recovery data.
(d) Collection of data. Data shall be collected in conjunction with
the aquifer test as follows:
[1] Prior to the test:
[a] Collection of geologic data of the area to be tested
including well logs, if available.
[b] History of water level fluctuations in the area when
available.
[c] The location, relative elevations and static water
levels in the pumped well and the observation well or
wells.
[d] The expected discharge of the pumped well.
[2] During the test. A standard aquifer test field data sheet
will be required for a pumped well and each observation
well. The data sheet shall include columns for listing:
[a] Date.
[b] Clock time.
[c] Elapsed time since pumping started/stopped (in
minutes and seconds).
[d] Depth to water below land surface.
[e] Drawdown or recovery (in feet and tenths).
[f] Observed discharge at specified intervals.
[3] Following the test. In accordance with recognized
principles of well hydraulics, graphs shall be prepared to
show time drawdown and time recovery for the pumped
well and the observation wells. A distance drawdown
§ 190-37 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-37
1:606
graph will be required for anticipated rates of pumping.
Computation of the coefficients of transmissibility and
storage as well as the rate of pumping, time and drawdown
are required as well as other data that may be considered
necessary to satisfy the test objectives.
(2) Water quality report. The water quality test shall be conducted
concurrently with any water quantity test. Such tests shall be
conducted by a certified laboratory per the following standards:
(a) All water samples to be tested must be drawn by a trained
PADEP-certified laboratory employee, a well driller contractor,
or pump installation contractor.
(b) For single-use on-lot wells, the quality of the water tested shall
meet the local and/or state regulations as it presently exists or
may hereafter be amended, or be capable of treatment to
attain said standard of quality for the following potential
contaminants: total coliform, fecal coliform, E.coli, nitratenitrogen,
nitrite-nitrogen, total nitrogen, lead, and chlorine.
(c) For community on-lot wells, the quality of the water tested
shall meet the National Primary Drinking Water Regulations as
set forth in the National Safe Drinking Water Regulations
(NSDW) of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as it
presently exists or may hereafter be amended, or be capable of
treatment to attain said standard of quality.
§ 190-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-37
1:607

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 190-38. General.
A. Minimum standards and requirements.
(1) The standards and requirements contained in this article shall
apply as minimum design standards for subdivisions and/or land
developments, as defined in § 190-12.
(2) If land development information indicates that existing
improvements on the subject tract do not meet the requirements of
this section, then existing improvements on the subject tract must
be designed and proposed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
When the land development will utilize or be integrated into
existing infrastructure, the existing infrastructure on the subject
tract shall be improved to the standards of this chapter.
B. Compliance with Borough ordinances required. All plans shall be
designed in compliance with Chapter 220, Zoning, and Chapter 184,
Stormwater Management, and all other applicable ordinances,
regulations, plans, studies, and local requirements.
C. Zoning approvals required prior to plan approval. When an application
requires the grant of a special exception, conditional use, or variance
from Chapter 220, Zoning, the applicant shall obtain such special
exception, conditional use, or variance approval from the Borough
Council and/or Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable, prior to the
approval of the applicable plan. The plan shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with any conditions that have been imposed
upon the grant of such special exception, conditional use, or variance
by the Borough Council and/or Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable.
D. Compliance with prior approved and recorded plans. Whenever all or a
portion of the land contained within an application for subdivision or
land development approval constitutes all or a portion of land included
in a prior subdivision or land development plan approved by the
Borough or the County Planning Commission and recorded in the Office
of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, the
plan shall comply with all conditions, restrictions and notes imposed on
the prior approval and/or included upon the recorded subdivision or
land development plan. The applicant shall identify all prior recorded
subdivision and/or land development plans of which all or a portion of
the land contained in the plan was a part and all conditions, restrictions
and notes that affect the current application. Failure to identify all
applicable conditions, restrictions and notes of record on prior plans
constitutes a violation of this article. The applicant shall submit with the
preliminary plan application a statement identifying the prior plans
reviewed; the conditions, restrictions and notes that would impact
development in accordance with the plan application for which
§ 190-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-38
1:609
§ 190-39. Streets, access drives, and driveways.
Each street shall be designed to meet the design requirements by use of
Appendix G and Appendix H.169 Consideration should be given to where
snow placement easements will be situated on the site.
approval has been requested; and an explanation of the manner in
which the proposed plan application has been designed to comply with
such conditions, restrictions and notes. This information shall be signed
by the applicant or the applicant's consultant.
A. General arrangement. The following criteria shall be considered in the
design of streets in all subdivisions and/or land developments:
(1) The alignment of streets shall conform to the Borough Official
Maps, and to such Borough, county and state road and highway
plans as have been duly adopted.
(2) For streets not shown on the circulation plan or Official Map, the
arrangement shall take into account existing topography and other
site constraints when providing for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
(3) Local streets shall be arranged so as to discourage excessive
speeds when their function is to remain local.
(4) Streets shall be designed with drainage grates that are safe for
crossing by bicycles or horse-drawn vehicles.
(5) Curvilinear streets and culs-de-sac should be utilized only where
topography and natural features dictate them on the site, and
where their use will be consistent with adjoining development
patterns. Curvilinear streets shall not be used immediately
adjacent to an existing grid street system without providing a
transition that continues and protects the grid. Culs-de-sac shall
not be used where it is possible to provide grid pattern streets that
provide better access for emergency vehicles, fewer restrictions for
snow removal and improved pedestrian access. New project street
systems, platted adjacent to an existing street system, shall not be
merely looped back on local streets, but shall connect with or be
designed to connect with, in the future, streets of a higher class.
Consideration shall be given to the dispersal of traffic from
commercial and employment centers, and to the ultimate
functioning of the street system and regional transportation
network.
(6) Streets shall be laid out to provide convenient and safe access to
the property. Where appropriate, the Planning Commission may
require additional cartway improvements and/or right-of-way width
along existing street frontages to accommodate the anticipated
169. Editor's Note: Appendixes G and H are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 190-38 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:610
traffic increases and to facilitate vehicular turning movements to
and from individual lots.
(7) Where a development abuts an existing or proposed arterial street,
the Planning Commission may require access management
techniques such as the use of marginal access streets, reverse
frontage lots, or other such treatment that will provide protection
for abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections with
the arterial street, and separate the local and through traffic.
(8) Street lengths shall be minimized as to promote the most efficient
street layout while still protecting the natural, cultural, and
historical environment.
(9) The use of permeable pavement is encouraged on sidewalks,
plazas, driveways, parking lots, and low-traffic roads. Permeable
pavement shall not be located on industrial sites, fueling stations,
sites with expansive soils or high depth to bedrock, areas draining
to the permeable pavement greater than five acres, areas with the
water table less than two feet below the bottom of the pavement
base, and less than 100 feet from drinking wells.
B. Street hierarchy.
(1) All proposed streets shall be classified according to the street
hierarchy of the existing transportation network with design
tailored to function and average daily traffic (ADT).
(2) The street hierarchy system shall be defined by the Borough
Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or other Borough planning
documents.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Commission's
satisfaction that the distribution of traffic to the proposed street
system will not exceed the ADT thresholds for any proposed street
type for a design period of 10 years from the proposed date of
completion of the road.
(4) Private streets may be used provided the Planning Commission
determines that no public benefit will be served by dedication.
Applications that propose a private street shall be accompanied by
a recorded declaration or an agreement which shall be recorded
with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds as part of the final
plan. This agreement shall establish the conditions under which the
street will be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
design approved on the final plan, and shall stipulate:
(a) Ownership interest in the private street.
(b) No limitations on users unless identified in the private
agreement.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:611
(c) A statement indicating that civil court, not the Borough, is
responsible for mitigating differences relating to the
agreement.
(d) The method of assessing maintenance and repair cost.
(e) Private streets shall not be offered for dedication as a public
street unless they are restored to Borough design standards
for streets. The offer for dedication of the street shall be made
only for the street as a whole.
C. Determination of required street design standards. Newly created
right-of-way and cartway width for each interior street classification
shall be determined by the proposed use, projected ADT and the
intensity of development permitted and existing along each street. Each
cartway width shall be based on the travel lane, on-street parking,
multi-modal lanes, and gutter width.
* Buffer areas and shoulders are encouraged but not required.
(1) Travel lanes. Travel lane width requirements shall vary according
to the average daily trips (ADT)*.
Travel Lane Width
Miles Per
Hour
Under 400
ADT
(feet)
401 to
1,500 ADT
(feet)
1,501 to
2,000 ADT
(feet)
Over 2,000
ADT
(feet)
15 9 10 10 11
20 9 10 11 12
25 9 10 11 12
30 9 10 11 12
35 9 10 11 12
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:612
Travel Lane Width
Miles Per
Hour
Under 400
ADT
(feet)
401 to
1,500 ADT
(feet)
1,501 to
2,000 ADT
(feet)
Over 2,000
ADT
(feet)
40 9 10 11 12
45 10 11 11 12
50 10 11 11 12
55 11 11 12 12
* Derived from AASHTO, as amended
(2) Nonmotorized multimodal travel lanes.
(a) Nonmotorized travel lanes shall be provided for all collector
and arterial streets when identified by the Borough Official
Maps.
(b) Non-motorized travel lane requirements shall vary according
to the speed of the streets.
[1] For a posted speed limit of 26 to 35 miles per hour, fourfoot
multimodal lanes shall be provided.
[2] For a posted speed limit of 36 to 45 miles per hour, six-foot
multimodal lanes shall be provided.
[3] For a posted speed limit of greater than 45 miles per hour,
eight-foot multimodal lanes shall be provided.
(c) Grates shall be bicycle and horse-drawn safe.
(3) Curbs, gutters, and swales.
(a) Curbing shall be required to meet any of the following:
[1] Stormwater management.
[2] Road stabilization.
[3] Ten feet on each side of drainage inlets.
[4] At intersections.
[5] At corners.
[6] At tight radii.
(b) Drainage swales in place of curbing may be used when all of
the following can be shown:
[1] Soil and/or topography make the use of drainage swales
preferable.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:613
[2] It is in the best interest of the community to preserve its
existing character by using drainage swales instead of
curbs.
[3] Curbing would negatively impact a cohesive stormwater
management best management design (BMP).
(c) Flexibility regarding curb type shall be permitted as long as
the curb type accommodates the system of drainage proposed.
(d) Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp cut at each
intersection, at the principal entrances to buildings which front
on parking lots, and at all crosswalks.
(4) Buffer area. Signage and street trees shall generally be located
within the buffer area of the right-of-way. Buffer areas shall be
planted with grass, ground cover, or treated with other suitable
pervious material. See § 190-47B for street tree standards. When
buffer areas are provided, they shall be a minimum of four feet
wide with eight feet preferred when planted with trees. Buffer
areas may be eliminated when a wider pedestrianway is provided.
(5) Rights-of-way.
(a) Center line of the right-of-way may not always be the center
line of the travel lanes.
(b) Where the right-of-way width of the new street is different than
the existing street, a transition area shall be provided, the
design of which is subject to Planning Commission approval.
(c) The right-of-way width shall be designed to meet the design
requirements by use of Appendix G. Right-of-way widths may
change for each street based on the anticipated future
development.
(6) Vertical street alignments.
(a) Vertical curves shall be used in changes in grade exceeding
1%.
(b) Alignment:
[1] Vertical street and access drive alignments shall be
measured along the center line.
[2] Minimum rate of vertical Curvature K shall be as specified
below:
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:614
Initial Speed
(mph)
Curvature, K1
(feet per percent)
Crest
Curvature, K1
(feet per percent)
Sag
15 3 10
20 7 17
25 12 26
30 19 37
35 29 49
40 44 64
45 61 79
50 84 96
55 114 115
1 Rate of vertical curvature, K = length of curve (L)
per percent algebraic difference (A) in the intersection
grades (K=L/A)
(c) Grade.
[1] Where the approaching grade is 7% or greater, a leveling
area shall be provided within 75 feet of a four-way street
intersection on the street of lesser classification, or access
drives, or the terminating street at a three-way
intersection.
[2] Such leveling area(s) shall have a maximum grade of 4%
for a minimum length of 40 feet measured from the
intersection of the center lines.
(7) Horizontal street alignments.
(a) Horizontal curves shall be used at all angle changes in excess
of two degrees.
(b) The design of horizontal curves shall be based on an
appropriate relationship between design speed and curvature
and on their joint relationships with superelevation (roadway
banking). (The longer the radius of a curve, the higher the
speed through that curve.)
(c) Single, long-radius curves shall be used rather than a series of
curves with varying radii and/or a series of short curves
separated by short, straight segments.
(d) Access drives intersections shall be designed to local street
horizontal alignment standards.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:615
(e) Determination of minimum horizontal center-line radius.*
Initial Speed
(mph)
Center-Line
Radius1
(feet)
No Superelevation
Center-Line Radius1
(feet)
4% Superelevation
(e max)
15 50 42
20 107 86
25 198 154
30 333 250
35 510 371
40 762 533
45 1,039 711
50 — 926
55 — 1,190
* Derived from AASHTO formula Rmin = V2/15*(0.01e +
fmax)
1 Curve radius shall be measured to the center line of
cartways and access drives.
(f) Superelevation in certain conditions may be amended when
using AASHTO Exhibit 3-16, as updated.
(8) Street intersections.
(a) Cul-de-sac/local streets. A minimum separation of no less than
150 feet between center lines shall be provided.
(b) Collector streets.
[1] Minor collectors a minimum separation distance of 275
feet between center lines shall be provided.
[2] Major collectors a minimum separation distance of 300
feet between center lines shall be provided.
(c) Arterial streets. A minimum separation distance of 600 feet
between center lines shall be provided.
(d) Right-angle intersections shall be used. No street intersection
modification shall be granted at an angle of less than 60°.
(e) The cartway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc with a minimum radius of five feet and a
maximum radius of 25 feet. The right-of-way radii at
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:616
intersections shall be substantially concentric with the edge
of the cartway. Curb return radii of 10 to 15 feet should be
used where high pedestrian volumes are present or the volume
of turning vehicles is low. Larger radii should be used when
parking or nonmotorized lanes are not provided.
(f) Where warranted by a traffic impact study, the Planning
Commission may require additional traffic lanes or additional
right-of-way to facilitate vehicular turning movements at
existing or proposed street intersections within subdivision or
land development plans.
(9) Sight distance at intersections.
(a) Proper sight distance shall be provided at all new streets,
access drives, and all driveway intersections in accordance
with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Design Manual - Part 2, Highway Design
(Publication 13), and Section 2.18.F, as amended. Sufficient
design and plan information shall be submitted with the plan
application proving that this minimum standard will be
achieved. Such design information shall be sealed by a
professional registered in Pennsylvania to perform such design
work.
[1] Access drive sight distance based on 10 feet off of edge of
cartway, an eye height of 3.5 feet to an object at a height of
3.5 feet.
[2] Street sight distance based on 15 feet off of edge of
cartway, an eye height of 3.5 feet to an object at a height of
3.5 feet.
(b) At all intersections where stop signs or other stop control
devices are not proposed, clear sight triangle easements shall
be provided. Sight triangle easements shall include the area on
each street corner that is bounded by the line which connects
the sight or "connecting" points located on each of the right-ofway
lines of the intersecting street. The planting of trees, other
plantings, signs, and structures exceeding 30 inches in height
that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the
easements shall be prohibited.
[1] Arterial streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of 150
feet.
[2] Collector streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of
100 feet.
[3] Local roads, culs-de-sac, and alleys shall have a clear sight
triangle side of 75 feet.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:617
(10) Cross-sectional specifications.
(a) All new street paving must be in accordance with the current
PennDOT Publication 408 and conform to the following crosssectional
specification (all courses are compacted thicknesses)
unless superseded by a street ordinance or construction and
material specification:
[1] Arterial streets shall have an eight-inch 2A stone subbase,
five-inch 25 mm base course, three-inch 19 mm binder
course, and one-and-one-half-inch wearing course.
[2] Major and minor collector streets shall have an eight-inch
2A stone subbase, five-inch 25 mm base course, two-inch
19 mm binder course, and one-and-one-half-inch wearing
course.
[3] Local streets shall have an eight-inch 2A stone subbase,
three-inch 25 mm base course, two-inch 19 mm binder
course, and one-and-one-half-inch wearing course.
(b) Street paving relative strength (design structural number)
shall meet 3.0 for all local roads, 3.5 for arterial and collector
roads, and 2.5 if all paving from top of stone to top of the street
is completed in one operation and the wearing course is not
laid at a later time. The design structural number depicts the
required strength of the proposed pavement will need to
provide. The structural number must be converted to
individual layer thicknesses of the pavement.
[1] Structural coefficients for common flexible pavement
materials:*
Pavement Component
Structural
Coefficient
Surface Course:
Superpave 9.5 mm, 12.5 mm,
19 mm, 25 mm (wearing and
binder courses)
0.44
ID-2, ID-3 (wearing and binder
courses)
0.44
FB-1, FB-2 (wearing and binder
courses)
0.20
FJ-1, FJ-1C, FJ-4 (wearing
courses)
0.35
Base Course:
Plain cement concrete (PCBC) 0.50
Lean cement concrete (LCBC) 0.40
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:618
Pavement Component
Structural
Coefficient
Superpave 25 mm, 37.5 mm,
base course
0.40
Bituminious concrete (BCBC) 0.40
Crushed aggregate (CABC) 0.14
Crushed aggregate, Type DG
(CABCDG)
0.18
Aggregate - bituminous (ABBC) 0.30
Aggregate - cement (ACBC) 0.40
Aggregate - lime - Pozzolan
(ALPBC)
0.40
Subbase:
Open-graded subbase 0.11
No. 2A subbase 0.11
Asphalt treated permeable base
course (ATPBC)
0.20
Cement treated permeable
base course (CTPBC)
0.20
* Per current PennDOT standards, Pavement Policy
Manual, Publication 242.
[2] Example of local paving is as follows: four-inch 2A stone
subbase, three-inch BCBC (bituminous concrete base
course), two-inch binder course, and one-and-one-half-inch
wearing course.
[3] Example of arterial and collector paving is as follows;
[a] Four-inch 2A stone subbase, five-inch BCBC, two-inch
binder course, and one-and-one-half-inch wearing
course; or
[b] Eight-inch 3A stone subbase, two-inch 2A top
dressing, three-inch BCBC, two-inch binder course,
and one-and-one-half-inch wearing course.
D. Pedestrianway.
(1) Trails.
(a) Trail width shall be a minimum of four feet.
(b) Easements 10 feet wide are required for trails. A plan note
shall be provided, indicating that such easement be five feet on
either side of the center line of the trail as constructed.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:619
(c) Encroachments into the trail shall not result in less than a fourfoot-
wide minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
(d) Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular
travel ways intersecting with trails.
(2) Sidewalks.
(a) Paved sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of a new
street.
(b) Sidewalk widths shall be a minimum of four feet.
(c) Where practical, sidewalks should be sloped towards adjacent
pervious surfaces, not adjacent impervious surfaces.
(d) Encroachments into the sidewalk shall not result in less than a
four-foot-wide minimum clearance width from any obstacles.
(e) Sidewalks shall not exceed a cross slope of 2%.
(f) Ramp cuts shall be located at all sidewalks intersecting with
vehicular travel ways.
(g) Marked crosswalks shall be provided within the vehicular
travel ways intersecting with sidewalks.
E. Lot access.
(1) The Planning Commission may require an applicant to provide
reverse frontage lots on the collector and/or arterial roads and
reduce the number of access points through access management
for the development.
(2) The Planning Commission may require the applicant to provide
ingress and egress to a particular lot or tract through the
remainder of a property or other properties over which the
applicant has control by the following;
(a) A temporary cul-de-sac designed for access to any adjoining
property or for phased development.
(b) Provision of access to existing nonconforming lots which have
no frontage on a public or private street.
(3) A highway occupancy permit is required for each access point onto
a state road or highway.
(4) All lots shall front on a public or a private right-of-way.
(5) Prior to the use and occupancy of a lot, each lot or dwelling unit
shall be provided with a street number assigned by the Zoning
Officer and approved by the Lancaster County-Wide
Communications. The street number shall be visible from the
street. Where a lot contains multiple building or dwelling units,
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:620
each building and dwelling unit shall be identified so that
emergency services can easily identify the location of every
building and dwelling unit in a time of emergency.
F. Street provisions for future developments.
(1) Where appropriate, rights-of-way shall be reserved for future
access strip usage in conjunction with the zoning classification of
adjacent tracts to allow for future development. Areas reserved for
future access strip usage will not be required to be improved;
however, these areas shall be reserved for street improvements to
be provided by the developer of the adjacent tract. Appropriate
plan notes shall be included to note future access strip expansion.
(2) Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted area reserved for
future access strip usage along the boundary of a tract being
developed, the proposed street must be extended over the area
dedicated or platted for future access strip usage. The street shall
be designed in conformance with the design requirements of the
proposed street subject to the existing right-of-way.
(3) The extension of existing streets that are presently constructed
with a cartway different from the standards of this chapter shall be
provided with a transition area, the design of which is subject to
Planning Commission approval.
G. Driveways. All driveways shall, at a minimum, be designed in
accordance with the following:
(1) Driveways must be designed in conformance with the sight
distance specified in Subsection H(3).
(2) Driveway access to a street shall not be located less than 25 feet
from the edge of the cartway of the intersecting street.
(3) Driveway access to lots shall be provided to the street of lesser
classification.
(4) To maintain good access management in the street network, when
a driveway intersects with a collector or arterial street, joint,
shared use, or reverse frontage driveways should be encouraged
when such design would increase traffic safety by decreasing the
potential for vehicular conflicts.
(5) Driveways shall be paved within the intersecting street right-ofway.
(6) Leveling areas shall be provided a minimum of 10 feet from the
edge of street cartway with a maximum slope of 10%.
(7) Shared or joint driveways must meet the follow standards:
(a) Driveways shall be used only for four or fewer dwelling units.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:621
(b) To decrease the potential for vehicular conflicts, driveways
may be located so they are centered on or entirely on one
property.
(c) An easement agreement shall be provided and recorded that
indicates the rights of ownership, access, and maintenance.
The Borough is not responsible to settle conflict issues with
joint or shared driveways.
H. Access drives. Access drives shall be designed to meet the following
requirements:
(1) Any property that utilizes an access drive shall have frontage along
a public or private right-of-way.
(2) The plan shall note that the access drive does not qualify for
dedication to the Borough and that the landowner assumes all
responsibility for its maintenance.
(3) Access drives shall be designed for their intended function. All
travel lanes shall be a minimum of eight feet wide; however,
sufficient design information must be submitted to indicate that the
number of travel lanes and width proposed have been designed to
accommodate the anticipated traffic to and from the development.
(4) Parking shall be permitted when sufficient Cartway width is
proposed. See § 190-40, Parking facilities.
(5) Access drives shall maintain a center line separation distance of
125 feet from all other access drives and streets. Access drive
intersections with other access drives within the site shall not be
subject to such restrictions.
(6) Proper sight distance shall be provided at access drive
intersections with existing public and private streets according to
this chapter.
I. Single access/cul-de-sac streets.
(1) To the greatest extent possible, through streets shall be provided.
The feasibility of a through street will be based on the physical
features of the tract proposed for development and/or adjoining
lots, the potential for extension of the street to adjoining lands
based on existing development patterns, restrictions imposed by
other government regulations and other recorded documentation,
and the ability of the design to meet all other requirements of this
chapter. When single access/cul-de-sac streets are proposed, the
application shall be accompanied by a written analysis of the merits
of the design and the reasons that a through street would not be
desirable.
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:622
(2) The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center
line intersection with the through street to the center point of the
turnaround.
(3) All cul-de-sac streets shall have a minimum length of 250 feet and a
maximum length of 600 feet. Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not
have a minimum length.
(4) Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be designed to serve a maximum
of 250 ADT for residential development and a maximum of 500 ADT
for nonresidential development.
(a) Permanent suls-de-sac may be extended beyond above
referenced ADT for the following justification, provided:
[1] The cul-de-sac is a boulevard construction; or
[2] The adjacent land is 100% developed.
(5) Any temporary cul-de-sac street designed for access to an adjoining
property or for authorized phased development and which is
greater than one lot deep shall be provided with a temporary allweather
turnaround. The use of such turnaround shall be
guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is extended.
Sidewalks along temporary culs-de-sac must be continued at the
same time that the street is continued.
(6) Permanent and temporary culs-de-sac shall not exceed 8% in
longitudinal slope at any point.
(7) Culs-de-sac shall have a circular, T-shaped or "hammerhead"
shaped turnarounds. Turnarounds shall be constructed completely
within the right-of-way.
(a) T-shaped or hammerheads may be used if the cul-de-sac serves
less than 10 dwelling units. Dimensions of a T-shaped or
hammerhead are 60 feet by 20 feet.
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-39
1:623
(8) Restoration to the temporary cul-de-sac paved areas and sidewalk
system within the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
(9) Permanent culs-de-sac with a circular turnaround shall be paved,
have a minimum radius of 42 feet without a center island and 45
with a center island.
J. Street names.
(1) Continuations of existing streets shall be known by the same name.
(2) Written notice that the proposed new street names are acceptable
from the Lancaster County-Wide Communications (fax number: 717
664-1126, as amended) shall be submitted.
(3) At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way
street intersection and one at each T intersection.
(4) Signs shall be free of visual obstruction. The design of street name
signs should be consistent, of a style appropriate to the Borough, of
a uniform size and color, and erected in accordance with Borough
standards.
(5) All streets shall be provided with street name signs in conformance
with this section. The plan shall note that it is the responsibility of
the developer to pay for the sign and installation of the street name
signs for all streets.
K. Traffic signs.
(1) Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the requirements
of the Borough and PennDOT.
(2) Signs shall be free of visual obstruction.
L. Dwelling unit identification. Street numbers for all dwelling units shall
be visible from the approved street frontage.
§ 190-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-39
1:624
§ 190-40. Parking facilities.
M. Underground wiring.
(1) All electric, telephone, television, and other communication
facilities distribution lines servicing new developments should be
provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated
public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing
standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing
such services.
(2) Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be
installed underground.
(3) Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the
placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the
visual impact of overhead lines. Trees shall be planted in open
areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and the
alignments.
A. Motorized vehicle parking facilities.
(1) Parking facility design criteria.
(a) Parallel parking shall be a minimum width of seven feet and a
minimum length of 23 feet.
(b) Parking space length and width can be increased from
minimum sizes where appropriate in accordance with location,
use, and turnover rate.
(c) Encroachments such as columns and light poles may encroach
into a module by one foot and affect up to 30% of the parking
spaces.
(d) Compact car parking spaces may be provided at a reduced size
of eight feet by 16 feet.
(e) Nonparallel parking within parking lots shall be designed to
meet the following requirements:
Angle
Vehicle
Projection
Minimum
Aisle
Min.
Base
Module1
Single
Loaded
Wall
to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection
Minimum
VP A W1 W2 W3 W4 W5 o i WP
45° 17'8" 12'8" 48'0" 30'4" 45'0" 42'0" 44'6" 1'9" 3'0" 12'0"
50° 18'3" 13'3" 49'9" 31'6" 47'0" 44'3" 45'11"1'11" 2'9" 11'1"
§ 190-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-40
1:625
Angle
Vehicle
Projection
Minimum
Aisle
Min.
Base
Module1
Single
Loaded
Wall
to
Interlock
Interlock
to
Interlock
Curb
to
Curb
Overhang
Interlock2
Reduction
Stall
Width
Projection
Minimum
55° 18'8" 13'8" 51'0" 32'4" 48'7" 46'2" 46'10" 2'1" 2'5" 10'5"
60° 19'0" 14'6" 52'6" 33'6" 50'4" 48'2" 48'2" 2'2" 2'2" 9'10"
65° 19'2" 15'5" 53'9" 34'7" 51'11" 50'1" 50'1" 2'3" 1'10" 9'5"
70° 19'3" 16'6" 55'0" 35'9" 53'7" 52'2" 52'2" 2'4" 1'5" 9'1"
75° 19'1" 17'10" 56'0" 36'11" 54'11" 53'10" 53'10" 2'5" 1'1" 8'10"
90° 18'0" 20'0" 60'0"3 42'0" 60'0" 60'0" 60'0" 2'6" 0'0" 8'6"
NOTES:
1 "Module" is defined as the combined dimension of two parked vehicles and the
aisle between them.
2 Calculated for nine-foot stall.
3 Base width may not be waived.
4 Parking dimensions for based on design vehicles of 6'7" x 17'0."
§ 190-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-40
1:626
(2) General parking standards.
(a) Angled parking may be forward (pull-in) or reverse (back-in).
(b) Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). Handicapped parking
shall be provided for all nonresidential developments and
multifamily structures and shall be located closest to the
accessible building entrance(s), consistent with Chapter 220,
Zoning.
(c) On-street parking shall be provided on at least one side of all
access drives and proposed streets with speeds equal to or less
than 30 mph.
(d) On-street parking shall not be located within 25 feet of a
cartway intersection in order to provide safe sight distance and
adequate turning radius for large vehicles.
§ 190-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-40
1:627
(e) Off-street parking areas shall be located compliant to the
requirements of Chapter 220, Zoning.
(f) Parked vehicles adjacent to sidewalks shall not overhang or
extend over the sidewalk in a manner that restricts pedestrian
circulation. Where such overhang is not restricted by a wheel
stop or other device, sidewalks shall have a four-foot minimum
clearance width from any obstacles.
(g) Not less than a two-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted
for horizontal curves in parking areas for concrete curbing.
(h) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for all end stalls.
(i) Painted lines, arrows, and dividers shall be provided and
maintained to control parking, and when necessary to direct
vehicular circulation.
(j) The typical cross-section of any surface parking lot shall be
prepared to meet the following minimum standards:
[1] Permeable pavement. Permeable pavement is required as
specified in the Columbia Borough Technical
Specifications, with the exception to heavy industrial sites,
fueling stations, sites with expansive soils or shallow depth
to bedrock, areas draining to the permeable pavement
greater than five acres, areas with the water table less
than two feet below the bottom of the pavement base, and
less than 100 feet from drinking wells; where
nonpermeable parking is allowed. Permeable pavement
includes paving units, porous asphalt pavement, or porous
concrete (using single-sized aggregate and low water
content); uniformly graded stone aggregate with void
space; filter fabric lining the subsurface beds; and
uncompacted (or hand-compacted) subgrade. Constant
supervision during construction is encouraged as
sediment must be kept from the aggregate base.
Geotechnical investigation should be conducted to
determine if the site is conducive to the use of permeable
pavement.
[2] Nonpermeable pavement. Where allowed, nonpermeable
parking areas shall be constructed to standards specified
in the Columbia Borough Technical Specifications.
(k) Shared parking is encouraged. The number of parking spaces
may be reduced if shown that the uses are compatible with
regard to parking needs. (See "Shared Parking," Second
Edition, by Urban Land Institute for methodology.)
(3) Nonstructure parking standards.
§ 190-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-40
1:628
(a) A minimum of 75% of the off-street parking provided must be
located within the side and/or rear of the structure(s) to be
served. Where appropriate, no more than 25% of the required
parking may be located in front of the structure(s). On-street
parking on any side of the structure may be counted toward
the percentage of parking required to be located within the
side or rear yard.
(b) Sidewalks/pedestrian easements shall be provided for
pedestrian circulation. All development shall incorporate a
sidewalk between the building and the street.
(c) Lighting shall be provided per § 190-47.
(d) Landscaping shall be required and located in unusable parking
or circulation areas with proper clearance from parked
vehicles and sidewalks. Planter areas and tree wells should be
installed in accordance with the parking lot dimension to avoid
adverse impacts on parking functions due to improper location
and/or design.
(e) Trees shall be provided in a quantity set forth in Chapter 220,
Zoning.
(4) Parking structures.
(a) Lighting and reflective materials/flat paint should be used
inside the parking structure and within all pedestrian areas to
increase the feeling of safety. Glossy or semigloss paint is
discouraged.
Minimum-
Maximum
Horizontal2
(footcandles)
Minimum/
Maximum
Horizontal
Uniformity3
Minimum-
Maximum
Vertical4
(footcandles)
Basic1 1 to 5 10:1 to 5:1 0.5 to 5
Ramps5
Day 2 to 5 10:1 to 5:1 1 to 5
Night 1 to 5 10:1 to 5:1 0.5 to 5
Entrance/exit
areas6
Day 50 25
Night 1 to 5 10:1 to 5:1 0.5 to 5
Stairways 2 to 5 1 to 5
Table based on the Illuminating Engineering Society (IET)
1 For typical conditions.
§ 190-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-40
1:629
2 Minimum "maintained" footcandles measured on the
parking surface, without any shadowing effect from parked
vehicles or columns. This may require three-to-fivefootcandle
average
3 The highest horizontal illuminance area, divided by the
lowest horizontal illuminance point or area should not be
greater than the ratio shown.
4 Measured facing the drive aisle at five feet above the
parking surface at the point of the lowest horizontal
illuminance.5 Applies only to clearway ramps (with no
adjacent parking) but not sloping floor designs.
6 A high illuminance level for the first 65 feet inside the
structure is needed to effect a transition from bright
daylight to a lower interior level.
7 Daylight may be considered in the design calculations.
(b) Parking lot lighting shall address glare control, light pollution
(unnecessary light), light trespass (bright visible sources or
light spilling into neighboring properties), and reduction of
shadows.
[1] Provision for energy conservation to mitigate over-lighting
is encouraged. A maximum lighting power density of 0.3
watt per square foot is encouraged.
(c) Provision of signage at exits of the parking structures shall be
required.
(d) Open-structure wall areas for natural ventilation or mechanical
ventilation shall be encouraged.
(e) Interaction between vehicles and pedestrians should be
provided in a safe manner.
(f) Traffic flow by vehicles entering the parking garage shall be
mitigated by either on site or external deceleration lanes based
on the traffic impact study if required.
B. Nonmotorized vehicle parking facilities. Nonmotorized vehicle parking
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Scooter/bicycle parking facilities. Scooter/bicycle parking facilities
for nonresidential land uses shall be provided in accordance with
the following regulations:
(a) Each scooter/bicycle space shall be equipped with a device
(such as a rack) to which a bicycle frame and one wheel can be
attached using a chain or cable. There shall be adequate
separation between adjacent devices to allow scooter/bicycles
to be attached or removed without moving other scooter/
§ 190-40 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-40
1:630
§ 190-41. Blocks and lots.
bicycles. The devices shall also be suitable for use by scooter/
bicycles not equipped with kickstands, and the appearance of
the device shall be generally consistent with nearby design
features.
(b) Scooter/bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the
structure for which they are provided. They shall be visible
from at least one entrance to the structure.
(c) For every 50 vehicular spaces required, accommodations for
three scooters or bicycles.
A. Blocks. All blocks that include residential dwellings shall have a
maximum length of 1,000 feet. Nonresidential blocks may vary from
this requirement. The applicant shall give special consideration to the
requirements of fire protection, pedestrian circulation, and utility
service. The Planning Commission may require easements as necessary
for these purposes.
B. Lot configuration. The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based
upon the minimum and maximum lot area requirements, salient natural
features, existing improvements, proposed improvements, and the
adjacent development pattern. Lot configurations should provide for
flexibility in building locations, while providing safe vehicular and
pedestrian circulation. When possible, lots with areas that are two or
more times the minimum requirements should be designed with
configurations that allow for additional subdivision.
C. Specific lot configuration requirements.
(1) Relationship to Borough boundaries. In order to avoid jurisdictional
problems, lot lines shall, wherever feasible, follow Borough
boundaries rather than cross them.
(2) Frontage. All lots must front on a public or private street.
(3) Provisions for future subdivision. Lots resulting from a proposed
subdivision that will be large enough to be further subdivided
should be configured to facilitate such future subdivision. Adequate
street right-of-way shall be provided as necessary. The Planning
Commission may require a sketch plan of such large lots that
indicates the potential future subdivision is generally in
conformance with the design standards of this chapter and the
applicable zoning provisions.
(4) Lot access. Lots shall not result in unsafe driveway locations on
public streets.
(5) Flag lots. Flag lots represent a viable design alternative under the
following standards. In such cases, evidence shall be submitted to
§ 190-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-41
1:631
§ 190-42. Easements.
the Planning Commission that documents the circumstances and
demonstrates that the platting of flag lots shall not restrict the
development potential and pattern of development of the tract and
adjacent lands.
(a) Adjacent flagpoles shall be encouraged to share driveway
access points. More than four adjacent flag lots shall be
oriented to a common public or private street right-of-way, not
driveways.
(b) Flag lots are encouraged when infill situations exist to achieve
maximum densities.
(c) Flag lots shall not be proposed in order to avoid construction of
streets. Flag lots proposed to create lots for home sites where
there is no potential for the construction of a public or private
street must demonstrate that there is no potential to construct
a street due to:
[1] Severe topographic or other environmental constraints
that limit the design of a street; or
[2] Other factors inherent in the site which make the
construction of a public or private street impractical.
(d) The width of a flagpole should be determined by the function of
the driveway, number of lots served, setbacks, grading, and
utility requirements.
(6) Double/reverse frontage lots.
(a) Residential double frontage lots are only permitted when a
reduction of driveway intersections along a street with a high
volume of vehicular movements is desired or the maintenance
of the integrity of a corridor is desired.
(b) Reverse frontage lots may be permitted when rear alleys are
proposed to provide vehicular access to lots.
(c) All double and reverse frontage lots shall include identification
on the plan as to the intended primary access.
(d) All reverse frontage lots shall have within the yard(s) that is/
are adjacent to any street right-of-way, other than the street of
vehicular access, an easement running the entire width of the
proposed lot, across which there shall be no vehicular access.
A. General. All easements including by way of example and not limitation;
sanitary sewer facilities, public water facilities, stormwater drainage
facilities, public or private utilities, access and/or pedestrian access
shall meet the standards found in this section.
§ 190-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-42
1:632
§ 190-43. Survey monuments and markers.
B. Design guidelines.
(1) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on
property lines.
(2) Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an
easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement.
(3) The plan shall show all proposed and existing easements of record
and indicate their location and width. All structures located within
the easement shall be shown, along with any applicable recording
information.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, utilities and pedestrian paths should
be centered within an easement. However, due to unexpected onlot
conditions, utility and pedestrian locations may be flexible
within the easement.
(5) All utility companies are encouraged to use common easements.
Utility easements shall be based on the width required by the utility
authorities but shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. Utility
easements shall be located within the street right-of-way or within
the building setback line, to the maximum extent practicable.
(6) Where pedestrian access is provided outside of a street right-ofway,
pedestrian easements shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
(7) The applicant shall reserve easements where stormwater or
surface water management facilities exist or are proposed when
located within the boundaries of the subject tract. The applicant
proposing to alter existing stormwater management facilities on
adjacent and/or downstream properties shall obtain a temporary
construction easement and/or a permanent easement and
maintenance responsibilities shall be established, to the extent
feasible.
(8) When the proposed stormwater management system will utilize or
be integrated into an existing stormwater collection or conveyance
system, the existing facilities shall be improved to the standards of
this chapter. The applicant shall determine the impacts of any
proposed improvements of the existing system to downstream
properties. If the improvements will cause adverse impacts on
downstream properties, the applicant shall mitigate such impacts.
A. Monuments shown on final plan. The location of all existing and
proposed monuments, lot line markers, property corners, and drill
holes shall be shown on the final plan. Those that are proposed shall be
labeled as such. Drilled holes in curbing shall be referenced
mathematically to a point on the right-of-way line.
§ 190-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-43
1:633
B. New monuments. Three monuments shall be spaced around the
proposed project with precise bearings and distances labeled which
reference those monuments to known property corners.
(1) Two such monuments shall be consecutive corners along street
rights-of-way and the third may be placed either on the boundary or
internal to the site.
(2) Longitude and latitude coordinates of the monuments shall be
shown on the recorded plan.
(3) If GPS technology is used, it shall be rectified and calibrated to the
State Plane Coordinate System, North American Datum (NAD)
1983.
(a) Such monuments shall be readily accessible and clear of
overhead obstructions.
(4) A CAD file including property lines, corners, rights-of-way, and
easements for the site shall be submitted to the Borough prior to
plan recordation.
C. Monument materials. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a
flat top having a minimum width or diameter of four inches and a
minimum length of 30 inches. Concrete monuments shall be marked
with a three-quarter-inch copper, brass dowel, or drill hole; stone or
precast monuments shall be marked on the top with a drill hole.
D. Existing and proposed property line and right-of-way markers. Markers
shall be set at all points where lot lines intersect curves, at all angles in
property lines, at the intersection of all other property lines, and at the
street right-of-way.
E. Marker (pin) materials.
(1) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars at least 30 inches
long and not less than 5/8 inch in diameter.
(2) Drill holes shall be drilled in concrete curbs (with or without PK
nails or discs) having a minimum diameter of 1/4 inch. The depth of
the holes shall be such that a PK nail or disc, if used, can be set in
as close to the surface of the curb as possible. Minimum depth
without the use of PK nail or disc shall be 1/2 inch. In the absence
of PK nails or discs, chisel or saw marks shall be used to facilitate
and identify the drill hole locations.
F. Certification of monuments and markers.
(1) All monuments, markers, and drilled holes shall be placed by a
registered professional land surveyor so that the scored marked
point, or center of the drilled hole shall coincide with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented or marked.
§ 190-43 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-43
1:634
§ 190-44. Sanitary wastewater disposal.
§ 190-45. Water supply.
(2) Provide a note on the plan indicating when the monuments and
markers are to be set.
A. Sanitary wastewater disposal. The applicant shall provide the type of
sewage facility consistent with current plans, including but not limited
to the Borough Comprehensive Plan and Borough of Columbia Sewage
Facilities Plan as well as existing physical, geographical and geological
conditions.
(1) The following types of sanitary sewage facilities are listed in order
of desirability:
(a) Public sewage system.
(b) Private community sewage system.
(2) The Planning Commission may require installation of a capped
system within the road right-of-way. If required, the Borough or
Authority shall inspect the capped system and accept dedication.
(3) The applicant shall provide evidence of approval from the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection prior to plan
recording.
(4) When connection to an existing public sewage system or private
community sewage system is proposed, the application shall
include a statement from the Borough or Authority providing such
service that sufficient capacity to service the proposed
development is available. Such notice shall be dated within 12
months of the plan application. Extender agreements shall be
provided prior to dedication.
(5) Approval by the Borough or Authority of the sewage facilities shall
be received and submitted prior to final plan recording.
A. Intent. The applicant shall provide the type of community water supply
system consistent with current plans, including but not limited to the
Borough Comprehensive Plan as well as existing physical, geographical
and geological conditions.
B. Design guidelines.
(1) The following types of water supply systems are listed in order of
desirability:
(a) Publicly owned community water supply systems.
(b) Privately owned community water supply systems.
§ 190-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-45
1:635
§ 190-46. Landscaping.
(c) Individual well when a community water supply system is not
accessible.
(2) Applicants shall submit to the Planning Commission documentation
in the form of a copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and/or private water utility
authority that the project is located in an area served by a public
utility and a statement that the utility has the capacity to serve the
project at this time; or a cooperative agreement or an agreement to
serve the project from a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners or from a municipal corporation, authority, or utility.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be provided whenever the water supply system
contains sufficient capability or is planned to have such capability
within two years from the date of final plan approval.
(a) The location and kind of fire hydrant shall meet the
specifications of the local Borough regulation.
(b) Fire hydrant location(s) shall be submitted prior to final plan
approval.
(4) When a new private water supply system is proposed for
development, a copy of the approval of such system by the
appropriate agency or utility company that provides the service
shall be submitted with the final plan. Suitable agreements shall be
established for the ownership and maintenance of such a
distribution system.
(5) Prior to installation of any new privately owned community water
supply system in areas or in proximity to areas of known
groundwater contamination or inadequate yields of potable
supplies, aquifer and water quality tests shall be performed
pursuant to §§ 190-37 and 190-38.
A. Intent. Landscaping plants intercept rainfall, reduce stormwater runoff,
prevent erosion, and reduce the need for detention. Landscape plants
also provide shade and reduce the temperature created by additional
impervious surfaces. Plants release moisture back into the
environment, improve air quality, and remove contamination from the
soil and water by absorbing excess nutrients, filter sediments, and
break down pollutants. Planting native plants helps provide habitat,
food, and protection for native species and ecosystems. Planting native
species generally increases the chance for long-term survivability of the
plant because they are naturally adapted to local conditions. Planting
nonnative species and cultivars could be incorporated in designs when
they provide a superior plant for spatial constraints and urban stress
mitigation found in local site conditions. Existing significant trees which
§ 190-45 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-46
1:636
help contribute to the sense of place should be preserved to the
maximum extent practical.
B. Native and invasive planting.
(1) Native plant materials should be incorporated in all designs. The
use of native plant material can help improve water quality, provide
additional and improved wildlife habitat, and typically adapt to
local conditions which then require less maintenance. Native plants
must be used near greenways, suburban forested areas, wetlands,
and riparian areas.
(2) Except as noted above, nonnative plants may be included in place
of a native plant if it is not considered invasive and the plant does
not introduce pests or diseases. A nonnative plant may be
incorporated into designs when they prove to be better suited for
the urban soil, environment, or spatial constraints, urban stress
mitigation, and integration into the surrounding ecosystem.
(3) The following is a list of invasive plants which may not be used in
any urban planting schedule:
(a) Trees. Tree-of-heaven (Ailanthus altissima), Norway maple
(*Acer platanoides), Sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus),
Empress tree (Paulownia tomentosa), Callery pear (*Pyrus
calleryana), Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila)
(b) Shrubs. Japanese barberry (*Berberis thunbergii), European
barberry (Berberis vulgaris), Russian olive (Elaegnus
angustifolia), Autumn olive (Elaeagnus umbellata), Winged
euonymus (*Euonymus alatus), Border privet (Ligustrum
obtusifolium), Common privet (Ligustrum vulgare), Tartarian
honeysuckle (Lonicera tartarica), Standish honeysuckle
(Lonicera standishii), Morrow's honeysuckle (Lonicera
morrowii), Amur honeysuckle (Lonicera maackii), Bell's
honeysuckle (Lonicera x bella), Common buckthorn (Rhamnus
cathartica), Glossy buckthorn (Rhamnus frangula), Wineberry
(Rubus phoenicolasius), Multiflora rose (Rosa multiflora),
Japanese spiraea (*Spiraea japonica), Guelder rose (*Viburnum
opulus).
(c) Grasses. Cheat grass (Bromus tectorum), Japanese stilt grass
(Microstegium vimineum), Maiden grass (*Miscanthus
sinensis), Common reed (Phragmites australis), Reed canary
grass (Phalaris arundinacea), Johnson grass (Sorghum
halepense), and Shattercane (Sorghum bicolor).
(d) Flowers. Garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), Goutweed
(Aegopodium podagraria), Bull thistle (Crisium vulgare),
Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), Musk thistle (Carduus
nutans), Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium), Goatsrue (Galega
officinalis), Giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum,
§ 190-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-46
1:637
Dame's rocket (Hesperis matronalis), Purple Loosestrife
(Lythrum salicaria), Eurasian water-milfoil (Myriophyllum
spicatum), Star-of-Bethlehem (Ornithogallum umbellatum),
Japanese knotweed (Polygonum Fallopia japonica), Wild
parsnip (Pastinaca sativa), Beefsteak plant (Perilla frutescens),
Lesser celandine (Ranunculus ficaria), Water chestnut (Trapa
natans)
(e) Vines. Five-leaf akebia (Akebia quinata), Porcelain-berry
(Ampelopsis brevipedunc ulata), Oriental bittersweet
(Celastrus orbiculatus), Japanese honeysuckle (Lonicera
japonica), Kudzu (Pueraria lobata), Mile-a-minute vine
(Polygonum perfoliatum)
* Species with cultivars that are known to be noninvasive
may be acceptable within a planting plan.
C. Street trees/screening/vegetative buffering.
(1) Any existing vegetation that is in appropriate locations, of an
acceptable species and quality may be used to fulfill landscaping or
buffering requirements.
(2) In order to aid surveillance and minimize the potential for crime,
planting shall also be sited, massed, and scaled to maintain
visibility of doors and first floor windows from the street and from
within the development to the greatest extent possible. Planting
patterns shall not obstruct sight lines or create isolated areas,
especially near pedestrian walking paths.
(3) Off-street parking and storage of vehicles in front yards of
commercial, industrial, and institutional lots shall be screened at
least 50% from the public right-of-way by vegetative screening or
fencing between three feet and five feet in height.
(4) Trash disposal areas, such as dumpster or compactor sites, shall be
effectively screened so as not to be visible from off site adjacent
parking areas, roadways, or adjacent residential properties. Such
areas shall be screened with a combination of architectural
masonry (or fencing) and/or landscaping with a height of at least
six feet.
(5) Open space areas should also include but not be limited to at least
three of the following:
(a) Seasonal planting areas.
(b) Large deciduous trees.
(c) Seating.
(d) Pedestrian-scale lighting.
§ 190-46 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-46
1:638
(e) Gazebos or other decorative shelters.
(f) Play structures for children.
(g) Natural environment areas.
(h) Recreational amenities.
(i) Trails.
(j) Another element satisfactory the Borough that would
implement the goals of the Borough Comprehensive Plan.
(6) All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc., in the American Standard of Nursery Stock,
ANZIZ60, current edition, as amended.
(a) Provide a landscape plan note indicating that the top of the
main order root (first large set of roots that divide from the
trunk) shall be planted no lower than one or two inches into the
soil.
(b) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for
optimal root growth whenever possible. Continuous planting
areas versus isolated planting boxes are encouraged.
(c) No staking and wiring of trees shall be allowed without a
maintenance note for the staking and wiring to be removed
within one year of planting.
(d) All street trees shall be provided by the applicant in
accordance with the following standards:
[1] The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to
that of the locality of the project. Varieties of trees within
the right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the
authority that accepts ownership of the street.
[2] All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be
sound, healthy, and vigorous; they shall be free from
disease, insects, insect eggs, and larvae.
[3] The trunk caliper, measured at a height of six inches above
finish grade shall be a minimum of two inches.
[4] Tree planting depth shall bear the same relationship to the
finished grade as the top of the root ball or original grade
of origin.
[5] The type, number and location of street trees shall be in
accordance with the Borough's Shade Tree Ordinance,170
§ 190-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-46
1:639
and shall be planted in a manner approved by the Borough
Engineer.
[6] Existing trees. Along street segments where existing
healthy trees will be preserved and protected during
construction, new street trees will not be required.
(7) All required landscape plants shall be maintained and guaranteed
for a length of 18 months from the date of planting. No more than
1/3 of the tree or shrub shall be damaged or dead without
replacement. Replacement plants shall conform to all requirements
of this section and shall be maintained after replanting for an
additional 18 months.
(8) The plant's growth shall not interfere with the street cartway,
sidewalk, signage, easements, clear sight triangles, or utility line.
Within the clear sight triangle, typical branching shall not be within
10 feet of ground level after 10 years of growth.
(9) No one species shall comprise more than 33% of the entire number
of street trees in a particular development.
(10) Existing significant trees and natural features, such as drainage
corridors, shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable
and incorporated into site plans and site design as major amenities.
(a) If a significant tree is designated to be preserved but is
removed or substantially damaged during the clearing,
grading, or construction, the applicant or developer may be
required by the Borough to replace the removed or damaged
tree.
(11) Street trees shall be provided in all land developments which
include new streets.
(a) Street trees shall be located within the street right-of-way.
(b) The required number and spacing of street trees shall be based
on the applicable Borough ordinance(s).
(c) Street trees shall be selected from the Borough Street Tree
List, as approved by the Planning Commission or Shade Tree
Commission.
D. Ground cover. Ground cover shall be provided on all areas of the project
to prevent soil erosion. All areas which are not covered by paving,
stone, or other solid material shall be protected with a suitable ground
cover, consisting of spreading plants including sods and grasses less
than 18 inches in height.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Trees.
§ 190-46 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-46
1:640
§ 190-47. Lighting.
E. Existing wooded areas. No more than 20% of existing woodlands
located in environmentally sensitive areas shall be destroyed or altered.
If the applicant can prove that invasive species are within either of
these areas, then the percentage of woodlands to be removed may be
increased to eradicate invasive species [see Subsection B(3)].
F. Tree protection zone.
(1) Prior to construction, the tree protection zone shall be delineated
at the dripline of the tree canopy. All trees scheduled to remain
shall be marked; however, where groups of trees exist, only the
trees on the edge need to be marked. A forty-eight-inch-high snow
fence or forty-eight-inch-high construction fence mounted on steel
posts located eight feet on center shall be placed along the
boundary of the tree protection zone.
(2) No construction, storage of material, temporary parking, pollution
of soil, or regrading shall occur within the tree protection zone.
When there is a group of trees, the tree protection zone shall be
based on the location of the outer trees.
A. Purpose. The standards established in this section set forth criteria for:
(1) Providing lighting in outdoor public places where public health,
safety, and welfare are potential concerns.
(2) Controlling glare from nonvehicular light sources that impair safe
travel.
(3) Protecting neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and
stray light from poorly aimed, placed, applied, maintained, or
shielded light sources.
(4) Reduce light pollution (unnecessary light) and light trespass
(bright visible sources or light spilling into neighboring properties).
B. Applicability. Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and in areas
of public assembly and travel, including, but not limited to: streets,
multifamily dwelling units, commercial, industrial, recreation areas,
and institutional uses. The Borough may require lighting to be
incorporated for other uses or locations, as they deem necessary. The
glare control requirements herein contained apply to lighting in all
above-mentioned uses as well as sign, architectural, landscaping, and
residential lighting.
C. Illumination levels. Lighting shall have intensities and uniformity ratios
in accordance with the current recommended practices of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as
contained in the IESNA Lighting Handbook. Future amendments to said
recommended practices shall become a part of this chapter without
§ 190-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-47
1:641
further action of the Borough. Examples of intensities for typical
outdoor applications, as extracted from the Eighth Edition of the
Lighting Handbook, are presented below:
Use Task
Maintained
footcandles1
Uniformity
Ratio2
(maximum:
minimum)
Streets Local Residential 0.4 minimum 6:1
Local Commercial 0.9 minimum 6:1
Parking:
multifamily
residential
Low vehicular/
pedestrian activity
0.2 minimum 4:1
Medium vehicular/
pedestrian activity
0.6 minimum 4:1
Parking:
industrial,
commercial,
institutional, and
municipal
High activity (e.g.,
regional shopping
centers/fast food
facilities, major
athletic/civic/
cultural events)
0.9 minimum 4:1
Medium activity
(e.g., community
shopping centers,
office parks,
hospitals,
commuter lots,
cultural/civic/
recreational
events)
0.6 minimum 4:1
Low activity (e.g., neighborhood
shopping, industrial employee
parking, schools, church parking,
farm businesses, farm operations)
0.2 minimum 4:1
Walkways and
bikeways
0.5 minimum 5:1
Building
entrances and
signs
4.0 average —
§ 190-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-47
1:642
NOTES:
1 Illumination levels are maintained horizontal footcandles on the
task, e.g., pavement or area surface.
2 Uniformity ratio is a measure of the dispersion of light on an
area. The ratio is measured as maximum light level to minimum
light level. Example: 4:1 for the given area, the maximum level of
illumination should be no less than 4 times the minimum level of
illumination (0.2 x 4 = 0.8 maximum light level)
D. Lighting fixture design.
(1) Dedicated fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the
lighting application and aesthetically acceptable to the Borough.
(2) The use of floodlighting, spotlighting, wall-mounted fixtures,
decorative globes and spheres, and other fixtures not meeting
IESNA full-cutoff criteria shall be permitted only with the approval
of the Borough, based upon applicability in retaining the urban
character of the Borough and achieving acceptable glare control.
(3) Fixtures shall be equipped with, or be modified to, incorporate light
directing and/or shielding devices such as shields, visors, skirts, or
hoods to redirect offending light distribution and/or reduce direct
or reflected glare. Glare control shall be achieved primarily
through the use of such means as cutoff fixtures, shields and
baffles, and appropriate application of fixture mounting height,
wattage, aiming angle and fixture placement.
E. Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
(1) All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted, and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians
by impairing their ability to safely travel.
(2) Unless for safety, security, or all-night operations, lighting shall be
controlled by automatic switching devices to permit extinguishing
between 11:00 p.m. and dawn.
(3) Lighting proposed for use after 11:00 p.m., or after the normal
hours of operation, shall be reduced by an average of 75% from
that time until dawn, unless supporting a specific purpose.
(4) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare.
(5) The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential
use from an existing property boundary shall not exceed 0.2
footcandle, measured at the existing property line at a height of
five feet.
F. Installation.
§ 190-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-47
1:643
(1) Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be run underground, not
overhead.
(2) Pole-mounted fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 25 feet
high.
(3) Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed outside paved
areas or on concrete pedestals at least 30 inches high above the
pavement, or by other approved protective means.
G. Post-installation inspection. The Borough reserves the right to conduct
a post-installation nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and, if appropriate, to require remedial
action at no expense to the Borough.
H. Streetlighting dedication.
(1) The Borough must accept dedication of streetlighting facilities
located within the right-of-way of a street dedicated to the
Borough.
(2) Until such time as the streetlighting is dedicated, the developer of
the tract (who has escrowed the streetlighting) will be responsible
for any and all costs associated with each streetlight. Such costs
shall include, but not be limited to: administration, placement, and
maintenance. Electrical charges shall be the responsibility of the
Borough at the issuance of the first building occupancy permit
within the development.
(3) Streetlights not dedicated to the Borough will remain the
responsibility of the developer or appropriate private entity
including all costs and responsibilities for the lighting in perpetuity.
§ 190-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-47
1:644
ARTICLE IX
Design Standards for Infill and Redevelopment Sites
§ 190-48. General.
§ 190-49. Site layout/development pattern.
A. Minimum qualifications.
(1) Infill development using Article IX shall include lots and parcels
that are surrounded by land containing structures on all perimeter
boundaries.
(2) Redevelopment projects using Article IX shall include the
remodeling, reusing, or replacement of existing structures on a
previous development lot or parcel.
B. Compliance with Borough ordinances required. All plans shall be
designed in compliance with Chapter 220, Zoning, and Chapter 184,
Stormwater Management, and all other applicable ordinances, plans,
studies, and local requirements.
C. Zoning approvals required prior to plan approval. When an application
requires the grant of a special exception, conditional use, or variance
from Chapter 220, Zoning, the applicant shall obtain such special
exception, conditional use or variance approval from the Borough
Council and/or Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable, prior to the
approval of the application. The plan shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with any conditions that have been imposed upon the
grant of such special exception, conditional use, or variance by the
Borough Council and/or Zoning Hearing Board, as applicable.
A. Intent.
(1) Building design for infill and redevelopment projects shall be
compatible with adjacent development where appropriate. The
layout of principal buildings, accessory structures, and parking
areas along a street is an example of a repeated site pattern that
creates a cohesive visual identity and attractive pedestrian street
scene for an area. Creating a strongly defined street edge will
improve the pattern of development. A sense of visual unity is
created within a neighborhood when similar building features are
repeated.
(2) Building orientation strongly influences a development site's focus
of activity. A building oriented at least in part to an adjoining public
street can create a strong presence in the public realm, and can
contribute significantly to a pedestrian-friendly built environment.
Building design that creates or adds to the visual interest of a
streetscape and a pedestrian scale is an essential element of infill
and redevelopment projects. Building height, scale, and massing
can be used to emphasize important corners, designate points of
§ 190-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-49
1:645
entry, and promote compatibility with surrounding uses. Planting
shall be sited, massed, and scaled to maintain visibility of doors
and first-floor windows from the street and from within the
development.
B. General arrangement.
(1) Buildings and open space shall be compatible with, or complement
the established proportion and building mass of adjacent
developments while maintaining a pedestrian scale and character.
(2) In order to maintain or create a sense of place and "arrival," all
developments at the intersection of two arterial and/or collector
streets shall comply with the following site layout and buildingorientation
standards:
(a) Parking areas and drive-through facilities shall not be located
within a one-hundred-fifty-foot radius measured from the
intersection of the center line of the two streets.
(b) Development located within a one-hundred-fifty-foot radius
from the intersection of the center line of the two streets shall
include one or more of the following focal point features visible
from the intersecting streets:
[1] A distinctive architectural or building design that does not
represent standard franchise architecture;
[2] Fountains or other water feature;
[3] Public plazas or other open space; or
[4] Significant landscape feature.
(3) Entry facades shall orient towards the primary street or active
pedestrian zone within the site to create an inviting image,
consistent front, and street edge definition.
(4) To the maximum extent practicable, the orientation of new lots
created shall repeat the predominant relationship of buildings to
buildings and buildings to street along the same and facing block
faces.
C. Lot access.
(1) Connections to compatible adjacent land uses should be provided
to the maximum extent feasible.
(a) Common or shared service and delivery access to compatible
land uses should be provided between adjacent parcels and/or
buildings.
(b) Projects should not become an isolated island in the
surrounding community. Instead, to reduce vehicle congestion
§ 190-49 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-49
1:646
and offer greater connectivity between adjacent land uses, the
following standards shall apply except where prohibited for
overriding public safety or other traffic related considerations:
[1] The internal street system shall connect to the perimeter
public street system to provide multiple direct connections
to, and between local destinations.
[2] The internal street system shall connect to the perimeter
public street system to provide community connections to
knit separate development together rather than forming
barriers between them.
(2) In order to maximize the efficiency of the street network, major
traffic generators should be located so that their primary access is
from a thoroughfare or commercial access roads.
(a) If a land use is proposed at a location or density that will have a
significant effect on current traffic patterns, a traffic impact
study shall be required to ensure that the street network can
accommodate the anticipated traffic demands and to define
required street improvements.
(b) The number of entrances should be minimized to the extent
possible in order to reduce conflicting points and facilitate
traffic flow. The specific location of primary vehicle entrances
is dependent on the following factors:
[1] The location of existing or planned median breaks;
[2] Separation distances between the entrance and major
intersections, minor intersections, and adjacent entrances;
[3] The need to provide shared access to adjacent parcels of
land;
[4] The need to align with previously approved or constructed
access points on the opposite side of the street;
[5] The minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic
onto and off the site safely and efficiently; and
[6] The need to provide multiple direct connections to, and
between, local destinations such as parks, schools, and
shopping.
(3) Specific design or geometrics of development streets and access
drives shall meet the intent of these design guidelines. (See
§ 190-39.)
(a) Configuration and design shall be appropriate given the size of
the development and the capacity of the street.
§ 190-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-49
1:647
(b) Geometrics shall be dependent on a variety of factors including
traffic volume, speed, and distribution. The resulting design
should provide an efficient ingress and egress to the
development and the following design issues should be
addressed in each case:
[1] The number of inbound and outbound lanes;
[2] Lane width;
[3] Throat length (i.e., the distance between the street and the
first point at which cross traffic or left turns are
permitted);
[4] Curb radii;
[5] The need or desirability of a raised median;
[6] The need for a deceleration lane; and
[7] Accommodation for pedestrian and nonmotorized
crossings.
(4) A clear system of driveways/access drives/streets shall be
established to carry the highest volumes of traffic within the site.
(See § 190-39.)
(a) Internal driveways/access drives/streets shall contain no
perpendicular parking spaces that directly access them.
(b) Truck loading and circulation facilities shall be appropriately
designed and provided for. To the greatest extent possible,
these areas should be separate from customer parking and
pedestrian areas.
(c) As the size of the development and the volume of the trucks
increase, internal circulation patterns should reflect an
increased separation between non-truck and truck traffic.
D. Lot frontage. All lots must front on a public street or a private street.
E. Provisions for future subdivision. Lots resulting from a proposed
subdivision that will be large enough to be further subdivided should be
configured to facilitate such future subdivision. Adequate street rightof-
way shall be provided as necessary.
F. Flag lots. Flag lots represent a viable design alternative under the
following standards. In such cases, evidence shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission that documents the circumstances and
demonstrates that the platting of flag lots shall not restrict the
development potential and pattern of development of the tract and
adjacent lands.
§ 190-49 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-49
1:648
§ 190-50. Streets, access drives and driveways.
Refer to § 190-39 for streets, access drives, and driveways standards.
§ 190-51. Parking facilities.
Refer to § 190-40 for parking facilities standards.
(1) Adjacent flagpoles shall be encouraged to share a common access
point.
(2) Up to four adjacent lots are encouraged to be oriented to a shared
driveway. More than four adjacent lots shall be oriented to a street
right-of-way.
(3) Flag lots are encouraged when infill situations exist to achieve
maximum densities.
(4) Flag lots proposed to create lots for home sites where there is no
potential for the construction of a public or private street must
demonstrate that there is no potential to construct a street due to:
(a) Severe topographic or other environmental constraints that
limit the design of a street; or
(b) Other factors inherent in the site which make the construction
of a public or private street impractical.
(5) The width of a flagpole should be determined by the function of the
driveway, number of lots served, setbacks, grading, and utility
requirements, but shall be a minimum of 25 feet to accommodate
emergency vehicles.
G. Double/reverse frontage lots.
(1) Residential double frontage lots are only permitted when a
reduction of driveway intersections along a street with a high
volume of vehicular movements is desired or the maintenance of
the integrity of a corridor is desired.
(2) Reverse frontage lots may be permitted when rear alleys are
proposed to provide vehicular access to lots.
(3) All double and reverse frontage lots shall include an identification
of the frontage for use as a street access.
(4) All reverse frontage lots shall have within the yard(s) that is/are
adjacent to any street right-of-way, other than the street of
vehicular access, an easement running the entire width of the
proposed lot, across which there shall be no vehicular access.
§ 190-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-52
1:649
§ 190-52. Easements.
Refer to § 190-42 for easements criteria.
§ 190-53. Survey monuments and markers.
Refer to § 190-43 for survey monuments and markers standards.
§ 190-54. Sanitary wastewater disposal.
Refer to § 190-44 for sanitary wastewater disposal standards.
§ 190-55. Water supply.
Refer to § 190-45 for water supply standards.
§ 190-56. Landscaping.
Refer to § 190-46 for landscaping standards.
§ 190-57. Lighting.
Refer to § 190-47 for lighting standards.
§ 190-52 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-57
1:650
ARTICLE X
Mobile Home Parks
§ 190-58. General standards.
In accordance with Section 501 of the PMPC, as amended,171 mobile home
parks and sites for the placement of manufactured housing are governed as
subdivisions or land developments, and are subject to the procedures and
standards of this chapter.
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 190-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-58
1:651
Chapter 194
TAXATION
§ 190-58 COLUMBIA CODE § 190-58
1:652
ARTICLE I
Real Property Tax
[Tax rates are set annually. A copy of the current ordinance is on file
in the office of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-58
1:653

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. 599 (Ch. 76, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 194-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Columbia Borough Realty Transfer Tax
Ordinance."
§ 194-2. Statutory authority.
This realty transfer tax is levied under authority of Article XI-D, entitled
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, which is a new article added by Act 77 of 1986 (Act of July 2, 1986,
P.L. 224, No. 77) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act 14 of
1981 (Act of May 5, 1981, P.L. 36, No. 14), as amended. The Pennsylvania
Real Estate Transfer Tax Act is codified as 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., and
Article XI-D is codified as 72 P.S.§ 8101-D et seq. This realty transfer tax is
also levied under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.172
§ 194-3. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726]
As used in this article, the words and phrases defined in 72 P.S. § 8101-C
(its successor statutes, or as amended from time to time) shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in said section.
§ 194-4. Imposition of tax; rate.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed, for general municipal purposes, on
every real estate transaction, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
A. The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is
presented for recording, within 30 days of acceptance of the document
or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
municipality, the tax shall be calculated on the value of the portion
within the municipality.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the collector, as
a joint and several liability, by every person who makes, executes,
delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document or in whose
behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording. In the case of an acquired company, the
172. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-4
1:655
§ 194-5. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidenced by the
collector affixing on the document an official stamp or writing setting forth
the date of payment of the tax and amount of tax paid.
§ 194-6. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a real
estate transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 194-7. Excluded transactions.
company shall also have liability for payment of the tax. All such
persons shall be liable for any penalties imposed under this article.
D. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
on a real estate transaction by the municipality and other political
subdivisions shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in Section 8 of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political
subdivision imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this
article, the provisions of said Section 8 shall apply.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance
by condemning body of the property condemned to the owner of
record at the time of condemnation, which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided that said reconveyance
is made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the municipality is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at a sheriffs sale or
tax claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
§ 194-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-7
1:656
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in
value then their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife or between persons who
were previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce; between a
parent and child or the spouse of such child; between a brother or
sister or the spouse of a brother or sister and a brother or sister or
the spouse of a brother or sister; and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this subsection. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 726]
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:657
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor. [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the municipality reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conservation, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
§ 194-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-7
1:658
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space
opportunities; or a transfer from such a conservancy to the United
States, the commonwealth or to any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions; or any transfer from such a
conservancy where the real estate is encumbered by a perpetual
agricultural conservation easement as defined by the Act of June
30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the "Agricultural Area
Security Law,"173 and such conservancy has owned the real estate
for at least two years immediately prior to the transfer. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(221) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interest in the partnership.
[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
(23) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate. [Amended 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 726]
(24) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(25) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
(26) Any other transactions excluded from realty transfer tax by 72 P.S.
§ 8102, its successor statutes, or as amended from time to time.
[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
173. Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 901 et seq.
§ 194-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:659
§ 194-8. Documents related to transfer or demise of title.
Except as otherwise provided in § 194-7, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 194-9. Acquired companies.
§ 194-10. Credits against tax.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets, it fails to meet the minimum requirement of a
family farm corporation under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article. [Added 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the collector for recording and
for the affixation of the official stamp or writing evidencing payment of
the tax. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in the municipality.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
§ 194-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-10
1:660
§ 194-11. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the collector for recording
shall set forth therein and as part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under this
article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship, provided that the relationship is specified in the deed,
instrument or writing. Documents which are not to be recorded shall be
presented to the collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article. Evidence of payment shall
be affixed to the original document and the certified copy. The certified copy
and statement of value shall be filed with the collector.
§ 194-12. Unlawful acts.
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
§ 194-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-12
1:661
§ 194-13. Civil penalties.
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid;
(2) Fail to record a declaration of acquisition, as required by this
article;
(3) Fraudulently affix to any document any forged evidence of
payment; or
(4) Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this article or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
municipality under this article or any rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to the extent applicable to
the tax levied hereunder.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a summary offense.
C. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition, when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
A. If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when
due, 10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected as an
initial penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
B. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a month, on the amount
of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid
in full.
C. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition, as required by this article, unless it is shown
to the satisfaction of the municipality that such failure is due to
reasonable cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid
tax at the rate of 5% per month or fractional part of a month, on the
amount of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax
is paid in full. This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties but
shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
D. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax is due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
E. In addition, if the municipality files suit in order to collect the amount of
any tax not paid when due under this article, at the discretion of the
court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable for
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the municipality in prosecution
of the suit.
§ 194-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-13
1:662
§ 194-14. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article, together with all penalties, shall be a lien
against the real estate to which the document relates and, in the case of
an acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The
lien shall date from the time when the tax is due and payable and shall
continue until discharged by payment in full of the tax, together with all
penalties. In order to enforce the lien, the municipality may proceed under
the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any
other appropriate manner.
§ 194-15. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax imposed under this article shall be fully paid and shall have priority
out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other
obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ
upon which the sale is made, and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting
said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to
him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to
pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the
remaining tax.
§ 194-16. Enforcement.
§ 194-17. Collection agent designated.
F. No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds of
any county of this commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder
shall have been paid in full and evidence of payment shall have been
affixed thereto by the collector.
A. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the municipality, the municipality
shall have the right to review all documents or records relating to any
real estate transaction or any related transactions and to take such
other steps as the municipality shall deem necessary or appropriate,
including a review or audit of any documents or records of any party to
a real estate transaction to determine the fair market value of the real
estate or any other relevant matter as determined by the municipality.
Upon request of the municipality, and at such place and time as
specified by the municipality, any party shall make available to the
municipality any documents or records requested by the municipality.
B. In the event that any tax is not paid when due, the municipality may
enforce payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in
assumpsit or any other appropriate means.
§ 194-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-17
1:663
§ 194-18. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The municipality may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 194-19. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the
collection agent for this tax, without compensation from the
municipality.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each political
subdivision.
C. On or before the 10th day of each month, the collector shall pay over to
the municipality all taxes collected under this article, less 2% for use of
the county, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. In accordance with Act 77 of 1986, any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which tax is imposed under this article
without payment of tax as required under this article, as is indicated in
the document or accompanying statement of value, shall, upon
summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of
prosecution.
A. To the extent that this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction
which is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax imposed by Act 77 of 1986 and to the extent not inconsistent
herewith or with rules or regulations adopted by the municipality, this
article shall be interpreted in the same manner as Act 77 of 1986 and in
accordance with regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to adoption of this article, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new
enactments.
C. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions which the municipality
is permitted to tax under Act 77 of 1986 to the fullest extent possible.
D. In the event that this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the municipality levying a realty transfer tax shall remain
in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any way by adoption
of this article.
§ 194-17 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-19
1:664
E. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this article.
F. Subject to the provisions in this section, this article shall supersede,
replace and repeal ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force
immediately prior to adoption of this article.
§ 194-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-19
1:665

ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 819174]
§ 194-20. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Columbia
Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 194-21. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This article.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Columbia.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924,101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this article.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
174. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2012. This ordinance also
provided: "The primary purpose of this ordinance is to conform the earned income and net
profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended and restated by
Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame required by Act 32. Any prior
enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits of individuals is amended and
restated in its entirety to read as stated in this ordinance. Any other prior enactment or
part of any prior enactment conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in force
immediately prior to adoption of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance are
intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and not as a new enactment. If this
ordinance is declared invalid, any prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in
full force and effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this ordinance. If any part of
this ordinance is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this ordinance. The
provisions of this ordinance shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall
such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior
to adoption of this ordinance. Subject to the foregoing provisions if this section, this
ordinance shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on
earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date." Editor's
Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. III, Earned Income Tax, adopted 12-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 506 (Ch. 76, Art. III, of the 1971 Code), as amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 686
and 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 194-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-21
1:667
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Columbia.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any Tax Collection District to which the Taxing Authority or any part
of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 194-22. Imposition of tax.
§ 194-23. (Reserved)
§ 194-24. Individuals under age 16 exempt from tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 0.5% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the Taxing Authority.
B. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
C. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment,
without the need for formal amendment of this article, to the maximum
extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
D. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with: (1) all applicable laws
and regulations; and (2) regulations, policies and procedures adopted
by the TCC or by the Collector. This includes any regulations, policies,
and procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed
by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
A. This governing body finds that:
(1) Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial
sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for many
legislative purposes; and
(2) Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and
subject to compulsory school attendance and child labor laws, and
therefore have limited earned income and net profits and control of
money such that enforcement of reporting and collection of tax
hereunder against them would yield inconsequential amounts and
be unduly difficult, expensive, and not in the public interest.
§ 194-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-24
1:668
§ 194-25. Individual tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 194-26. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 194-27. Tax Collector.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
§ 194-28. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 194-29. (Reserved)
B. For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt
from liability for the tax.
§ 194-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-29
1:669

ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 746175; amended in its entirety
12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 783176]
§ 194-30. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December
31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 194-31 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 through December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.
175. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Occupation Privilege Tax,
adopted 12-29-1970 by Ord. No. 471 (Ch. 76, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code), as amended.
176. Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that it shall be effective on 1-1-2008.
§ 194-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-31
1:671
§ 194-31. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Columbia during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for
that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the
following purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough Council
from time to time: 1) emergency services, which shall include emergency
medical services, police services and/or fire services; 2) road construction
and/or maintenance; 3) reduction of property taxes; or 4) property tax
relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion
in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to
homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less
than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax
is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by
the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
§ 194-32. Exemption; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a
double, triple or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected
disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or
its successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
§ 194-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-32
1:672
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a Tax Collection
Officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 194-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-32
1:673
§ 194-33. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal
Law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
§ 194-32 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-33
1:674
§ 194-34. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 194-35. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 194-36. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession with a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 194-37. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person maybe employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 194-32 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 194-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-37
1:675
§ 194-38. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 194-39. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In
case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 194-37 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-39
1:676
§ 194-40. Suits for collection.
§ 194-41. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 194-42. Interpretation.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998
(municipalities may detail their appeal processes).
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
§ 194-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-42
1:677
§ 194-43. (Reserved)
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 194-42 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-43
1:678
ARTICLE V
Local Taxpayers' Bill of Rights
[Adopted 11-8-1999 by Ord. No. 684]
§ 194-44. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.177
§ 194-45. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and
adopted.178
§ 194-46. Form of petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.179
§ 194-47. Administrative appeal procedures.
The governing body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund of
occupation privilege taxes or real property transfer taxes under the Local
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights shall be undertaken by a hearing officer.
§ 194-48. Hearing officer.
The governing body hereby appoints the Borough Manager of the Borough
of Columbia as hearing officer.
§ 194-49. Incorporation of procedures.
The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4 attached hereto and
incorporated herein are hereby approved and adopted.180
177. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.
178. Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.
179. Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.
180. Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer.
§ 194-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-49
1:679

ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemptions for Industrial, Commercial and Other Business
Property
[Adopted 1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 840]
§ 194-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning
set forth below:
DETERIORATED AREA — The area bounded and described as the
"deteriorated area" by Ordinance No. 640 passed by the Borough of
Columbia on August 10, 1992, and as the same may hereafter be amended
from time to time.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity and located in the Borough of Columbia. No
residential homes, apartments or other living establishments will be
included except hotels and motels which rent rooms on a short-term basis.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction, or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances, or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Columbia, the Columbia
Borough School District and the County of Lancaster or any other
governmental entity having the authority to levy real property taxes within
the Borough of Columbia.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Construction of new industrial, commercial or
other business facilities which are owned by an individual, partnership,
association or corporation and will be used solely for business purposes.
§ 194-51. Exemptions.
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
(1) To the exemption schedule as established by this article; and
(2) To that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the
actual cost of new construction or improvements.
B. In all cases the exemption form taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment valuation attributable to the actual costs of
new construction or improvements, as the case may be, and for which a
separated assessment has been made by the Lancaster County Board of
Assessment Appeals, and for which an exemption has been separately
requested.
§ 194-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-51
1:681
§ 194-52. Exemption schedule. [Amended 4-10-2017 by Ord. No.
883]
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to improving the
property.
D. In any case, after the effective date of this article, when deteriorated
property or new construction is damaged, destroyed or demolished by
any cause or for any reason, and the assessed valuation of the property
affected has been reduced as a result of said damage, destruction or
demolition, the exemption from real property taxation authorized by
this article shall be limited to that portion of new assessment
attributable to the actual cost of improvements or construction that is
in excess of the original assessments that existed prior to the damage,
destruction or demolition of the property.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, each item of construction
and/or improvements shall be treated separately for exemptions under
this article if they are being performed or constructed under separate
building permits. By way of example only, if a property owner obtains a
building permit to construct a house in year one, and then in year two
obtains a separate building permit to install a garage or make
additional improvements to the previously constructed house, that
garage or new improvements shall be treated separately for purposes
of exemption under this article.
A. The following real estate exemption schedule shall be in effect for five
tax years commencing with the new tax year following the tax year
within which a certificate of occupancy or other Borough-issued
certification of completion is dated:
Length Portion Exempt
First year 100%
Second year 100%
Third year 100%
Fourth year 50%
Fifth year 50%
After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property but shall continue for the full time originally granted.
C. If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is
modified, terminated or changed during the five-year period which in
any way would have affected the exemption if the property had been so
used when the exemption was granted, then at the election of the
Borough of Columbia, the exemption shall terminate as of the date the
§ 194-51 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-52
1:682
§ 194-53. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
use was modified or terminated or the Borough of Columbia determines
that the continuation of the exemption would be inconsistent with the
purposes of this article.
D. Any property which has already begun the exemption schedule as set
forth in Ordinance No. 840-2014 at the time this Ordinance No.
883-2017 is adopted shall continue on the same five-year schedule as in
effect prior to the adoption of this Ordinance No. 883-2017.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the Borough of Columbia at the time a building permit is secured for
new construction or for the improvement. The application shall be in
writing upon forms specified by the Borough of Columbia setting forth
the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued along with zoning, land
division and/or land development requirements;
(2) The location of the property to be improved;
(3) The nature of the property to be improved (industrial, commercial,
etc.);
(4) The type of improvement;
(5) The summary of the plan of the improvement;
(6) The cost of the improvement;
(7) The property has been inspected and verified by the Columbia
Borough Manager or his designated agent; and
(8) Certification by the applicant that there are no unpaid real estate
taxes, municipal sewer charges, or other municipal charges, bills or
liens outstanding related to the property.
(9) Such additional information as the Borough of Columbia may
require.
B. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Lancaster
County Board of Assessment by the Columbia Borough Manager. The
Lancaster County Board of Assessments shall, after completion of the
new construction or improvement, assess separately the new
construction or improvement and calculate the amounts of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits set
forth in this article and shall notify the taxpayer and Columbia Borough
of the reassessment and amounts of the assessment eligible for
exemption.
C. The cost of new construction or improvements to be exempted and the
schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request for
§ 194-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-53
1:683
§ 194-54. Amendments.
No amendment to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
resolution or ordinance of each local taxing authority which has consented
to be bound by the terms of this article.
§ 194-55. Termination date.
Unless prior to that date which is five years from the effective date of this
article, the Columbia Borough Council adopts an ordinance and Columbia
Borough School District Board of Directors adopts a resolution or takes
other appropriate action extending this article for an additional five years,
this article shall terminate exactly five years from the effective date of
this article. On or prior to each renewal period, this article shall terminate
on the fifth year following renewal unless both the Columbia Borough
Council and Columbia Borough School District Board of Directors have
adopted ordinances, in the case of the Borough, or resolutions or other
appropriate actions, in the case of the School District, extending the term
of this article for an additional five years. This article shall terminate at the
discretion of either the Columbia Borough Council or the Columbia Borough
School District Board of Directors upon adoption of appropriate repealing
ordinance or resolution, respectively, with formal written notification to one
another at least 90 days in advance of said planned ordinance or resolution,
respectively. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any taxpayer who has received
or applied for exemption granted by this article prior to the expiration or
termination of this article, if said exemption is granted, shall be entitled to
the full exemption authorized herein.
§ 194-56. Nonpermissible exemptions.
Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be applied to
any residential home, apartment buildings or other living establishments,
except hotels and motels which rent rooms on short-term basis.
tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to their adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the Borough of Columbia or by the taxpayer
as provided by law.
§ 194-53 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-56
1:684
ARTICLE VII
Tax Exemption for Improvements to Deteriorated Residential
Property
[Adopted 1-13-2014 by Ord. No. 841]
§ 194-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings
set forth below:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
DETERIORATED AREA — For purposes of improvements as defined herein,
the area bounded and described as the "deteriorated area" by Ordinance
No. 640, passed by the Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia on
August 10, 1992, and as the same may thereafter be amended from time
to time, and for purposes of residential construction as defined herein, the
areas described in Ordinance No. 640, passed by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia on August 10, 1992.181182
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — A dwelling unit located in a deteriorated
neighborhood, or a dwelling unit which has been or upon request is certified
by a health, housing or building inspection agency as unfit for human
habitation for rent withholding, or other health or welfare purposes, or has
been the subject of an order by such agency requiring the dwelling unit
to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of noncompliance with
laws, ordinances or regulations.
DWELLING UNIT — A house, double house, or duplex, townhouse or row
house, apartment or condominium, or any building or unit of a building
intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by an individual, family
or families or other groups of persons, which living quarters contain a
kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the occupant or
occupants.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of housing
safety, health or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws.
181. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 846, adopted 1-13-2014, included, in part, the following:
"SECTION 1. Pursuant to the Act, Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania does hereby designate and affix the boundaries of a deteriorated
area for purposes of the said Act to be the boundaries of the Columbia Borough as are
shown and described in Ordinance No. 640 of the Borough of Columbia, a copy of which is
attached hereto, which is on file in the Borough Office and does hereby designates all
areas within the boundaries of the Columbia Borough as a Deteriorated Area for purposes
of the said Act. The descriptions and any and all exhibits attached to Ordinance No. 640 as
amended from time to time are hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance and
shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein." Ord. No. 847,
adopted 2-10-2014, specified that Ord. No. 846 shall be effective January 13, 2014, without
any action taken by the Columbia Borough School District. It further provided that as a
result of the adoption of Ord. No. 846, Ord. No. 802 is repealed and its provisions are null
and void.
182. ["The Act" refers to Improvement of Deteriorating Real Property or Areas Tax Exemption
Act, 72 P.S. § 4711-101 et seq.]
§ 194-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-57
1:685
Ordinances or regulations governing housing standards, ordinary upkeep
and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION — The building or erection of dwelling
units, as defined above, upon vacant land or land specifically prepared to
receive such structures.
§ 194-58. Exemptions.
§ 194-59. Exemption schedules.
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited to:
(1) The exemption schedule as established by this article; and
(2) That portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual
costs of improvements to deteriorated properties or the actual
costs of residential construction built in a deteriorating area.
B. In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment valuation attributable to the actual costs of
the improvements or residential construction, as the case may be, and
for which a separate assessment has been made by the Lancaster
County Board of Assessment Appeals, and for which an exemption has
been separately requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted by the Borough if the property owner
does not secure all of the necessary and proper permits prior to
commencing the residential construction or making the improvements.
D. In any case, after the effective date of this article, when residential
construction or improvements are damaged, destroyed or demolished
by any cause or for any reason, and the assessed value of the property
affected has been reduced as a result of the said damage, destruction or
demolition, the exemption from real property taxation authorized by
this article shall be limited to that portion of the new assessment
attributable to the actual costs of the residential construction or
improvements that is in excess of the original assessments that existed
prior to the damage, destruction or demolition of the improvements or
residential construction.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, each item of construction
and/or improvements shall be treated separately for exemptions under
this article if they are being performed or constructed under separate
building permits. By way of example only, if a property owner obtains a
building permit to construct a house in year one, and then in year two
obtains a separate building permit to install a garage or make
additional improvements to the previously constructed house, that
garage or new improvements shall be treated separately for purposes
of exemption under this article.
§ 194-57 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-59
1:686
§ 194-60. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
A. The following exemption schedule shall apply for deteriorated
properties to which improvements have been made, which schedule
shall be in effect for five tax years commencing with the new tax year
following the tax year within which a certificate of occupancy or other
Borough-issued certification of completion for the improvements to the
property is dated:
Length Portion Exempt
First year 100%
Second year 80%
Third year 60%
Fourth year 40%
Fifth year 20%
After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.
B. The following exemption schedule shall apply for properties in a
deteriorated area subject to new residential construction, which
schedule shall be in effect for five years commencing with the new tax
year following the tax year within which a certificate of occupancy or
other Borough-issued certification of completion is dated:
Length Portion Exempt
First year 100%
Second year 80%
Third year 60%
Fourth year 40%
Fifth year 20%
After the fifth year, the exemption shall terminate.
C. The exemptions set forth above are limited to the additional assessment
valuation attributable to the actual costs of the improvements or
residential construction.
D. If the use of the property at the time the exemption is granted is
modified, terminated or changed during the five-year period which in
any way would have affected the exemption if the property had been so
used when the exemption was granted, then at the election of the
Borough, the exemption shall terminate as of the date the use was
modified or terminated or the Borough determines that the
continuation of the exemption would be inconsistent with the purposes
of this article.
E. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
§ 194-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-60
1:687
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article shall apply to
the Borough at the time a building permit is secured for new residential
construction or for the improvement. The application shall be in writing
upon forms specified by the Borough setting forth the following
information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued along with zoning, land
division and/or land development requirements;
(2) The location of the property to be improved;
(3) The nature of the property to be improved, (industrial, commercial,
etc.);
(4) The type of improvement;
(5) The summary of the plan of the improvement;
(6) The cost of the improvement;
(7) The property has been inspected and verified by the Columbia
Borough Manager or his designated agent;
(8) Certification by the applicant that there are no unpaid real estate
taxes, municipal sewer charges, or other municipal charges, bills or
liens outstanding related to the property; and
(9) Such additional information as the Borough may require.
B. A copy of the exemption requests shall be forwarded to the Lancaster
County Board of Assessment by the Columbia Borough Manager. The
Lancaster County Board of Assessments shall, after completion of the
new residential construction or improvement, assess separately the
new residential construction or improvement and calculate the amounts
of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the
limits set forth in this article and shall notify the taxpayer and the
Borough of the reassessment and amounts of the assessment eligible
for exemption.
C. The cost of new residential construction or improvements to be
exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of
the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to that
exemption request and subsequent amendment to this article, if any,
shall not apply to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the Borough or by the taxpayer as provided
by law.
§ 194-60 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-61
1:688
§ 194-61. Amendments.
No amendment to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
resolution or ordinance of each local taxing authority which has consented
to be bound by the terms of this article.
§ 194-62. Termination date.
Unless prior to that date which is five years from the effective date of this
article, the Columbia Borough Council adopts an ordinance and Columbia
Borough School District Board of Directors adopts a resolution or takes
other appropriate action extending this article for an additional five years,
this article shall terminate exactly five years from the effective date of
this article. On or prior to each renewal period, this article shall terminate
on the fifth year following renewal unless both the Columbia Borough
Council and Columbia Borough School District Board of Directors have
adopted ordinances, in the case of the Borough, or resolutions or other
appropriate actions, in the case of the School District, extending the term
of this article for an additional five years. This article shall terminate at the
discretion of either the Columbia Borough Council or the Columbia Borough
School District Board of Directors upon adoption of appropriate repealing
ordinance or resolution, respectively, with formal written notification to one
another at least 90 days in advance of said planned ordinance or resolution,
respectively. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any taxpayer who has received
or applied for exemption granted by this article prior to the expiration or
termination of this article, if said exemption is granted, shall be entitled to
the full exemption authorized herein.
§ 194-63. Nonpermissible exemptions.
Any exemption made permissible under this article shall not be applied
to any properties not subject to exemption hereunder and under the
Improvement of Deteriorating Real Property or Areas Tax Exemption Act,
72 P.S. § 4711-101 et seq.
§ 194-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-63
1:689

ARTICLE VIII
Volunteer Service Tax Credit
[Adopted 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 904183]
§ 194-64. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwiser:
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for a volunteer fire company listed
under § 194-65B who has complied with, and is certified under, the
Volunteer Service Credit Program. Administrative staff, emergency
responders and support staff are eligible to be considered as active
volunteers, provided they meet the criteria.
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The time frame when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed under § 194-65B.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer.
VOLUNTEER — A member of the Columbia Borough Fire
Department.[Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
§ 194-65. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. The Borough of Columbia hereby establishes a
Volunteer Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to
encourage membership and service in the community's Columbia
Borough Fire Department. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
B. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of the Borough of Columbia who are volunteers of the
Columbia Borough Fire Department.
C. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria, set by
resolution under this section, during the eligibility period to qualify for
the tax credits established under § 194-66. For 2018, and each
subsequent year thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January
1 until December 31.
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VIII, Volunteer Service Tax
Credit, adopted 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 901.
§ 194-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-65
1:691
D. Recordkeeping. The chief of the volunteer fire company listed under
§ 194-65B shall keep specific records of each volunteer's activities in a
service log to establish credits under the Volunteer Service Credit
Program. Service logs shall be subject to review by the Borough of
Columbia, the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor General.
The chief shall annually transmit to the Borough of Columbia a
notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that have met the minimum
criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The notarized
eligibility list shall be transmitted to the Borough of Columbia no later
than January 31 for the previous year's service eligibility. The chief shall
post the notarized eligibility list in an accessible area of the Columbia
Borough Fire Department's facilities. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord.
No. 918]
E. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification to their chief. The chief shall sign the application if the
volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and forward it to the Borough Manager. Applications shall not
be accepted by the Borough after April 1 of each year.
F. Municipal review. The Borough Manager shall review the applications
for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program and shall cross
reference them with the notarized eligibility list. The Borough Council
shall approve all applicants that are on the notarized eligibility list. All
applicants approved by the Borough Council shall be issued the
appropriate tax rebate by the Borough Manager.
G. Official Tax Credit Register. The Borough of Columbia shall keep an
official Tax Credit Register of all active volunteers that were issued tax
credit certificates. The Borough Manager shall issue updates, as
needed, of the official Tax Credit Register to the following:
(1) Borough Council; and
(2) Chief of the Columbia Borough Fire Department. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 918]
H. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call or during Department-approved and/or-required
training exercises may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury
must have occurred while responding to, participating in, or
returning from an emergency response call or Departmentapproved
and/or-required training exercises with one of the
entities listed under § 194-65B.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under § 194-65
stating that their injury prevents them from performing duties to
qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
§ 194-65 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-65
1:692
§ 194-66. Real property tax rebate.
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under § 194-65, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Columbia Borough Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be eligible to
receive a grant of real property tax credit as follows:
(1) Emergency responders, basic level: must respond to 20% of
emergency and nonemergency fire responses that the Columbia
Borough Fire Department is dispatched to. If the 20% is met by the
volunteer member, they are eligible for a 10% rebate from the
Columbia Borough real estate taxes.
(2) Emergency responders, advanced level: must respond to 40% of
emergency and nonemergency fire responses that the Columbia
Borough Fire Department is dispatched to. If the 40% is met by the
volunteer member, they are eligible for a 20% rebate from the
Columbia Borough real estate taxes.
(3) Administrative staff, basic level: must attend 45% of the Company
meetings and Board of Director meetings for the Department. If the
45% is met by the volunteer member, they are eligible for a 10%
rebate from the Columbia Borough real estate taxes.
(4) Administrative staff, advanced level: must attend 90% of the
Company meetings and Board of Director meetings for the
Department. If the 90% is met by the volunteer member, they are
eligible for a 20% rebate from the Columbia Borough real estate
taxes.
(5) Support staff, basic level: must actively participate in 75 hours of
fund-raising activity offered by the Columbia Borough Fire
Department. Fundraising activities include bingo, kitchen, steak
and seafood festival, barbeques and any events used for raising
funds for the benefit of the Columbia Borough Fire Department. If
the 75 hours is met by the volunteer member, they are eligible for a
10% rebate from the Columbia Borough real estate taxes.
(6) Support staff, advanced level: must actively participate in 150
hours of fund-raising activity offered by the Columbia Borough Fire
Department. Fund-raising activities include bingo, kitchen, steak
§ 194-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-66
1:693
§ 194-67. Appeals.
and seafood festival, barbeques and any events used for raising
funds for the benefit of the Columbia Borough Fire Department. If
the 150 hours is met by the volunteer member, they are eligible for
a 20% rebate from the Columbia Borough real estate taxes.
B. Application or credit. If the tax is paid in the penalty period, the tax
credit shall only apply to the base tax year liability.
C. Claim.
(1) An active volunteer may file a claim for the tax credit on their
qualified real property tax liability for the municipality's real estate
tax levy. The tax credit shall be administered as a refund by the
Borough Treasurer. An active volunteer shall file the following with
the Borough Manager:
(a) A true and correct receipt from the municipal real estate tax
collector of the paid municipal real property taxes for the tax
year which the claim is being filed.
(b) Photo identification.
(c) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property
as defined in this article.
(2) If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Borough Treasurer shall issue the tax refund to the
active volunteer in the form of a property tax rebate.
D. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Borough Manager shall reject the claim for a municipal real
property tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide the documents
required under Subsection C(1).
(2) If the Borough Manager rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be
notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall include the
reasons for the rejection and provide the method of appealing the
decision pursuant to § 194-67.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Borough
Manager.
A. Real property tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 194-66 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
§ 194-66 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-67
1:694
§ 194-68. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
article is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this article, it being
the intent of the Borough that such remainder shall be and shall remain in
full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
(3) All appeals under § 194-67 shall follow the provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A.
Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of
local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating
to judicial review of local agency action), also known as the "Local
Agency Law."
§ 194-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-68
1:695

ARTICLE IX
Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone Exemption
[Adopted 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 908184]
§ 194-69. Purpose.
§ 194-70. Boundaries of Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone.
The Borough of Columbia hereby designates the boundaries of the proposed
Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone (KOEZ) as those areas and parcels
identified on Exhibit "A," set forth and attached hereto.185
A. The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, recognizes
the need to encourage investment in defined geographical areas within
the Borough of Columbia that are experiencing distress characterized
by one or more of the following: high unemployment, low investment of
new capital, blighted conditions, underutilized, obsolete or abandoned
industrial, commercial and residential structures, or deteriorated tax
base; and
B. The Pennsylvania Keystone Opportunity Zone Act, Act of October 6,
1998, P.L. 705, No. 92, 73 P.S. §§ 820.101 through 820.1309 and 72 P.S.
§ 8911-D, as amended, including amendment by Act 43 of 2017
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), authorizes political subdivisions
such as the Borough of Columbia to apply to the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development ("DCED") for
designation of an area within the political subdivision's boundaries as a
Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone ("KOEZ"); and
C. As a precondition of such application, the political subdivision is
required to adopt an ordinance which provides for exemptions,
abatements, credits or deductions from certain local taxes within the
designated and approved KOEZ; and
D. Approval of the benefits provided in the Act will result in improving the
economic, physical, and social conditions within the proposed KOEZ by
stimulating existing business employment, creating new employment
and diminishing blight; and
E. It is expected that the increase in private- and public-sector investors
will reverse the disinvestment and conditions of blight within the
proposed KOEZ by the time of its termination; and
F. The proposed KOEZ within the Borough of Columbia is comprised of
parcels of property which are deteriorated, underutilized or
unoccupied.
184. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IX, Keystone Opportunity
Expansion Zone Exemption, adopted 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 903.
185. Editor's Note: Exhibit "A" is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 194-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-71
1:697
§ 194-71. Amount of exemption; duration.
In accordance with the Act, but without limiting requirements or provisions
of the Act, commencing on January 1, 2019, and continuing for 10 years
thereafter (to terminate on December 31, 2028) the following tax
exemptions shall apply to qualified businesses defined by the Act within the
KOEZ:
§ 194-72. Eligibility.
§ 194-73. Roll-back taxes.
This article shall not provide exemption for any tax owed prior to January
1, 2019. Any and all roll-back taxes arising under Section 5490.6 of the
Pennsylvania Farmland and Forestland Assessment Act, as amended (Act
319), 72 P.A. Stat. §§ 5490.1 through 5490.13 shall be due and owing upon
the conversion of the real property within the KOEZ from agricultural to
industrial use. The amount of such roll-back taxes shall be determined in
accordance with 7 Pa. Code § 137b.89, and this article does not provide
exemption from liability for payment of such roll-back taxes.
§ 194-74. Payment in lieu of taxes.
Qualified businesses may enter into an agreement for payment in lieu of
taxes pursuant to which it agrees to pay 100% of the current base real
property tax on the terms and conditions set forth in the agreement, the
A. 100% for the real property tax on the assessed value of improvements
made to the qualified business' property within the KOEZ; and
B. To the extent that any such taxes are hereinafter enacted and levied by
the Borough of Columbia, 100% of business gross receipt taxes for
operations conducted by a qualified business within the expansion
zone, 100% of business privilege taxes and business opportunity taxes,
taxes on the earned income received by a resident of the expansion
zone, taxes on the net profits of a qualified business attributable to
business' activity conducted within the expansion zone, mercantile
taxes attributable to business' activity conducted by a qualified
business within the expansion zone, and sales and use taxes for
purchases exclusively used and consumed by the qualified business in
the expansion zone.
A. In accordance with the Act, exemptions shall only be available for
qualified businesses that qualify for the same and comply with all
provisions of the Act not only at the time of initial application but
throughout the term of this article.
B. In accordance with the terms of the Act, no qualified business may
claim or receive an exemption unless it is in full compliance with all
state and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions, and with all state
and local zoning, building and housing laws, ordinances or codes.
§ 194-71 COLUMBIA CODE § 194-74
1:698
form and substance of which shall be substantially as set forth in Exhibit "B"
hereto.186
§ 194-75. Conditions for article effectiveness.
This article shall be effective only should both of the following occur:
§ 194-76. Effective date; termination.
Assuming all conditions set forth above are met, the provisions of this
article shall become effective on January 1, 2019, and shall terminate on
December 31, 2028.
§ 194-77. Provisions of Act in corporated by reference.
The provisions of the Act not herein enumerated are incorporated as part of
this article by reference, and if any provision of this article is determined to
be contrary to the Act, such provision shall be deemed eliminated, and the
Act shall control.
§ 194-78. Severability.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this
Ordinance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts
of this Ordinance; it being the intent of the Borough of Columbia that the
remainder of the Ordinance shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
A. DCED approval by December 31, 2018, of the application for the
proposed Keystone Opportunity Expansion Zone; and
B. Adoption by the school district of the Borough of Columbia of a
resolution approving all of the same tax credits, abatements and other
provisions as contained in this article.
186. Editor's Note: Exhibit "B" is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 194-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-78
1:699
Chapter 198
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
§ 198-1. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, and the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter:
GOODS — Any tangible personal property, including, without limitation,
vegetables, produce, fruits, plants, flowers, pretzels, food, drinks, ice
cream, cakes, pies, pastries, candy, leather goods, cosmetics, beauty aids,
hair pieces, wearing apparel of any kind, jewelry, ornaments, art work,
decorative items, tobacco and tobacco products.
ISSUING AUTHORITY — Such person or persons as shall be appointed from
time to time by Borough Council by resolution.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
SERVICES — Any personal services to be performed by the person engaged
in the sale of such services, including, without limitation, tarot card
readings, horoscopes, palm readings, spiritual guidance, advice or other
nontangible services, and also including, without limitation, the services
of inspecting real property or structures or recommending or performing
repair, remodeling or improvement thereto.
STAND — Any stand, stall, kiosk, showcase, table, bench, rack, vending
machine or any other fixture or device for the displaying, exhibiting,
carrying, transporting, storing, selling or offering for sale of any goods
or any services which shall be used for a period of less than 30 days or
intended for use for a period of less than 30 days.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — The sale or offering for sale of any goods
or any services by any of the following means:
§ 198-2. License required.
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within Columbia
Borough unless such person has procured a license as provided by this
chapter.
Peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample or
otherwise, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public place, or from
house to house, within Columbia Borough.
A.
Stationing, placing, setting up or maintaining a stand for the sale of
goods or services upon the streets or sidewalks or on any public place
or privately owned real estate, within Columbia Borough.
B.
Selling goods or services from any vehicle, movable stand, basket,
container, pushcart, hand cart, barrow or similar device.
C.
§ 194-78 COLUMBIA CODE § 198-3
1:700
§ 198-3. Exemptions from license requirement.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 198-4. Exemptions from payment of license fee.
A. Boys or girls under 18 years of age who take orders for newspapers,
greeting cards, candy and the like, or who represent the Boy Scouts and
Girl Scouts or similar organizations and take orders for and deliver
cookies and the like, or any person who works for an organization which
has registered with the Pennsylvania Department of State as required
by Act 337, approved August 9, 1963, known as the "Solicitation of
Charitable Funds Act."187
B. Commercial travelers or sales agents selling to dealers in the usual
course of business.
C. Persons conducting judicial or other sales under legal proceedings.
D. Stands located in the Columbia Market House in compliance with the
regulations of the Market House.
E. Stands on privately owned real estate by owners, occupants or lessees
of that real estate for the sale of goods owned or produced by such
person, including yard sales, garage sales or sale of garden produce of
such person, provided that such stand and activity are in compliance
with applicable zoning and land use regulations, and further provided
that not more than two yard sales or garage sales may be held on a
property in any twelve-month period.
F. Persons selling goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
G. Vending machines on real property with the permission of the property
owner. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
H. School fairs held on school property.
A. The following persons shall be exempted from payment of the license
fee provided in this chapter but shall not be excluded from any other
provisions of this chapter:
(1) Farmers selling their own produce.
(2) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products.
(3) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of meat and meat
products.
187. Editor's Note: See 10 P.S. § 162.1.
§ 198-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-4
1:701
§ 198-5. Application for license.
Every person desiring to engage in any transient retail business in Columbia
Borough shall first make application to the issuing authority for a license
and shall provide the following information:
(4) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of milk or milk products,
provided that "milk or milk products" shall not include or apply to
ice cream or other frozen desserts.
B. Any person engaged in any transient retail business dealing in one or
more of the exempted categories and selling other goods or services not
exempted shall be subject to the license fee fixed by this chapter for his
activities in connection with the sale of goods or services not in any of
the exempted categories.
A. Name.
B. Proof of identity.
C. Age.
D. Home address.
E. Business address.
F. Previous criminal record.
G. Name of person employing him.
H. Type of goods or services he intends to sell or offer.
I. Place or places where he was engaged in selling immediately prior to
such application.
J. Place or places where he proposes to engage in selling immediately
after leaving Columbia Borough.
K. Type, make and model of vehicle he uses and its state registration and
registration number, if any.
L. At the discretion of the issuing authority, two photographs, 2 1/2 by
three inches, of himself taken within one year of application.
M. At the discretion of the issuing authority, he shall allow his fingerprints
to be placed upon such application.
N. Where he or any helper proposes to sell anything that is to be eaten or
drunk, such investigation and examination as the issuing authority
requires establishing that he and his helper do not have any
communicable diseases.
O. The proposed commencement date and length of time during which he
proposes to engage in a transient retail business in Columbia Borough.
§ 198-4 COLUMBIA CODE § 198-5
1:702
§ 198-6. Issuance of license.
§ 198-7. License fee.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be paid to the issuing authority
for the use of Columbia Borough and shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council. When an applicant has several agents or
helpers, each agent or helper shall be licensed separately and each shall pay
the appropriate fee. Only those persons set forth in § 198-4 shall be exempt
from payment of the license fee.
§ 198-8. Term of license. [Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 889]
All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for the appropriate period,
needed as determined by the issuing authority, not to exceed six months,
P. The full address at which his transient retail business is to be carried on
in Columbia Borough.
Q. The exact location and approximate value of any real estate owned by
the applicant.
R. The name of one bank with which the applicant has dealt for a period of
one year or more.
S. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each
partner having an interest in the applicant.
T. If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation and principal
place of business and the names and addresses of each officer of the
applicant.
U. Proof that he holds valid, current licenses or permits from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for his business activity if such are
applicable.
V. Authorization for the Borough of Columbia to perform a background
check, which background check must be reasonably satisfactory to the
Borough of Columbia before the issuance of a permit verifying the
criminal information referenced in other parts of this § 198-5. [Added
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 889]
A. The issuing authority shall have the authority to investigate any
application for license and, for that purpose, may, at the discretion of
the issuing authority, impose a waiting period of 24 hours between the
making of the application and the issuance or denial of the license.
B. When a person makes an application for himself and one or more
helpers, all applicable personal information specified in § 198-5 above
shall be given for each helper, and an individual license shall be given
for each helper.
§ 198-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-8
1:703
unless revoked as herein provided. The permit shall be valid commencing
the date of issuance thereof.
§ 198-9. Form of license; identification badge.
§ 198-10. Nontransferability.
No license granted to any person under this chapter shall be transferable.
§ 198-11. Standards of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued shall, in the conduct of his
activities, comply with the following standards of conduct:
A. Each license shall be issued by the issuing authority in written form and
shall show the name and address of the licensee, the type of license
issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold or offered, the amount of
the license fee, the date of issuance, the license number and such other
information as the issuing authority, in its discretion, shall determine.
B. Each person engaged in a transient retail business in Columbia
Borough shall, while so engaged, carry his license on his person.
C. The issuing authority, in its discretion, may issue an identification
badge or card to each licensee under this chapter which shall contain
such identification and information as the issuing authority shall
determine. If issued, the identification badge or card shall be worn by
the licensed person conspicuously and shall be used only by the person
to whom it is issued and may not under any circumstance be
transferred to any other person.
A. He shall carry his license and identification badge or card, if issued, at
all times and exhibit them upon request to any police officer or to any
person on whom he shall call or with whom he shall talk.
B. He will not permit any person to have possession of his license or
identification badge or card, if issued, and shall immediately report its
loss to the issuing authority. He shall not alter or deface his license or
identification badge or card in any way.
C. He will not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling or structure without
the invitation or permission of the occupant or owner and shall
immediately leave any premises upon request of the occupant or owner.
D. He will not represent his license to be an endorsement of himself or his
goods or services.
E. He will not station, place, set up or maintain a stand on any sidewalk or
public place or in any street, alley or lane in Columbia Borough;
provided, however, that Columbia Borough Council may grant
permission for temporary occupancy of sidewalks or streets for stands.
§ 198-8 COLUMBIA CODE § 198-11
1:704
F. He will comply with the provisions of all applicable health and safety
codes.
G. He will not restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede vehicular traffic
in any street, alley or lane in Columbia Borough or any pedestrian rightof-
way on any sidewalk in Columbia Borough.
H. He will not restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the ingress or
egress from any abutting property.
I. He will not conduct himself or his business in such a way as would
create or become a nuisance.
J. He will not increase traffic congestion or cause or increase traffic delay
or hazards.
K. He will not cause, create or constitute a danger to life, health or
property.
L. He will not sell food or drinks of any kind for immediate consumption
unless he has available for public use his own litter receptacle, which
shall be clearly marked and maintained for his patrons' use, nor shall he
leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of
all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him.
M. He will not store, place or leave any stand overnight on any sidewalk,
street, alley, lane or public place in Columbia Borough.
N. He will not engage in business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
O. He will maintain any required licenses or permits issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
P. During a parade, he may engage in business in the streets designated
as the parade route by moving ahead of the parade or by following the
parade but will not engage in business by moving within the parade or
by moving in and out of the parade entrants, and he will not otherwise
restrict, obstruct or interfere with the parade, its entrants or parade
spectators.
Q. Where the transient retail business is or includes the service of
inspecting real property or structures or recommending or performing
repair, remodeling or improvement thereto, he shall notify his
customers that a building permit or other permit or approval of
Columbia Borough may be required in order for such repair, remodeling
or improvement to be undertaken and he shall not represent that he is
an official of Columbia Borough or that his service is approved by or
required by Columbia Borough.
R. Where the transient retail business is or includes the sale of goods or
services from a vehicle operated on any street, alley or lane in Columbia
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-11
1:705
§ 198-12. Violations and penalties.
Borough, the person engaged in such business shall comply with the
following requirements: [Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 654]
(1) He shall maintain a valid Pennsylvania driver's license, registration
and current inspection for the vehicle.
(2) He shall equip the vehicle with signal lamps mounted at the same
level and as high and as widely spaced laterally as practical, which
lamps shall be five inches to seven inches in diameter and shall
display two alternately flashing red lights on the front of the vehicle
and two alternately flashing red lights on the rear of the vehicle,
both lights visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight upon a straight,
level street.
(3) He shall equip the vehicle with a caution signal arm that can be
extended horizontally from the left side of the vehicle, which arm
shall be red and white and/or yellow in color and contain two
alternately flashing red and/or yellow lights three inches to five
inches in diameter located at the top and bottom thereof, visible at
300 feet to the front and rear in normal sunlight upon a straight,
level street. [Amended 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 665]
(4) He shall equip the vehicle with a convex mirror mounted on the
front so the driver in his normal seating position can see the area in
front of the truck obscured by the hood.
(5) He shall actuate the flashing lights and extend the caution signal
arm whenever he is stopped on any street, alley or lane in Columbia
Borough for the purpose of vending. [Amended 5-22-1995 by
Ord. No. 665]
(6) He shall not back the vehicle or drive in reverse to make or attempt
a sale.
(7) He shall conduct his business and shall operate the vehicle to
protect the safety of his customers and persons using the streets,
alleys or lanes in Columbia Borough.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice of Columbia Borough, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
B. In addition to the penalties provided in § 198-12A, the issuing authority
is authorized, when a uniformed police officer is present, to remove any
stand, equipment, goods or any other article or thing held for sale by
any person who uses the sidewalk or any street or public place in
Columbia Borough in violation of this chapter and refuses to
immediately comply with this chapter upon written notice of violation.
§ 198-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 198-12
1:706
§ 198-13. Application of Zoning Ordinance.
The issuance of a license under this chapter shall not waive the application
of the Zoning Ordinance of Columbia Borough, Chapter 220 of the Columbia
Borough Code, as now enacted or hereafter amended or reenacted, or
the requirement of compliance with said Zoning Ordinance of Columbia
Borough.
Chapter 202
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Foundation — See Ch.
48.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Such person shall immediately be notified of the place where his
property can be claimed, then he shall be entitled to immediately claim
his property upon payment of the costs of removal.
C. In addition to the penalties contained in § 198-12A, any license issued
under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement contained
in the application for the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement in the
course of carrying on the transient retail business licensed under
this chapter.
(3) Conducting the transient retail business in such a manner as to
create a public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace or constitute
a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals of the public
or interfere with the rights of abutting property owners.
§ 198-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-13
1:707

ARTICLE I
Shade Tree Commission
§ 202-1. Creation. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as the
"Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Columbia," pursuant to the
provisions of the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1656, No. 581, § 2721
(53 P.S. § 47721 et seq.).188
§ 202-2. Membership; compensation; terms of office. [Amended
12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 657]
The Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of five residents of the
Borough, who shall be appointed by the Council for terms of five years and
shall serve without compensation. The members first appointed pursuant to
this article shall be appointed so that only one member's term shall expire
each year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Council for any
unexpired terms or upon completion of a term.
§ 202-3. Report of transactions.
The Shade Tree Commission shall annually report in full to the Mayor and
Council its transactions.
§ 202-4. Regulations; approval required.
The Shade Tree Commission may make, publish and enforce regulations
for the care and protection of the shade trees of the Borough. No such
regulation shall be in force until it has been approved and ordained by
the Borough Council and published at least twice in newspapers of general
circulation in the Borough.
§ 202-5. Custody of shade trees.
The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the shade trees
in and upon the highways of the Borough and of trees whose branches
extend over and above such highways or whose continued existence shall be
a menace to the using of such highways and is authorized to plant, remove,
maintain and protect shade trees on said highways and on all property of
the Borough of Columbia.
§ 202-6. Employment of assistants.
The Commission may, with the approval of the Borough Council, employ
and pay such necessary assistants as may be required to perform the duties
devolving upon it.
188. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 2721 et seq.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-7
1:709
§ 202-7. Notice of planting, transplanting or removal of trees.
Whenever said Commission proposes to plant or transplant any shade tree
or remove shade trees on any highways, which may be a menace to the
users of such highways, notice of the time and place of the meeting at
which such work is to be considered shall be given once a week for two
weeks immediately preceding the meeting in a newspaper having general
circulation in the Borough, which notice shall specify, in detail, the
highways or portions thereof upon which the work is to be done; or by
personal service of 10 days' written notice thereof to the owner or owners;
or by leaving 10 days' written notice thereof at the place of business of
the owner; or, if the owner is not found in Columbia, Pennsylvania, then
by sending 10 days' written notice thereof by the United States mail, with
the return address thereon, to the last known address of said owner; or by
posting a copy of said written notice thereon in a conspicuous place on the
property affected.
§ 202-8. Property owner responsible for costs. [Amended 5-12-2014
by Ord. No. 849]
The cost of planting, transplanting or removing any shade trees in the
highways or which are a menace to the public use of such highways, the
construction of guards, curbing or grading for the protection thereof and
the replacement of any pavement or sidewalk necessarily disturbed shall be
paid by the owner of the real estate on whose property the work is done,
which cost as to each freeholder shall be ascertained by the Commission
and certified to the Borough Council and to the Borough Treasurer, unless
arrangements are made by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 202-9. Notice of assessment; lien.
Upon the filing of the certificate of cost with the Council, the Borough
Clerk shall cause 30 days' written notice to be given by mail to the person
or persons against whose property an assessment has been made, stating
the amount of the assessment and the time and place of payment and
accompanied by a copy of the certificate. Said cost so certified shall be a
lien from the time of filing of the certificate with the Council, and if not paid
within 30 days from the date of notice, a claim may be filed and collected by
the Borough Solicitor in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected.
§ 202-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article or any regulations adopted in pursuance of this
article shall, upon conviction, be required to pay a penalty as specified in
the Shade Tree Regulations.189
189. Editor's Note: See Art. II, § 202-14 of this chapter.
§ 202-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 202-11
1:710
§ 202-11. Additional powers and duties.
The Commission shall have other powers and duties as are set forth in the
Borough Code.
§ 202-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-11
1:711

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 202-12. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where the
context already indicates a different meaning:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Columbia.
PERMIT — Any permit in writing as issued by the Secretary of the Shade
Tree Commission.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any street, sidewalk or alley open to the public.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough
of Columbia.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant on any public
highway in the Borough of Columbia or that part of any tree, shrub or other
woody plant which extends within the lines of any public highway.
§ 202-13. Control of trees to be exclusive.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the exclusive custody and control
of the shade trees on and along the streets and highways of the Borough
and may plant, remove, maintain and protect shade trees along the public
highways of the Borough. The Commission may require the planting or
replanting of shade trees along the public highways of the Borough. The
kind of trees and alignment and locating of the trees shall be determined by
the Commission but shall not prevent necessary and reasonable use of the
streets, sidewalks, or abutting property or the conduct of business.
§ 202-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-10-1986 by Ord.
No. 598; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 699]
Violators of Article I, Shade Tree Commission, of this chapter and any
regulations adopted in pursuance thereof shall be required to pay a penalty
of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days.
§ 202-15. Application for permit. [Amended 8-9-2004 by Ord. No.
739]
The application for any permit required hereunder shall be made in writing
to the Commission before a property owner may plant, remove or alter any
shade tree along any public highway. It shall specify the particular kind of
work or operation the applicant desires to perform thereunder and shall
state the exact location and the species of trees to be affected. It shall be
§ 202-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-15
1:713
the duty of the Secretary to submit every such application promptly to the
Commission for approval or disapproval. The Commission shall act upon
such application within 45 days from the date the application is submitted
to the Commission. The permit shall be effective for such length of time
as the Commission shall in each case determine, and such time shall be
indicated on the permit. Any such permit may be revoked at any time upon
proof satisfactory to the Commission that any of the terms or conditions of
the permit have been violated.
§ 202-16. Permit required; bond.
§ 202-17. Replacement of trees.
As a condition to any permit to remove any shade tree or existing tree
stump, the Shade Tree Commission may require that the applicant plant, at
his expense, another tree in the place of the one removed. The Shade Tree
Commission, in such case, shall direct the type, size and location of the tree
to be planted and the time within which the work shall be done.
§ 202-18. Costs for damage or destruction to trees.
In the event of a shade tree being damaged, the Shade Tree Commission
may make a charge for repairs to the tree plus the devaluation of the tree
against the person causing the damage to said tree. In the event of a shade
tree being destroyed by any person, the Shade Tree Commission may make
A. Permit to be obtained; exception.
(1) No person shall plant, cut down or remove any shade trees under
the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission or fasten any sign,
wire, rope or other materials to, around or through any such shade
tree or deposit, place, store or maintain any stone, brick, sand,
concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of
water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any such shade tree, unless he
shall first obtain a permit from the Shade Tree Commission so to
do.
(2) Exception. Newly planted trees may be guyed to provide stability
during the first growing season.
B. No person shall move any building or other object on or over any public
street or highway within the Borough in such a manner as to damage or
injure any shade tree or shrub in such street or highway, unless he first
obtains a permit from the Shade Tree Commission so to do.
C. As a condition to any permit to move any building or object on or over
any public street or highway, the Shade Tree Commission may require
the applicant to furnish bond in the amount sufficient to cover any
damage or injury to any shade tree or shrubs in such street, and it may
direct the route of any such moving so as to minimize damage or injury
to shade trees and shrubs.
§ 202-15 COLUMBIA CODE § 202-18
1:714
a charge for the appraised value of the tree, plus the cost of removal and
replacement thereof, against the person causing the destruction of said
tree.
§ 202-19. Trees damaged by storms. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 849]
In the event that any shade tree or trees are felled by storm or other
casualty, said trees, branches or stumps thereof shall be removed from the
cartway by the Borough without charge. Replacement of such trees will be
made at the discretion of the Shade Tree Commission and at the expense
of the property owner or Shade Tree Commission, as determined by the
Commission.
§ 202-20. Injury to trees prohibited.
No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any shade tree or set
fire or permit any fire to burn where such a fire or the heat thereof will
injure any shade tree, and no person shall knowingly permit any leak to
exist in any gas or steam pipe or main without the root zone of any such
shade tree or permit any toxic chemical, either solid or liquid, to seep, drain
or be emptied on or about any such shade tree.
§ 202-21. Work which interrupts utility services.
Whenever the Shade Tree Commission determines it to be necessary to
prune, remove or to do other maintenance work to any shade tree which
may temporarily interrupt electric or other utility services, the property
owner affected by the curtailment of utilities shall be given written notice of
such work. Utilities shall also be given written notice of such work and will
be allowed 24 hours in which to comply with said notice.
§ 202-22. Trimming of trees. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 849]
The owner of the property shall trim branches from a shade tree
overhanging the streets and highways of the Borough so that they will not
obstruct the light from any streetlight and so that there shall be a clear
height of 12 feet above the surface of the street and 12 feet over the
sidewalk. If any property owner shall neglect or refuse to trim any shade
tree as required by this section, upon notice in writing by the Commission,
within the time limits specified in such notice, the Commission may cause
such trimming to be done at the expense of the owner or as determined by
the Shade Tree Commission. The practice of topping of trees is prohibited
without the consent of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 202-23. Approval of utility installations.
All permits issued for the installation of public utility facilities shall have
prior approval of the Commission.
§ 202-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-24
1:715
§ 202-24. Types of trees restricted. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord. No.
849]
The Commission shall plant or permit to be planted trees of not less than
1 1/2 inches in diameter, 72 inches above the ground, symmetrical in shape,
with a clean trunk and straight without branches for a distance of six
feet from the ground. The planting of any species other than those of
the approved list on file in the Borough office is prohibited. In addition,
overhead wires and underground utilities will determine the placement of a
tree and its maximum height at maturity.
§ 202-25. Spacing of trees. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 849]
The spacing between newly planted shade trees shall not be less than
30 feet. No shade tree shall be planted less than 30 feet from a curb
intersection, or less than 15 feet from a fire hydrant, sewer inlet, light
standard or utility pole unless a waiver is granted by the Commission.
§ 202-26. Removal of dangerous or diseased trees.
When any tree along the streets or highways of the Borough or growing
on private property but overhanging any street or highway, in the opinion
of the Commission, endangers the life, health, safety or property of the
public or is afflicted by any contagious disease or insect infestation, it shall
be within the discretion of the Commission to determine what remedy is
necessary and whether or not such tree must be removed. The owner of
the property shall be notified in writing of the existence of the danger,
disease or insect infestation and shall be given reasonable time for removal
of the same at the expense of the owner, except when trees are infected
with Dutch Elm disease. In such case, no notice is necessary, and the
Borough shall immediately take steps to remove such trees at the property
owner's expense. If a dangerous, diseased or infested tree is not removed or
corrected within the allotted time by the property owner, the Commission
shall cause the matter to be corrected or the tree removed, and the costs
thereof shall be assessed to the owner of the property.
§ 202-27. Distance of trees from sidewalk. [Amended 5-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 849]
An open space of at least 60 inches by 36 inches must be allowed for the
planting of a shade tree. When a tree has outgrown this space or when a
sidewalk has been laid without allowing for such space, the sidewalk must
be repaired at the expense of the property owner so that at least 12 inches
will be left between the base of the tree and the edge of the pavement.
§ 202-28. Curbs to be installed prior to planting.
No shade tree shall be planted on any street or highway of the Borough
where curbs have not been constructed, unless approved by the
Commission. The Commission will then specify the species of tree and plant
location.
§ 202-24 COLUMBIA CODE § 202-29
1:716
§ 202-29. Cooperation with other departments.
There shall be close cooperation between the Commission and other
Borough departments when their work affects shade trees on or along the
streets and highways of the Borough. The Commission shall approve all
building permits that may affect shade trees of the Borough. All sewer,
lighting and paving plans shall be cleared with the Commission.
§ 202-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-29
1:717
Chapter 204
TRUCKED WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 126. Solid waste — See Ch. 181.
§ 204-1. Purposes, policies and objectives.
The purposes of this chapter are:
§ 204-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Trucked Waste
Ordinance" of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIOSOLIDS/SLUDGE — Treated solids generated from secondary treatment
processes at a wastewater treatment facility.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
CATEGORICALLY DENIED WASTES — Grease trap and grease interceptor
wastes, flammable, explosive or corrosive wastes, metal-laden wastewaters
and sludges, radioactive wastes, animal waste (manure), and other wastes
determined by the Waste Water Manager as being detrimental to the
treatment plant, to the operation of the sewer system, or to the health,
safety and welfare of the employees of the Borough or the Borough of
Columbia Sewer Authority.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
LIQUID WASTE — Any waste that is nontoxic to the biological treatment
process at the treatment plant, is biodegradable and is determine to have
no adverse affect on the operation of the treatment plant and which is
not directly discharged into the sewer system of the Borough of Columbia,
A. To provide a program for the environmentally sound and cost-effective
disposal of trucked waste to the treatment plant.
B. To provide an alternative opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewater and sludge/biosolids.
C. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment plant which
would interfere with its operation or contaminate the resulting sludge/
biosolids.
§ 202-29 COLUMBIA CODE § 204-3
1:718
including waste from residential holding tanks, residential septic tanks and
commercial holdings/septic tanks used for nonprocessed wastewater.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — Any policies and procedures promulgated
by the Waste Water Manager for the enforcement and application of the
provisions of this chapter.
TREATMENT PLANT — The sewage treatment plant of the Borough.
TRUCKED WASTE — Any liquid waste brought to the treatment plant
by truck including all liquid waste and such other wastes that may be
considered by the Waste Water Manager or his designee based on sourcespecific
information and laboratory analysis, including but not limited to
industrial and commercial wastewaters of nontoxic and biodegradable,
municipal and wastewater sludge/biosolids if they are from biological
treatment processes, nontoxic and meet all United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEPA) Part 503 and Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PaDEP) "Agricultural Use Guidelines, and
Special Wastes," including landfill, leachates, slurries, condensates, wash
waters, portable toilet water and nontoxic liquid wastes.
WASTE WATER MANAGER — Shall be that person designated by the
Borough Manager as the Waste Water Manager of the Treatment Plant.
§ 204-4. Trucked waste permit required.
No trucked waste shall be admitted to the treatment plant from a truck
or trucking company that has not obtained a trucked waste permit in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 204-5. Trucked waste permit.
A. All truckers or trucking companies delivering trucked waste to the
treatment plant must have obtained a trucked waste permit ("permit"
or "permits") issued by the Borough from the Waste Water Manager.
B. In order to obtain a trucked waste permit, the hauling firm, trucking
company or trucker must submit a completed trucked waste hauler's
permit application along with any fee established by resolution of
Council from time to time to the Waste Water Manager.
C. Application.
(1) The Waste Water Manager is authorized to draft and promulgate an
application for waste hauler permits which shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:
(a) Company name and address;
(b) Company contact information;
(c) Name and title of authorized representative;
§ 204-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-5
1:719
(d) Vehicle make, model year, license plate number, gross vehicle
weight, tank volume, waste management permit license
number;
(e) A description of the type of trucked waste to be delivered to the
treatment plant;
(f) Proof of insurance in compliance with § 204-9 hereof;
(g) A certification statement certifying all the information is true
and correct and certifying that the company and all of its
employees shall comply fully with all of the terms and
conditions of this chapter and with any policies and
procedures; and
(h) A properly executed and authorized signature of an authorized
representative of the company.
(2) Should the hauling company applying for a trucked waste permit be
separate from the producer of the trucked waste, the hauling
company shall also produce such information as required by the
Waste Water Manager, including but not limited to the producer's
DEP license number, a signed certificate from the producer of the
trucked waste that they are current and compliant with all
Department of Environmental Protection regulations and a
certification from the producer that they will provide to the Waste
Water Manager the following information: compliance with the
Waste Transportation Safety Act (Act 90)190 regarding the PaDEP
Municipal and Residual Waste Transportation and Safety program.
D. A trucked waste permit must be obtained by each hauling firm, trucking
company or trucker before discharging any trucked waste to the
treatment plant. Permits shall be issued to those persons, firms or
companies meeting all of the following conditions:
(1) Have applied for a permit by fully completing and submitting a
permit application and paying the nonrefundable fee as established
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council;
(2) Satisfying all permit application requirements; and
(3) In the instance of renewals, provide proof of having complied with
all conditions and requirements of their previously issued permit.
E. The trucked waste permit must be renewed on an annual basis by
submission of a renewal application in the form required by the Waste
Water Manager and payment of a nonrefundable renewal fee as
established from time to time by resolution of Council. The Waste Water
Manager may deny renewal of a permit for any trucker, trucking
190. Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 204-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 204-5
1:720
§ 204-6. Policies and procedures.
The Waste Water Manager be and hereby is authorized and directed to
promulgate policies and procedures relating to the operation, application
and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited
to provisions for the following:
§ 204-7. Right to reject trucked waste.
The Waste Water Manager may reject any load of trucked waste and
dischargers may be required to cease discharging operations at any time.
The right to reject is in the sole and absolute discretion of the Waste Water
Manager. The treatment plant is limited by the requirements on loading and
company or hauling firm which has failed to comply with the terms of
this chapter or the policies and procedures.
A. Hours of operation at the treatment plant during which trucked waste
will be accepted.
B. Procedures and requirements for the discharge of trucked waste to the
treatment plant, including, without limitation, provisions relating to
type and amount of hose to be used, care to be taken in discharge, clean
up that may be required, and requirements that employees at the
treatment plant visually inspect trucked waste, and visually witness the
discharge of trucked waste into the treatment plant.
C. The right to reject:
(1) Any categorically denied waste;
(2) The discharge of any material which would damage or cause
obstruction of or to the treatment plant;
(3) The discharge of any materials which are flammable, explosive,
corrosive; or
(4) Sand, grit, grease and oil.
D. Requirements for the types of trucks used to haul trucked waste to the
treatment plant.
E. Requirements regarding the production and maintenance of the permit
issued hereunder.
F. Requirements to produce prior to discharge of trucked waste into the
treatment plant information concerning waste pickup points, volumes,
and waste characteristics.
G. Any and all other items deemed appropriate by the Waste Water
Manager to properly implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to effectively, safely and efficiently operate the treatment
plant.
§ 204-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-7
1:721
flow from by its NPDES permit and trucked waste may be rejected at any
time if in the opinion the acceptance of such waste would violate either, and/
or if the acceptance of trucked waste would pose a threat of any kind to
the treatment plant or the employees of the Borough or Columbia Municipal
Authority working at the treatment plant, and/or if the acceptance of such
trucked waste may be potentially harmful to the treatment process or for
any other similar reason determined in the sole and absolute discretion of
the Waste Water Manager.
§ 204-8. Right to inspect trucked waste.
§ 204-9. Insurance.
All truckers or trucking companies delivering trucked waste to the
treatment plant shall purchase at its own expense and maintain for the
duration of this permit such insurance as will protect it and/or the Borough
from claims set forth below which may arise out of the waste hauler's
operation under the permit. Such insurance shall be issued by a company or
companies licensed to do business in the State of Pennsylvania, and rated
at least A-, and provide coverage for:
A. Upon request, the Waste Water Manager or his or her designee shall be
permitted to immediately sample any trucked waste being delivered to
the treatment plant.
B. Upon conclusion of any testing of trucked waste samples determining
that the trucked waste includes categorically denied wastes or other
waste which is not permitted to be discharged to the treatment plant,
the Waste Water Manager may surcharge the trucking company in such
amounts as approved by Council from time to time by resolution.
Further, should any individual or entity holding a trucked waste permit
discharge categorically denied waste or other wastes which are
prohibited from being discharged into the treatment plant, the Waste
Water Manager may suspend or terminate their trucked waste permit.
A. Claims under worker's compensation, disability benefit and other
similar employee benefit acts;
B. Claims for damages because of bodily injury, occupational sickness or
disease, or death of any person other than his employees;
C. Claims for damages other than to the work itself because of an injury to
or destruction of tangible property including loss of use resulting
therefrom; and
D. Claims for damages because of bodily injury or death of any person or
property damage arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of
any motor vehicle. The Borough shall be named as an additional insured
on all general and automobile liability insurance policies. Said liability
policies shall contain a clause stating that they shall be primary
insurance with respect to waste hauler's negligence, notwithstanding
§ 204-7 COLUMBIA CODE § 204-9
1:722
§ 204-10. Appeals.
§ 204-11. Fees and charges.
All fees and charges as referenced in this chapter may be established from
time to time by resolution of Council.
§ 204-12. Violations and penalties.
§ 204-13. Recovery of fines, penalties and costs.
any insurance maintained by the Borough. Liability insurance shall be
on a comprehensive form or on a general form and shall be written on
an occurrence basis (policy shall not be a claims-made basis) and in the
amount of $2,000,000.
A. Any person or entity which feels aggrieved by the actions of the Waste
Water Manager, whether that be for the denial, suspension or
revocation of a permit, failure to renew a permit, issuance of a
surcharge relating to the discharge of categorically denied waste or
other prohibited waste into the treatment plant, or other similar matter
may appeal the same to the Borough of Columbia Municipal Authority
Board (the "Board") by filing a written appeal with the Waste Water
Manager and paying any appeal fee established by resolution of Council
from time to time.
B. Any and all such appeals shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board scheduled not less than two weeks from the date
of filing of the appeal.
C. The determination of the Board shall be final.
D. Any appeals from the Board's decision shall be handled in accordance
with the Local Agency Law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.191
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or any
other entity who or which has violated any provisions of this chapter
shall come upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more
than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
C. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may pursue any other
equitable remedies available to it at law, including those for injunctive
relief.
191. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
§ 204-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-13
1:723
Chapter 207
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 86. Noise — See Ch. 149.
A. Borough shall be entitled to recover any and all fines, penalties and
costs which it incurs in enforcing this action against any person, entity,
corporation or limited liability company.
B. The Borough shall be entitled to recover any and all fines, penalties and
costs as set forth in Section 3321 of the Borough Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.192
192. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3321.
§ 204-13 COLUMBIA CODE § 204-13
1:724
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania193 as now in force or as
hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include
the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 207-2. Permanent regulations to be enacted as ordinances.
[Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 748]
Except as otherwise set forth in Chapter 207 of the Code of the Borough of
Columbia, Pennsylvania, all traffic and parking regulations of a permanent
nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as
amendments to ordinances of the Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-3. Special authority of Mayor.
The Mayor may for special temporary purposes restrict or prohibit all
traffic or parking on particular highways or parts thereof where otherwise
it would be permitted, or may permit traffic and parking on particular
highways or parts thereof where otherwise it would not be permitted. Such
temporary special provisions shall include time allowed for painting of lines,
parades, exhibitions, demonstrations, celebrations and other similar uses,
and like permission or prohibition may be imposed or granted where special
temporary uses are being made in the premises immediately adjoining the
highway, wherein unusual usages of the highway may be deemed necessary.
No traffic shall interfere with the provisions of this section. Such temporary
restrictions and prohibitions shall be enforced by the Mayor and the police
of the Borough in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person
who shall operate a vehicle in violation of any such restriction or prohibition
shall be liable to the penalty set forth in the law for such violation and, in
case of any violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law, to
a penalty as set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-4. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.
193. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:725
§ 207-5. Enforcement. [Added 11-18-1964 by Ord. No. 384]
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the Mayor,
the Chief of Police and patrolmen.
§ 207-6. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or
prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to
punish any offense under the authority of any of these repealed ordinances
and regulations.
§ 207-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-6
1:726
ARTICLE II
Parking
[Adopted 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 556 (Ch. 87, Art. II, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-7. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.194
Whenever a space shall be marked off on any street or alley for the parking
of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within
the lines bounding such space.
§ 207-8. Bus stops.
The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and mark by proper signs bus stops, and no vehicle
other than a bus engaged in loading, unloading or awaiting passengers shall
be parked there at any time.
§ 207-9. Taxicab loading areas.
The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and mark by proper signs taxicab loading areas, and no
vehicle other than a taxicab shall be parked there at any time.
§ 207-10. Loading and unloading zones.
The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and mark by proper signs loading and unloading zones.
Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday
inclusive, no vehicle shall be parked in any such zone, the purpose of
this section being to reserve such zones for vehicles being loaded and/or
unloaded.
§ 207-11. Parking zones for benefit of handicapped. [Amended
1-27-2009 by Ord. No. 797]
Except as otherwise set forth in Article XVI of this chapter, the Public Safety
Committee of the Borough of Columbia is hereby authorized to establish,
designate and mark, by proper signs, parking zones or parking places for
the exclusive use by and for the benefit of the handicapped, and no vehicle,
other than a vehicle operated by or for the benefit of a handicapped person
shall be parked there at any time.
§ 207-12. Parking zones at the River Park. [Added 5-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 719]
The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and mark by proper signs parking zones or parking
194. Editor's Note: Original § 87-9, Parking without lights authorized, which immediately
preceded this section, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 207-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-12
1:727
places for the exclusive use by vehicles with trailers only at the parking
areas designated for the River Park in the Borough of Columbia as said
property is described in an agreement by and between the Borough of
Columbia and the Pennsylvania Fish Commission dated September 9, 1968,
and no vehicle, other than a vehicle with a trailer, shall at any time be
parked at such spaces so designated.
§ 207-13. Parallel parking; exceptions.
No vehicle, including boat trailers, camp trailers and any like devices, shall
be parked or stand except with its right wheels to the curb and with both
the right front and right rear wheels thereof within 10 inches of the curb,
provided that, when necessary to permit the proper loading or unloading of
a commercial vehicle, permission may be granted by the Chief of Police to
either the owner or tenant of the real property or the owner of the vehicle
to park such vehicle at an angle for such purpose, provided further that on
one-way streets vehicles may be parked with either the right or left side
thereof to the curb when headed in the legal direction, unless parking on
such side is otherwise prohibited.
§ 207-14. Proximity to fireplugs, crosswalks and traffic control
signals. [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 679]
No vehicle, including boat trailers, camp trailers and any like devices, shall
be parked within a distance of 15 feet of any fireplug or fire hydrant, within
a distance of 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or within a distance
of 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
§ 207-15. Blocking garage or driveway.
No vehicle, including boat trailers, camp trailers and any like devices, shall
be parked at any time in front of or opposite any public or private garage
or driveway or adjacent to the curb at the entrance to a public or private
driveway.
§ 207-16. Continuous parking restricted; repairs.
§ 207-17. Parking in violation of notice or signs. [Amended
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 748; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 831]
A. No vehicle, including boat trailers, camp trailers and any like devices,
shall be allowed to remain parked on any Borough highway or street for
a period longer than 48 consecutive hours. Moreover, when such a
vehicle is moved, it shall be moved no less a distance than twice its own
length.
B. Except for emergency repairs which are necessitated to prevent the
obstruction of traffic or such minor repairs as tire changes and the like,
it shall be unlawful to repair any vehicle on any Borough highway or
street.
§ 207-12 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-17
1:728
§ 207-18. Enforcement.
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the Mayor,
the Chief of Police and members of the Police Department of Columbia
Borough.
§ 207-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
608; 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 679; 5-12-2001 by Ord. No. 719]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article, being
Article II of Chapter 207 of the Code of Columbia Borough, or aiding or
abetting or assisting in the violation of said provisions shall, upon conviction
before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, to be collected as fines and penalties are by
law collectible. Whenever an alleged violator of the parking regulations set
forth in Article II of Chapter 207 of the Code of Columbia Borough has
not paid the prescribed fine within seven days after a parking ticket has
been issued, such person shall pay an additional fine as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for processing a citation in addition to the costs
of such citation before any District Justice. If said fine is not paid within
A. The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and mark by proper signs restrictions on parking in
various areas during stated hours (e.g., spaces restricting parking for
patrons of the public library only during library hours). In the instance
that such restrictions are permanent rather than temporary, such
restrictions must be approved in the form of an ordinance by Borough
Council. Moreover, should Borough Council wish to remove or rescind
any such permanent restriction on parking under this § 207-17, it shall
do so in the form of an ordinance.
B. When signs are placed giving legal notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle in violation of the regulations promulgated by the Public
Safety Committee of the Borough and/or Borough Council which are
then in full force and effect.
C. No vehicle, including boat trailers, camp trailers, and any like devices,
shall be parked in violation of any temporary or permanent official sign
or signs prohibiting parking.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in any of the
ordinances of the Borough of Columbia, upon placement of signs, no
parking shall be allowed on Market Street from Locust Street to Sadie
Lane, except Borough Police vehicles on west side, and from Avenue I to
Sadie Lane, and on or around the Columbia Historic Market House. Any
vendors doing business in the Columbia Historic Market House may use
the area along Avenue I at the Columbia Historic Market House for
loading and unloading only; however, refrigerated trucks in service are
permitted to park in this loading and unloading zone the full day.
Borough Police vehicles will be permitted to park on the north side of
Sadie Lane.
§ 207-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-19
1:729
seven days, said fine shall be collected as fines and penalties are by law
collectible by suit before any District Justice.
§ 207-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-19
1:730
ARTICLE III
Parking Meters
[Adopted 1-12-1953 by Ord. No. 249 (Ch. 87, Art. III, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-20. Restricted parking in parking meter zones; exceptions.
[Amended 11-9-1964 by Ord. No. 383; 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 580;
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 831]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor or other
vehicle to park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. for more than two hours at any time on the following described
parts of streets in the Borough of Columbia, which are hereby
established as parking meter zones, except such spaces as are or shall
be designated as cab stands, bus stops, entrances to hotels, theaters,
doctors' offices, fireplugs and other places where no parking is allowed;
provided, however that the foregoing restrictions shall not apply to
parking on Sundays or on any of the following legal holidays: New
Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, Presidents' Day, Memorial
Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day.
(1) The east and west sides of Third Street between Walnut Street and
Cherry Street.
(2) The east and west sides of Fourth Street between Walnut Street
and Cherry Street.
(3) The north and south sides of Locust Street between Second Street
and Fifth Street.
(4) The south side of Walnut Street between Fourth Street and Fifth
Street.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or
other vehicle to park such vehicle between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or
Saturday for more than two hours at any time on the Borough municipal
parking lot located adjacent to the Borough Municipal Building and the
Columbia Historic Market House, which is hereby established as a
parking meter zone; provided, however, that the foregoing restrictions
shall not apply to parking on Sundays or on any of the following legal
holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, Presidents'
Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or
other vehicle to park such vehicle in the municipal parking lots on
South Third Street and Avenue H at Short Avenue between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any Monday through Friday without having
an authorized parking permit properly issued by the Borough of
§ 207-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-20
1:731
§ 207-21. Parking meters. [Amended 5-10-1954 by Ord. No. 257;
2-8-1971 by Ord. No. 476; 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 580]
§ 207-22. Operation of parking meters. [Amended 10-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 580]
In order that the time during which a vehicle is parked on the portion
of the streets or in the municipal parking lot described in § 207-20 above
may be properly and conveniently computed, the owner or operator of a
vehicle entering such parking space during the time of limited parking
shall immediately deposit such coins as are required, but not to exceed
the parking limit as set forth in § 207-20, in the parking meter adjacent
to such parking space if such parking meter shall indicate by a proper
signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and failure to do so shall
constitute a violation of this article. Upon the deposit of such required coins
in such meter, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
during the lawful hours as set forth in § 207-20. If such vehicle shall remain
in any such parking space for such a length of time that the meter shall
indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired, such
vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this article.
Columbia in accordance with this Chapter 207 of the Code of the
Borough of Columbia.
A. Where parking meter zones have been designated for street parking,
parking meters shall be erected and maintained on the sidewalk
adjacent to such parking spaces and as close to the curbline as
practical.
B. In the municipal parking lot located at Cherry Street and Avenue I,
parking meters shall be erected and maintained at the front of
designated parking spaces.
C. All parking meters shall be maintained in good and workable condition
and shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the
deposit therein of coins as hereinafter designated for a period not to
exceed the hours set forth in § 207-20 and, at the expiration of such
time, to indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking period has
expired.195
D. In all designated parking meter zones, parking meters shall be erected
and maintained which shall be so set as to display a signal of legal
parking upon the deposit therein of coins of the United States in
increments and amounts set by resolution of Borough Council, for a
period not to exceed the hours set forth in § 207-20. [Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
195. Editor's Note: Original § 87-24D, E and F, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided parking meter fees, were repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 207-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-23
1:732
§ 207-23. Extension of parking time prohibited. [Amended
5-10-1954 by Ord. No. 257; 10-10-1983 by Ord. No. 580]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit
or cause to be deposited in a parking meter such coins as will increase or
extend the parking times of any parking beyond the applicable period set
forth in § 207-20.
§ 207-24. Unlawful parking in meter zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in his name to be parked in the parking-meter zone
herein designated or hereafter designated in violation of the provisions of
this article.
§ 207-25. Unlawful placement of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than parallel with the curbline
and to park any vehicle across any line or marking designating a parking
space or to park said vehicle any way that same shall not be wholly within a
parking space, as designated by said lines or markings, and in such manner
that the hood of such vehicle shall not be alongside of or next to such
parking meter adjacent to such parking space.
§ 207-26. Substitutes for coins prohibited. [Amended 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 726]
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
a slug, device or other substitute for any coins of the United States as
provided for herein.
§ 207-27. Disposition of payments. [Amended 10-10-1983 by Ord.
No. 580; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
The United States coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as
provided in this article, are hereby levied and assessed as fees to cover
the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance,
control and use of parking spaces; regulation of the parking vehicles; street
cleaning and maintenance in the parking meter zone created hereby; and
for the maintenance of and traffic regulation on any or all streets in said
Borough.
§ 207-28. Abuse of meters unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to deface, tamper with, damage, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
terms of this article.
§ 207-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1964 by Ord. No.
378; 8-12-1968 by Ord. No. 418; 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 556; 3-9-1987
§ 207-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-29
1:733
by Ord. No. 603; 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 607A; 6-14-1999 by Ord. No.
679]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of Article III of
Chapter 207 of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania, or
aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of said provisions shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine as set forth
in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for each offense, to be collected as fines
and penalties are by law collectable. Whenever an alleged violator of the
parking regulations set forth in Article III of Chapter 207 of the Code of the
Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania, has not paid the prescribed fine within
seven days after a parking ticket has been issued, such person shall pay an
additional fine as set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for processing
a citation in addition to the costs of such citation before any District Justice.
If said fine is not paid within seven days, said fine shall be collected as fines
and penalties are by law collectable by suit before any District Justice.
§ 207-30. Parking permits. [Amended 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 679;
3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 831]
§ 207-31. Redesignation of meter zones.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, by a vote of the majority of its
members, designate additional parking-meter zones or it may discontinue
the use of any zone as a parking-meter zone.
A. Contractor parking permit. A parking permit to be known as a
"Contractors' Parking Permit" can be obtained by any contractor who is
working in the immediate area and must park his vehicle on the streets
designated in § 207-20 above by making an application at the police
department of the Borough of Columbia and paying the sum as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Borough Council, by resolution adopted from time to time, may
establish other permits and permitting processes and may adopt rules
and regulations for the use of the Borough parking lots and for the
obtaining of permits for parking from the Borough of Columbia,
including the establishment of permits for the Borough of Columbia's
unmetered parking lots at South Third Street, Avenue H and Short
Avenue, and spaces on Market Street from Avenue I to Cherry Street;
which rules and regulations may include the imposition of a fee for
obtaining such a permit, establishing who may obtain such permit, and
establishing permit parking hours.
§ 207-29 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-31
1:734
ARTICLE IV
Unlicensed and Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 5-13-1957 by Ord. No. 311 (Ch. 87, Art. IV, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-32. Parking of unlicensed or abandoned vehicles prohibited.
Unlicensed vehicles or abandoned vehicles are prohibited from parking on
any street or avenue in the Borough of Columbia for any period longer than
48 hours.
§ 207-33. Violations and penalties.
The police of the Borough of Columbia are authorized to arrest upon view
and without warrant any person or persons violating this article, and the
person or persons so violating shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-34. Disposition of fines.
All fines and penalties collected under this article shall be paid to the
Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-35. Authority of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on any of the streets,
highways or public property of the Borough in violation of the provisions of
this article or the provisions of law or any ordinance of the Borough.
§ 207-36. Designation of storage garages.
The Chief of Police shall designate garages for the storage of such
impounded vehicles.
§ 207-37. Storage garage bonds.
Every such approved storage garage shall post a bond in the amount
of $2,000, to be filed with the Borough Secretary/Treasurer, for the
indemnifying of the owner of such impounded vehicle against the loss
thereof or injury or damage thereto while in the custody of said garage.
§ 207-38. Towing and storage charges.
The Chief of Police shall fix and establish the charges that shall be made for
the towing and storage of any vehicle removed and impounded under the
authority of this article.
§ 207-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-39
1:735
§ 207-39. Impoundment notices.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority of
this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall
be sent by registered mail by the Chief of Police to the owner of record of
such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which said vehicle
was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and the garage in
which it shall have been impounded.
§ 207-40. Payments irrecoverable.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest, be
final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the
money so paid.
§ 207-41. Hearings.
In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a District Justice within the Borough of Columbia, in which case such
defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice as is
provided by the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses and shall
have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 207-42. Records of impounded vehicles.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of vehicles impounded and shall be
able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners
thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 207-43. Towing and storage charges independent of fines.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the
owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the
violation of this article or any law or other ordinance on account of which
said vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 207-44. Removal by owner prior to impoundment.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 207-45. Enforcement.
It shall be the duties of the Mayor, Chief of Police and patrolmen to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 207-39 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-45
1:736
ARTICLE V
U-Turns
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. V, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-46. U-turns restricted; violations and penalties.
No U-turns shall be made on any two-way street in the Borough of Columbia
unless they can be made back of the intersection and at such times and
places as may be indicated by official signs. Any person who shall violate
any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-46
1:737

ARTICLE VI
Traffic Signals
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. VI, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-47. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
At all intersections where official traffic signals shall be erected by proper
authority, traffic at such intersections may be directed by such signals.196
196. Editor's Note: Original Art. VII, Play Highways, which immediately followed this article, as
adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 207-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-47
1:739

ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. VIII, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-48. One-way streets established. [Amended last 9-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 656; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
The following are hereby established as one-way streets:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Avenue H North Third North Fourth East
Avenue I Eleventh Street Twelfth Street West
Barber Street Plane Street Twelfth Street East
Bethel Street
[Amended
12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 889]
Locust Street Cherry Street South
Chestnut Street Fifth Street Sixth Street West
Commerce Street
[Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 896]
Rotary Avenue Walnut Street South
Corn Avenue Union Street Avenue N South
Fairview Avenue
[Amended
8-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 791]
Plane Street South Ninth
Street
East
Houston Street
[Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 831]
Eighth Street Tenth Street West
Lawrence Street Third Street Second Street West
Market Street
[Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 831]
Locust Street Cherry Street North
Perry Street Fourth Street Second Street West
Ramp leading from
Inter-County Bridge
onto South Second
Street on the side
toward Walnut
Street
East
§ 207-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-48
1:741
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Ramp leading from
Second Street on the
Poplar Street side to
the Inter-County
Bridge (Route 462)
South
Rotary Avenue
[Added 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 896]
Front Street Commerce
Street
East
Sadie Lane
[Amended
3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 831]
South Third
Street
Market Street East
South Eighth Street Lancaster
Avenue
Wright Street North
South Second Street Lawrence
Street
Union Street North
South Sixth Street Lancaster
Avenue
Union Street South
South Tenth Street Houston Street Mifflin Street North
South Third Street Perry Street Mill Street South
Spruce Street Eighth Street Eleventh
Street
East
Stump Avenue
[Added 8-11-2008
by Ord. No. 791]
Union Street Avenue J North
Tenth Street [Added
2-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 896]
Ironville Pike Spruce Street South
Washington Street Barber Street Lancaster
Avenue
North
§ 207-49. (Reserved)197
§ 207-50. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-14-1955 by Ord.
No. 298]
The police of the Borough of Columbia are authorized to arrest, upon view
and without warrant, any person or persons violating this article, and the
person or persons so violating shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
197. Editor's Note: Former § 207-49, Redesignation of one-way streets (providing for two-way
traffic on a portion of Barber Street), as added 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 655, was repealed
8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 791.
§ 207-48 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-51
1:742
§ 207-51. Disposition of fines. [Added 11-14-1955 by Ord. No. 298]
All fines and penalties collected under this article shall be paid to the
Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-52. Enforcement. [Added 11-14-1955 by Ord. No. 298]
It shall be the duty of the Mayor, Chief of Police and patrolmen to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 207-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-52
1:743

ARTICLE VIII
Left Turns Prohibited
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. IX, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-53. Specific intersections; violations and penalties. [Amended
3-11-1974 by Ord. No. 508]
A. Left turns shall be prohibited at the following locations:
(1) Vehicular traffic moving eastward on Chestnut Street shall be
prohibited from making a left-hand turn north onto Fifth Street.
(2) Vehicular traffic moving northwardly or southwardly on Fifth Street
shall be prohibited from making a left-hand turn onto Maple Street.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
penalty as set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-53
1:745

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. X, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-54. Maximum speed limit for streets. [Amended 11-14-1955
by Ord. No. 297; 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 705]
A maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour is hereby established upon all
streets in the Borough, except for such locations and circumstances when a
lesser speed shall be required under the provisions of the law.
§ 207-55. Maximum speed limit for avenues. [Amended 7-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 705]
A. A maximum speed limit of 10 miles per hour is hereby established upon
all avenues in the Borough, except for such locations and circumstances
when a lesser speed shall be required under the provisions of the law.
B. Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
in a summary hearing, be sentenced to pay such fines as may be
imposed pursuant to 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3362 and/or other applicable
provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code as amended from
time to time.
§ 207-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-55
1:747

ARTICLE X
Through Highways and Stop Intersections
[Adopted 11-23-1954 by Ord. No. 290 (Ch. 87, Art. XI, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-56. Through highways.
The Public Safety Committee of the Borough is hereby authorized to
establish, designate and properly indicate by the erection of stop signs at
the intersections thereof through highways, and all vehicles approaching
such highways upon an intersecting street or alley shall come to a full stop
within a reasonable distance before entering such intersection.
§ 207-57. Stop intersections. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
726]
The following are hereby established as intersections at which stop signs
are authorized to be placed by the Borough of Columbia. All vehicles
approaching any such intersection shall come to a full stop within a
reasonable distance before entering such intersection.
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
462 Bridge off ramp North South Second Street
462 Bridge on ramp South Chestnut Street
Avenue E Both North Third Street
Avenue E East North Sixth Street
Avenue F Both North Third Street
Avenue F East North Fifth Street
Avenue G Both North Ninth Street
Avenue H Both North Ninth Street
Avenue H South North Fifth Street
Avenue H West North Second Street
Avenue I East South Ninth Street
Avenue S East South Ninth Street
Bank Alley Both Locust Street
Barber Street East Lancaster Avenue
Barber Street East South Eleventh Street
Barber Street East South Twelfth Street
Barber Street [Added
8-11-2008 by Ord. No.
791]
East Tenth Street
Barber Street South Florence Street
§ 207-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-57
1:749
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
Bethel Street North Locust Street
Bethel Street North Ridge Avenue
Bethel Street South Cherry Street
Blue Lane West South Front Street
Blunston Street Both South Ninth Street
Blunston Street West South Eight Street
Bridge Street East North Second Street
Bridge Street West North Front Street
Cedar Street Both North Third Street
Central Avenue Both South Fifteenth Street
Central Avenue Both South Fourteen Street
Central Avenue Both South Thirteen Street
Central Avenue Both South Twelfth Street
Central Avenue West South Tenth Street
Cherry Street Both South Fifth Street
Cherry Street Both South Fourth Street
Cherry Street Both South Third Street
Cherry Street East South Eighth Street
Cherry Street West South Second Street
Cherry Street West South Sixth Street
Chestnut Street Both North Eleventh Street
Chestnut Street Both North Ninth Street
Chestnut Street Both North Seventh Street
Chestnut Street Both North Sixth Street
Chestnut Street North North Seventh Street
Chestnut Street South North Fifth Street
Cloverton Drive Both Kinderhook Road
Commerce Street South Walnut Street
Concord Avenue East South Sixth Street
Corn Avenue South Avenue N
Devonshire Road North Ironville Pike
Eastbound exit ramp of
Route 30
East Linden Street
Franklin Street Both Plane Street
Front Street Both Walnut Street
§ 207-57 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-57
1:750
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
Front Street North Locust Street (except right
turn)
Front Street North Locust Street (right turn
keep moving)
Front Street North Walnut Street
Front Street South Locust Street
Front Street South Walnut Street
Gard Court South Devonshire Road
Grinnell Avenue Both South Eleventh Street
Grinnell Avenue East South Twelfth Street
Hereford Drive East Pheasant Drive
Hereford Drive West Ridge Avenue
Hilmar Street North Cloverton Drive
Houston Street East South Ninth Street
Ironville Pike West North Ninth Street
Kinderhook Road South Ironville Pike
Lawrence Street East South Second Street
Lawrence Street West Front Street
Lawrence Street West Railroad tracks
Lawrence Street West South Second Street
Linden Street Both North Fifth Street
Linden Street Both North Third Street
Linden Street West North Second Street
Locust Street Both North and South Eighth
Street
Locust Street Both North and South Ninth
Street
Locust Street Both North and South Sixth
Streets
Locust Street East North Fourteenth Street
Locust Street East North and South Twelfth
Street
Locust Street West North Front Street
Locust Street West North Thirteenth Street
Manor Street Both Florence Street
Manor Street Both Plane Street
§ 207-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-57
1:751
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
Manor Street Both South Thirteenth Street
Manor Street Both South Twelfth Street
Manor Street West South Fourteenth Street
Maple Street Both North Fifth Street
Maple Street Both North Third Street
Maple Street West North Second Street
Maple Street West North Seventh Street
Maple Street West North Sixth Street
Market Alley North Avenue I
Market Alley North Locust Street
Market Alley North Sadie Lane
Mifflin Street East South Tenth Street
Mifflin Street West South Ninth Street
Mill Street Both Railroad tracks
Mill Street Both South Fourth Street
Mill Street East South Fifth Street
Mill Street West South Fifth (Right turn
keep moving)
North Eight Street Both Chestnut Street
North Eleventh Street North Ironville Pike
North Eleventh Street South Locust Street
North Fifth Street South Chestnut Street
North Fourth Street Both Chestnut Street
North Fourth Street Both Linden Street
North Fourth Street Both Maple Street
North Fourth Street
[Amended 8-11-2008
by Ord. No. 791]
Both Walnut Street
North Ninth Street North Ironville Pike
North Ninth Street (exit
of High School)
South Ironville Pike
North Second Street Both Chestnut Street
North Second Street Both Poplar Street
North Second Street Both Walnut Street
North Second Street North Cedar Street
§ 207-57 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-57
1:752
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
North Second Street South Locust Street
North Seventh Street North Maple Street
North Seventh Street South Locust Street
North Sixth Street Both Chestnut Street
North Sixth Street Both Maple Street
North Sixth Street
[Amended 8-11-2008
by Ord. No. 791]
Both Walnut Street
North Sixth Street North Poplar Street
North Sixth Street South Locust Street
North Tenth Street Both Chestnut Street
North Tenth Street North Ironville Pike
North Tenth Street South Locust Street
North Thirteenth Street Both Chestnut Street
North Thirteenth Street North Ironville Pike
North Thirteenth Street South Locust Street
North Twelfth Street Both Chestnut Street
North Twelfth Street Both Walnut Street
North Twelfth Street North Ironville Pike
North Twelfth Street South Locust Street
Norwood Road South Ironville Pike
Norwood Road West Cloverton Drive
Park Avenue East South Eleventh Street
Park Avenue East South Tenth Street
Park Avenue West South Ninth Street
Park Avenue West South Tenth Street
Perry Street West Railroad tracks
Perry Street West South Front Street
Perry Street West South Third Street
Pheasant Drive West Malleable Road
Plane Street Both Manor Street
Plane Street North Barber Street
Plane Street South South Front Street
Poplar Street Both North Fifth Street
Poplar Street Both North Fourth Street
§ 207-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-57
1:753
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
Poplar Street Both North Seventh Street
Poplar Street Both North Sixth Street
Poplar Street Both North Third Street
Poplar Street West North Second Street
Purple's Lane Both North Seventh Street
Purple's Lane West North Ninth Street
Ridge Avenue Both South Eighth Street
Ridge Avenue Both South Ninth Street
Ridge Avenue Both South Tenth Street
Ridge Avenue East Pheasant Drive
Ridge Avenue West Bethel Street
Ridge Avenue West South Eleventh Street
Shawnee Avenue North Lancaster Avenue
South Alley South Lancaster Avenue
South Eighth Street
[Added 9-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 856]
Both Locust Street
South Eighth Street North Wright Street
South Eleventh Street Both Barber Street
South Eleventh Street Both Central Avenue
South Eleventh Street North Lancaster Avenue
South Eleventh Street North Locust Street
South Eleventh Street South Lancaster Avenue
South Eleventh Street South Manor Street
South Eleventh Street South Ridge Street
South Fifth Street Both Union Street
South Fifth Street North Cherry Street
South Fifth Street South Cherry Street
South Fourteenth Street North Lancaster Avenue
South Fourteenth Street South Manor Street
South Fourth Street Both Cherry Street
South Fourth Street Both Union Street
South Ninth Street
[Added 9-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 856]
Both Locust Street
§ 207-57 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-57
1:754
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
South Ninth Street Both Manor Street
South Ninth Street
[Added 9-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 856]
Both Ridge Avenue
South Ninth Street South Lancaster Avenue
South Second Street Both Union Street
South Second Street North Cherry Street
South Second Street North Locust Street
South Second Street North Perry Street
South Second Street South Union Street
South Sixth Street Both Cherry Street
South Sixth Street Both Lancaster Avenue
South Sixth Street North Locust Street
South Sixth Street South Union Street
South Tenth Street North Barber Street
South Tenth Street North Locust Street
South Tenth Street North Mifflin Street
South Tenth Street South Manor Street
South Third Street Both Union Street
South Third Street North Cherry Street
South Third Street South Cherry Street
South Third Street South Mill Street
South Thirteenth Street Both Manor Street
South Thirteenth Street North Lancaster Avenue
South Twelfth Street Both Manor Street
South Twelfth Street North Locust Street
Spruce Street East North Eleventh Street
Spruce Street East North Ninth Street
Staman Lane East Pheasant Drive
Staman Lane West Ridge Avenue
Stump Avenue [Added
8-11-2008 by Ord. No.
791]
North Avenue J
Tann Avenue North Lancaster Avenue
Union Street Both South Fifth Street
§ 207-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-57
1:755
Street
Direction of
Travel
Intersecting
Street
Union Street Both South Fourth Street
Union Street Both South Third Street
Union Street East Lancaster Avenue
Union Street West Railroad tracks
Union Street West South Front Street
Walnut Street Both North Eight Street
Walnut Street Both North Eleventh Street
Walnut Street Both North Fifth Street
Walnut Street Both North Fourth Street
Walnut Street Both North Ninth Street
Walnut Street Both North Seventh Street
Walnut Street Both North Sixth Street
Walnut Street Both North Tenth Street
Walnut Street Both North Third Street
Walnut Street West North Front Street
Washington Street North Lancaster Avenue
Westbound exit ramp of
Route 30
West North Third Street (Right
turn yield)
Wright Street Both South Ninth Street
§ 207-57 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-57
1:756
ARTICLE XI
Truck Traffic
[Adopted 5-14-1956 by Ord. No. 302 (Ch. 87, Art. XII, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-58. Restriction of trucks on Borough streets. [Added
3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 787198]
§ 207-59. (Reserved)199
§ 207-60. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-8-1984 by Ord. No.
588]
The police of the Borough of Columbia are authorized to arrest upon view
and without warrant any person or persons violating this article, and the
person or persons so violating shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
A. All truck traffic except for local delivery, is hereby prohibited on all
Borough of Columbia owned streets, public thoroughfares and rights-ofways.
B. The restrictions set forth above shall not apply to state-owned streets
and highways such as Routes 462 and 441.
C. The restrictions set forth above shall not apply to the following:
(1) Trucks or pickup trucks weighing less than 9,001 pounds of
registered gross weight; [Amended 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 791;
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 799]
(2) Trucks serving as medical or other types of emergency vehicles;
(3) Borough of Columbia owned utility trucks or construction trucks;
(4) Trucks used in the construction industry traveling to or from job
sites located within the Borough of Columbia;
(5) Utility trucks traveling to or from job sites located within the
Borough of Columbia;
(6) Garbage or waste hauling trucks traveling on Borough of Columbia
streets for purposes of picking up garbage or waste in the Borough
of Columbia;
(7) Trucks being operated by residents of the Borough of Columbia and
being driven to or from such operator's residence.
198. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 207-58, Designation of streets for
passenger vehicles only.
199. Editor's Note: Former § 207-59, Restriction on various streets, as added 8-11-1958 by Ord.
No. 323, as amended, was repealed 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 787.
§ 207-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-61
1:757
§ 207-61. Disposition of fines.
All fines and penalties collected under this article shall be paid to the
Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-62. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor, Chief of Police and patrolmen to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 207-61 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-62
1:758
ARTICLE XII
Vehicle Unloading
[Adopted 9-9-1968 by Ord. No. 426 (Ch. 87, Art. XII, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-63. Unloading prohibited on certain thoroughfares.
All vehicles except for trucks attending Borough Market are hereby
prohibited from unloading merchandise, goods or wares on the following
named public thoroughfares in the Borough of Columbia between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. Fridays, eastern standard time, and between
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Saturdays, eastern standard time:
§ 207-64. Violations and penalties.
The police of the Borough of Columbia are authorized to arrest upon view
and without warrant any person or persons violating this article, and the
person or persons so violating shall be subject to penalty as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-65. Disposition of fines.
All fines and penalties collected under this article shall be paid to the
Borough of Columbia.
A. Locust Street between Second Street and Fifth Street.
B. Third Street between Cherry Street and Walnut Street.
C. Fourth Street between Cherry Street and Walnut Street.
D. Fifth Street between Cherry Street and Walnut Street.
§ 207-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-65
1:759

ARTICLE XIII
Parking of Heavy Vehicles
[Adopted 9-9-1974 by Ord. No. 512 (Ch. 87, Art. XIV, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — All vehicular-type equipment, other than
trucks, normally used in various construction operations or building
maintenance operations. This term shall include but not be limited to
bulldozers, backhoes, tractors, front-end loaders, trailers designed to carry
any construction materials, tools or vehicles, and mobile compressor units.
TRAILERS — All vehicles designed to be pulled behind a motor-driven
vehicle and shall include but not be limited to boat trailers, boats on trailers
and all types of commercial freight trailers.
TRUCKS — All commercial or private vehicles ordinarily and commonly
referred to as "trucks" specifically including that type of vehicle defined
as a "tractor" or "truck-tractor" in Section 102 of the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 102). Trucks classified as
panel trucks and pickup trucks, 3/4 ton or smaller, are excluded from this
definition and are not covered by the prohibitions of this article.
§ 207-67. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park any trucks, whether or not connected to trailers,
trailers not connected to motor vehicles, and construction equipment on
streets, sidewalks and all abutting public rights-of-way owned by the
Borough of Columbia. This prohibition shall not apply to:
§ 207-68. Violations and penalties.
Any person or any officer of any firm, association or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice, be subject to a penalty as
set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code. Each day's continuance of the
offense shall constitute a new offense.
A. Trucks and/or trailers parked for four hours or less during delivery,
loading or unloading procedures.
B. Construction equipment in use or parked at a site currently under
construction, repair or demolition.
§ 207-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-68
1:761

ARTICLE XIV
Booting and Towing
[Adopted 9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 627 (Ch. 87, Art. XV, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 207-69. Definition.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BOOT, BOOTING or BOOTED — The act of immobilizing a motor vehicle in
such a manner as to prevent its operation with a device or by means which
will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device is
in place.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS — Outstanding violation(s) of the
parking, standing or stopping regulations of the Borough of Columbia
Traffic Ordinances or Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code for which citation(s)
has been filed with a District Justice and a summons has been issued
to which either no response has been made or for which a warrant has
been issued and including adjudicated citation(s) where the fine and costs
imposed are unpaid.
§ 207-70. Boot installation.
A motor vehicle found parked within the Borough upon any public ground
at any time may, by or under the direction of an officer or member of the
Department of Police of the Borough of Columbia, be booted if there are
three or more unsettled parking violations pending against the owner of the
motor vehicle.
§ 207-71. Notice.
Upon booting of such motor vehicle, the officer or employee shall cause to
be placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice that the vehicle
has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle might result
in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall also outline the procedure for
obtaining removal of the boot. Upon request by the owner, as soon as
practicable, the officer or employee shall provide the owner of the booted
vehicle a list of the prior unsettled parking violations for which or on
account of which such vehicle was booted.
§ 207-72. Boot removal; hearing.
A. The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall be
permitted to secure release of the vehicle upon:
(1) Depositing of the collateral required for his appearance before a
District Justice to answer for each unsettled parking violation or
paying the amount of the fine, penalty and court costs, if any, for
each unsettled parking violation; and
§ 207-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-72
1:763
§ 207-73. Towing and storage of vehicles.
The boot shall remain in place for 48 hours unless the owner has complied
with § 207-73. If such compliance has not occurred within 48 hours, the
vehicle shall be towed or impounded. If the booting occurs when a vehicle
is parked in any zone regulated by towing provisions, then such vehicle
is subject to immediate towing and impounding. Towing and storage fees
shall be paid, along with fees specified in § 207-74, before the owner of
such vehicle or authorized person shall be permitted to repossess or secure
the release of the vehicle. Vehicles unclaimed within 60 days of towing and
storage shall be deemed abandoned and subject to disposal as such in the
manner authorized by law.
§ 207-74. Booting fee.
The owner of a booted vehicle shall be subject to a fee for each such
immobilization as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council.
§ 207-75. Tampering with boot or movement of vehicle prohibited;
penalty.
Any person who shall tamper with, remove or attempt to remove any
device used to immobilize a motor vehicle that has been booted pursuant
to this article or who shall move or attempt to move the vehicle booted
before release of the vehicle has been officially secured shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty
as set forth in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-76. Implementation and enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Police of the Borough
of Columbia, and the Chief of the Department shall have the authority to
implement the parking enforcement provisions thereof and to promulgate
such rules and regulations as are necessary therefor, which regulations
shall become effective upon approval by Council.
(2) Paying the fees as required by § 207-74.
B. The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall have the
right to a post-immobilization hearing limited to the determination of
the validity of the booting. Such hearing must be requested within 15
days after the vehicle is booted and shall be conducted by a hearing
officer appointed by the Mayor. The hearing shall be held during normal
business hours within one business day of the demand therefor. The
post-immobilization hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate
the merits of any citation issued relative to any immobilized vehicle but
will be limited solely to whether the vehicle was properly subject to
booting under the provisions of this article.
§ 207-72 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-77
1:764
§ 207-77. Right to hearing.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any person of the
constitutional right to a hearing or trial as to the violations for which
citations have been issued.
§ 207-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-77
1:765

ARTICLE XV
Cruising
[Adopted 6-30-1986 by Ord. No. 597 (Ch. 25 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 207-78. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cruising Ordinance."
§ 207-79. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found that a general public nuisance and threat to the public
safety results from the repetitive unnecessary driving of motor vehicles,
also known as "cruising," in the Borough of Columbia. The purpose of this
article is to reduce the noise of loud radios, screeching tires, air pollution
and congestion resulting from cruising and to ensure access for safety
vehicles to and through the Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-80. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle on a street past a traffic control point,
designated by a police officer in the Borough of Columbia, under conditions
in which traffic is congested at or near the control point, five or more times
within any two-hour period, from 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. Passing the control
point a fifth time under the same conditions stated herein shall constitute
"cruising" and, therefore, a violation of this article.
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A reference point on a street in a designated
area selected by a police officer for the purpose of enforcing this article.
§ 207-81. Prohibited acts.
No person shall cruise. For the purposes of this article, the person having
care, custody or control of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person
cruising regardless of whether that person was actually driving the motor
vehicle. For the purposes of this article, the "person having care, custody
or control of a motor vehicle" shall mean either the owner of said vehicle,
if present in the vehicle at the time of the violation, or, if the owner is not
so present, the person or persons having the owner's authority to use the
vehicle.
§ 207-82. Exceptions.
This section shall not apply to official emergency or police vehicles, licensed
taxicabs for hire, or other commercial or passenger vehicles being driven
for business purposes and for residents of the Borough of Columbia
traveling to a specific destination.
§ 207-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-83
1:767
§ 207-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be fined not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days.
§ 207-83 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-83
1:768
ARTICLE XVI
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 729]
§ 207-84. Short title.
This article may be referred to as the "Borough of Columbia Handicapped
Parking Ordinance."
§ 207-85. Purpose and intent.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia enacts this article for the
following purposes:
§ 207-86. Definitions and word usage.
Words and phrases used in this article shall have, for the purposes of
this article, the meanings given them in the current Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code ("MVC"), except in those instances where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The singular shall include the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this article to have the following meanings:
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS — Owners of properties in the Borough of
Columbia which share a common property line with the property occupied
by the resident for whom a handicapped parking space is requested.
APPLICANT — One who is handicapped or who is a severely disabled
veteran who occupies real estate as his or her principal residence in the
Borough and who files an application for the installation of a handicapped
parking sign.[Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania or his designee.
A. To facilitate and provide adequate parking on public streets for
handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans;
B. To prevent the proliferation of handicapped parking spaces to the
detriment of the community;
C. To maintain and preserve an adequate amount of parking spaces for
handicapped persons and severely disabled veterans residing in the
Borough of Columbia; and
D. To provide for an application process with clearly established eligibility
and evaluation criteria for obtaining handicapped parking spaces.
§ 207-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-86
1:769
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer and/or
official of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — A parking space reserved for use by
handicapped persons or severely disabled veterans utilizing vehicles
lawfully bearing handicapped registration or severely disabled veterans
plates or placards.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PLACARD — An instrument of notice that is hung from the inside rearview
mirror of a vehicle indicating that said vehicle is currently authorized to
park in a handicapped parking space.
PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE — The Public Safety Committee of the
Borough Council.200
§ 207-87. Application for handicapped parking space.
Any applicant wishing to reserve a handicapped parking space on any street
within the Borough upon which public parking is currently permitted shall
submit a written request to the Borough Manager, which must include the
following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant if the
applicant is a person other than the resident.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the resident.
C. The registration number of the handicapped or severely disabled
veteran registration plate or placard issued by PennDOT to the resident
or the applicant on behalf of the resident.
D. Proof of ownership of a vehicle by the applicant or the resident for
whom the handicapped parking space is requested along with the
make, model and license plate number of such vehicle.
E. A description of the physical impairment of the resident, a statement as
to whether the impairment is permanent or temporary (if temporary, a
detailed statement of the anticipated term of the impairment) and
whether a device such as wheelchair, crutches or walker is used by such
resident for locomotion. The applicant shall supply with the written
request proof of the resident's asserted medical disability from a
medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy or doctor of podiatry medicine
(collectively, "physician"). The physician's statement must be signed by
the resident's physician, must not be issued more than six months prior
to the date of the written request and must specifically set forth the
nature of the impairment, how the impairment limits the resident's
mobility and the estimated duration of the resident's impairment.
F. The location of the requested handicapped parking space.
200. Editor's Note: The former definition of "resident," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774.
§ 207-86 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-87
1:770
§ 207-88. Review process. [Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall review all requests
submitted for reservation of a handicapped parking space and shall submit
to the Borough Manager a recommendation regarding each request. If
required by the MVC or pursuant to PennDOT regulations, the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Borough Manager shall obtain a traffic and
engineering study related to each request. The cost of any such request
shall be borne by the applicant. The recommendations of the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager within 60 days following receipt by the Borough of the request,
unless the applicant, in writing, agrees and consents to a waiver of this
time requirement. The Borough Manager shall consider the request within
30 days following submission of the recommendations from the Code
Enforcement Officer, and the Borough Manager may take whatever action
he deems appropriate in his sole and absolute discretion. Should the
Borough Manager grant the request, he shall provide written notice thereof
to the applicant and shall direct the proper officials of the Borough to post
an appropriate sign at the approved location upon payment to the Borough
by the applicant of all costs of and for acquisition and installation of the
sign, including the signpost and any and all other related costs. Should
the Borough Manager deny the request, he shall, in writing, inform the
applicant of the same, and in such writing set forth the reasons for the
denial; said writing is to be mailed within seven business days following the
date the Borough Manager denies the request.
G. The names, addresses and telephone numbers (if listed in a published
telephone directory) of adjacent property owners of all real estate
sharing a common property line with the resident's.
H. Any other information requested by the Borough Manager, including
medical records evidencing the resident's ongoing disability. Moreover,
if the disability is not permanent, the applicant shall, when requested
by the Borough Manager, submit any and all documents requested by
the Borough Manager to evidence that the disability of the resident
continues to exist.
I. Payment of the application fee as set from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no applicant or
resident for whom the handicap parking space is requested, shall be
required to pay any such fee should such applicant or resident for
whom the handicap parking space is requested have a current severely
disabled veteran plate and/or severely disabled veteran placard issued
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1342, as amended from time to time. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 831]
J. Copy and proof of a valid driver's license issued to the applicant.
[Added 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
§ 207-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-89
1:771
§ 207-89. Notice to adjacent property owners. [Amended 1-8-2007
by Ord. No. 774]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall, in writing, notify the adjacent property
owners that an application has been submitted and that they can submit to
the Borough Manager, in writing, their support or opposition to the request.
The notice shall set forth the date and time by which such written support
or objection must be received by the Borough Manager.
§ 207-90. Review criteria. [Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
A. While all requests for the reservation of a handicapped parking space
lie solely and absolutely in the discretion of the Borough Manager, and
while the possession of a handicapped or severely disabled veteran's
registration plate or placard does not guarantee that the applicant's
request will be granted, the Borough Manager shall, among others,
consider the following factors in rendering his or her decision on each
request:
(1) Whether the person for whom the handicapped parking space is
requested is a resident;
(2) Whether PennDOT has issued a handicapped or severely disabled
veteran registration plate or placard to the resident or on behalf of
the resident for whom the request is made. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, should no one residing in the dwelling with the resident
have such a handicapped or severely disabled veteran registration
plate from PennDOT, the resident or the applicant shall not be
entitled to the issuance of a handicapped parking space under this
article;
(3) Whether there exists a reasonably accessible and practicable offstreet
parking space to serve the location, it being understood that
if such off-street parking place exists, the Borough Manager shall
not grant the request;
(4) The recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer;
(5) Whether the resident has any other handicapped parking spaces
reserved unto him in the Borough, it being understood that the
Borough Manager shall grant no more than one parking space per
resident;
(6) The recommendations and findings of any traffic and/or
engineering studies, if any, for the location;
(7) The nature of the resident's disability, and whether that disability
creates a need for a reserved handicapped parking space that
outweighs the public interest in maintaining that space for general
public use;
(8) All information set forth in the written request of the applicant; and
§ 207-89 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-90
1:772
§ 207-91. Annual renewal of space; termination; appeals. [Amended
1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774; 1-27-2009 by Ord. No. 797]
§ 207-92. Enforcement.
Borough Council specifically authorizes its duly appointed police officers,
Code Enforcement Officer and Borough Manager and any other person
authorized by Borough Council by resolution to enforce this article and
to issue citations for violations of this article and to prosecute any such
violations pursuant to the terms of this article.
(9) Any other information which the Borough Manager deems
applicable or appropriate under the particular facts and
circumstances of each request.
B. The Borough Manager, in his or her sole and absolute discretion, may
limit the number of handicapped parking spaces on any street within
the Borough of Columbia.
A. Annual renewal. Any and all handicapped parking spaces created
hereby shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one year from
the date created or renewed, unless sooner terminated in accordance
with the provisions of this article. Any applicant wishing for the space
created at his or her request to be renewed for an additional one-year
period shall submit a written request to the Borough Manager,
including the information required by § 207-87 hereof, along with a
renewal fee of $10, which fee may be modified from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council. The request for renewal shall be
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of § 207-90 hereof.
B. Termination. In the event that the applicant for whom a handicapped
parking space was created ceases to permanently reside at the location
for which the space has been reserved, is no longer disabled, ceases to
have a current handicapped or severely disabled veterans registration
plate or placard, fails to file the annual renewal or pay the annual
renewal fee, fails to comply with any other terms of this article, or if the
Borough Manager shall determine that such applicant is no longer
entitled to the handicapped parking space, the Borough Manager shall,
by written letter directed to the applicant, rescind the approval for such
handicapped parking space and direct the proper officials of the
Borough to remove all signs designating such handicapped parking
space.
C. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Manager
pursuant to this article, may appeal that decision by filing a written
request for appeal with the Borough Manager within 10 days of the
Borough Manager's actions being so appealed. All such appeals shall be
heard by the Public Safety Committee at its next regularly scheduled
public meeting occurring more than seven days after the filing of the
appeal.
§ 207-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-93
1:773
§ 207-93. Prohibited parking. [Amended 1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
§ 207-94. Violations and penalties.
§ 207-95. Nonlimitation.
Nothing in this article is intended to or shall be construed to limit Borough
Council from establishing handicapped parking spaces within the Borough
in any other manner and at any time Borough Council deems appropriate,
to the extent authorized by the MVC, PennDOT regulations and other
applicable laws.
§ 207-96. Existing handicapped parking spaces.
Handicapped parking spaces in existence on the effective date of this
article shall be permitted to remain in place subject to the annual renewal
provisions hereof.
A. The parking of any vehicle not lawfully bearing a handicapped or
severely disabled veteran's registration plate or placard when the
vehicle is being operated for the transportation of a handicapped
person or severely disabled veteran shall be prohibited at all times in
any parking space reserved pursuant to this article, and no parking
shall be permitted at any such handicapped parking space by any
vehicle other than that for which a handicapped parking space has been
reserved.
B. If a handicapped parking space is created under this article, the
handicapped parking space so created may be used by any person
parking a vehicle lawfully bearing registration plates or placards issued
by PennDOT to handicapped persons or severely disabled veterans.
This article shall not be construed as granting the applicant for whom
the request was submitted the exclusive right to park his or her vehicle
in the handicapped parking space created hereunder.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon summary
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution.
B. Nothing in this section is intended to limit or prohibit the issuance of
citations for violations of the MVC. The penalties of this section shall be
deemed to be in addition to, and not in place of, any violations of the
MVC, provided only that the total of all such fines for each violation
shall not exceed $600.
C. Each citation issued hereunder shall be considered a separate violation,
and separate violations shall not be combined in calculating the total of
such violations.
§ 207-93 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-97
1:774
§ 207-97. False statements.
It shall be unlawful and a violation hereof for any person to knowingly
and willfully make a false statement to any public official for purposes of
obtaining a handicapped parking space.
§ 207-98. Costs.
In addition to all costs which are made the responsibility of the applicant by
the terms hereof, the applicant and/or the resident for whom the applicant
is making the request for a handicapped parking space shall be solely
responsible for the cost of any and all state-related applications, filings and
documentation required for a placard or registration plate (handicapped or
severely disabled veteran). All such placards or registration plates must be
displayed while the vehicle is parked in a public designated handicapped
parking space.
§ 207-98.1. Record of handicapped parking spaces. [Added
1-8-2007 by Ord. No. 774]
The Borough Manager or his or her designee shall at all times keep a
written list of all handicapped parking spaces reserved in the Borough of
Columbia and shall promptly update such list each time a new space is
reserved or repealed.
§ 207-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-98.1
1:775

ARTICLE XVII
Snow Emergency Procedures and Routes
[Adopted 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 733]
§ 207-99. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHAINS — At least six cross-chains per driving wheel.
EMERGENCY COORDINATOR — The Mayor of the Borough of Columbia or,
in the absence of the Mayor, the President of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Columbia.
SNOW — Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets and
sidewalks of the Borough of Columbia such as snow, sleet, hail, ice and
freezing rain.
SNOW EMERGENCY — A state of highway conditions that are hazardous
and dangerous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as declared by the
Emergency Coordinator.
SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES — All streets within the Borough of Columbia
so designated and marked.
SNOW TIRES — Tires on driving wheels having treads designed for use in
snow, which tires must be in such condition as to serve the purpose for
which they were designed.
VEHICLES — All self-propelled motorized vehicles using streets and/or
highways of or within the Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-100. When regulations are effective.
The Emergency Coordinator is authorized to declare the snow emergency
regulations of this article to be in effect:
§ 207-101. Declaration of snow emergency.
A. While snow is falling within the Borough of Columbia;
B. Whenever there exists upon the streets and sidewalks of the Borough of
Columbia a covering, coating or accumulation of snow which, for the
effective removal thereof, requires prohibitions against parking of
vehicles; or
C. Whenever the Emergency Coordinator has received from a recognized
weather forecasting service a firm forecast of snow.
A. A declaration of snow emergency may be made by the Emergency
Coordinator, at his discretion, in order to facilitate the movement of
traffic and to combat the hazards or imminent hazards of excessive
§ 207-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-101
1:777
§ 207-102. Designation of snow emergency routes and marking of
streets.
snow and ice on streets named as snow emergency routes in § 207-102
hereof.
B. The Emergency Coordinator shall, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m., inform the public of a snow emergency and the effective
time thereof by issuing press releases to local radio, television and
news services which have a normal operating range covering the
Borough of Columbia. The effective time of the snow emergency shall
commence no less than two hours after the announcement thereof.
C. The snow emergency shall continue in full force and effect until the
Emergency Coordinator declares it to be over in the same manner as it
was declared.
D. The announcement of the commencement time and termination time of
a snow emergency may be made simultaneously by the Emergency
Coordinator in place of or in addition to any announcement of
termination.
E. Announcements of temporary bans against parking as set forth in
§ 207-104 of this article shall be made in the same manner as
announcements of snow emergencies.
A. The following streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 886]
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street Both From North 2nd Street
to North 9th Street
Lancaster Avenue Both From Locust Street to
Malleable Road
Locust Street Both From Front Street to
9th Street
9th Street Both From Ironville Pike to
Lancaster Avenue
North 5th Street Both From Chestnut Street
to Locust Street
North 3rd Street Both From Locust Street to
Cedar Street
B. All streets designated as snow emergency routes shall be posted with
approved signs or markers at intervals not exceeding 1,000 feet, which
signs or markers shall bear the words "snow emergency route."
§ 207-101 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-103
1:778
§ 207-103. Parking and traffic restrictions and prohibitions;
resumption thereof.
§ 207-104. Temporary bans on parking.
§ 207-105. Removal and impounding of vehicles during snow
emergency.
A. Beginning with the effective time of a snow emergency, as declared and
announced by the Emergency Coordinator, but in no event less than two
hours after such declaration, and continuing until the snow emergency
has been terminated:
(1) No person shall operate a vehicle on any snow emergency route in
such manner or in such condition as to allow or permit such vehicle
to become stalled on such snow emergency route either by reason
of the fact that the driving wheels are not equipped with chains or
snow tires, by the exhaustion of fuel supply to the vehicle or by the
abandonment of the vehicle.
(2) No person shall park or permit to remain parked any vehicle, boat,
boat trailer or any trailer used for the purposes of hauling vehicles
or other items on a snow emergency route until announcement has
been made of the termination of the snow emergency and its
corresponding prohibition against parking on snow emergency
routes.
(3) When a snow emergency has not been declared and announced by
11:00 p.m., the parking prohibitions set forth above shall not apply
until 8:00 a.m. the next day.
B. Whenever the Emergency Coordinator finds that some or all of the
conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency no longer exist, the
Emergency Coordinator is authorized to declare a termination of the
snow emergency, in whole or in part, effective immediately upon any
announcement of the same.
A. The Emergency Coordinator shall be authorized to declare a temporary
ban on parking of vehicles on any street within the Borough of
Columbia whenever a snow emergency has been declared. The
Emergency Coordinator shall make an announcement thereof and in
such announcement shall state the time and streets upon which parking
of vehicles shall be prohibited.
B. The declaration and announcement of the temporary ban on parking
shall be made not less than four hours prior to its becoming effective.
C. Upon such declaration and announcement, the Borough of Columbia
shall place temporary signs prohibiting parking on the streets so
designated, which signs shall be posted not less than four hours prior to
the time the prohibition is to become effective.
§ 207-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-105
1:779
§ 207-106. Violations and penalties.
The owner of any vehicle removed and impounded under § 207-105 shall
be assessed a fine as set by resolution of Borough Council from time
to time. Any person, partnership, business, corporation or other entity
violating the provisions of this article, upon the issuance of a citation and
conviction by a District Justice, shall be guilty of a summary offense and
shall pay a fine of not more than $600. Each day a violation exists shall
A. The Borough shall have the authority to remove and impound, or to
order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked on a snow
emergency route during a snow emergency declared pursuant to
§ 207-101 hereof.
B. In the event that a vehicle is towed pursuant to this section, then, in
addition to any other penalties set forth in § 207-106 hereof, prior to the
owner of such vehicle regaining possession of said vehicle or upon
assessment of the penalty pursuant to § 207-106 hereof, the owner shall
pay to the Borough of Columbia the costs incurred by the Borough in
causing such removal and storage, which shall be in addition to any
penalties assessed pursuant to § 207-106.
C. In the event that the owner of said vehicle fails and refuses to claim
such vehicle, then the Borough shall, in addition to all other rights
granted herein and by law, be entitled to pursue a civil action against
said owner for the cost of towing and storage of said vehicle. Neither
the Borough nor its employees or contractors shall have any liability for
any damage to any vehicle parked in violation of this article occurring
to such vehicle by reason of the Borough's removal of such vehicle from
its parking location and/or by reason of the Borough's road
maintenance and/or snow removal activities or operations.
D. Placement of objects to reserve parking spaces.
(1) It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to place or cause
to be placed any item whatsoever for the purpose of reserving
parking spaces on any street or alley in the Borough during any
periods of precipitation or inclement weather, regardless of
whether a snow emergency has been declared.
(2) Borough employees shall have the authority to remove any such
object which, in the sole discretion of the Borough employees, is
being used or has the effect of saving or reserving any parking
space within the Borough cartway.
E. Dumpsters on snow emergency routes. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or permit to remain placed any dumpster on a
designated snow emergency route at any time from December 1
through March 31, except through the acquisition of a special
exemption granted by the Borough Manager or his designee, and then
only for the specified time that is approved.
§ 207-105 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-106
1:780
be considered a separate violation, subject to the same fines as set forth
herein. It shall not be necessary to issue a separate citation for each day,
but one citation can be issued to cover multiple days of violations. The
Borough of Columbia hereby authorizes the Borough Manager, Secretary,
Code Enforcement Officer or any duly and constituted police officer or
parking enforcement officer to issue citations for violations of this article.
§ 207-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-106
1:781

ARTICLE XVIII
Hazardous Vehicle Parking
[Adopted 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 911]
§ 207-107. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this article to have the following meanings:
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE — A vehicle which (1) contains one or more broken
windows or one or more missing doors or a missing trunk or hood which
allows entry into the vehicle by children; (2) is structurally unstable or
supported by blocks, jacks or other devices creating a danger of slipping
and moving; (3) is parked on private property in such manner as to
constitute an "abandoned vehicle" under the Vehicle Code; or (4) is partially
dismantled, unusable or wrecked and which cannot safely or legally be
operated on the streets or highways of the Borough. Currently licensed,
registered and inspected vehicles shall not be included within this definition
regardless of condition.
UNSHELTERED STORAGE — Any storage except inside a building or in an
area completely surrounded by a solid fence of a height not less than the
height of the motor vehicle or trailer being sheltered.
VEHICLE CODE — The Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 207-108. Prohibition on parking.
No person who owns a hazardous vehicle shall park, place or deposit the
hazardous vehicle in unsheltered storage upon any private property within
the Borough of Columbia. No person owning or occupying any property
within the Borough of Columbia shall permit a hazardous vehicle to remain
in unsheltered storage on any property.
§ 207-109. Prohibited storage.
§ 207-110. Permitted sheltered storage.
The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to a limit of one hazardous
vehicle if it is stored within an enclosed building or an area completely
surrounded by a solid fence of a height of not less than the height of the
hazardous vehicle, and this article shall not apply to the premises of a
business enterprise otherwise operated in a lawful place and manner when
necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, nor shall it apply to
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any
hazardous vehicle to store or permit such vehicle to remain in
unsheltered storage on any private property within the Borough.
B. It shall be further unlawful for any person, after notification to remove a
hazardous vehicle, to move the same to unsheltered storage on any
other private property within the Borough of Columbia.
§ 207-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-110
1:783
the seasonal use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters
and nonmotorized campers. The prohibitions of this article shall likewise
not be applied to salvors holding the current certificate of authorization
from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 207-111. Citations; tickets; notice of removal.
§ 207-112. Emergency powers.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the Borough or duly authorized officials
from removing from private property, without notice, any attended or
unattended motor vehicle, the presence of which constitutes a hazard or
threat to the life, health, safety, welfare and morals of the residents of
the Borough which is imminently dangerous and, in the opinion of the
Borough or authorized officials, constitutes a nuisance which gives rise to
the existence of emergency conditions.
§ 207-113. Penalties for violation.
A. This article may be enforced by any Borough of Columbia Code
Compliance Manager or his/her designee.
B. Upon the finding of violation, the official may issue violation tickets to
the owner and/or occupant of the property where the vehicle is placed
in accordance with Article II of Chapter 1 of the Borough Code. The
penalties for nonpayment; abatement and charges, and appeals shall be
as provided in Article II, § 1-20. If the Borough is required to abate an
abandoned hazardous vehicle, the abatement cost shall be as provided
in that subsection, as amended from time to time.
C. After three violation tickets have been issued, or if in the opinion of the
Compliance Manager the situation requires written notice, said notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail to the owner of record or
persons having custody of such hazardous vehicle, and also to the
owner of the property, if different, to remove the hazardous motor
vehicle within 30 days. The notice shall state or contain:
(1) A description and location of the hazardous motor vehicle.
(2) A statement that the hazardous motor vehicle must be removed
within 30 days.
(3) A statement that removal from the location to another location in
the Borough of Columbia is not permitted, unless that location
provides sheltered storage as defined herein.
(4) A statement that after removal was made, that notification of the
removal should be given to the Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer.
(5) A statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance.
§ 207-110 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-113
1:784
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000, together with cost of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.
B. In addition to or in lieu of enforcement under any other provision of this
article, the Borough may enforce any provision of this article by an
action in equity in the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County.
C. In any action brought pursuant to this § 207-113, the Borough is
entitled to receive, at the order of the Court, an assessment of Court
costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough in
bringing forth any such action. Each day that the property is not in
compliance shall constitute a separate violation.
D. The remedies set forth above shall not be construed to the limit or deny
the right of the Borough of Columbia to any other equitable or legal
rights or remedies as may be otherwise available at law.
§ 207-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-113
1:785
Chapter 220
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Official Map — See Ch. 43.
Demolition permits — See Ch. 105.
Existing structures, property maintenance
and fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Flood insurance program — See Ch. 119.
Historic district — See Ch. 130.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Noise — See Ch. 149.
Sewers and sewerage — See Ch. 173.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
190.
Trees — See Ch. 202.
§ 207-113 COLUMBIA CODE § 207-113
1:786
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 220-1. Applicability.
Any activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a way that
conforms with the regulations of this chapter. See § 220-3A.
§ 220-2. Purposes and community development objectives.
This chapter is hereby adopted:
§ 220-3. Permits and certificates.
A. In accordance with the requirements and purposes [including Sections
604 and 605 or their successor section(s), which are included by
reference] of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,201 as
amended; and
B. In accordance with goals and objectives of the Columbia
Comprehensive Plan, which are hereby included by reference.
A. Applicability.
(1) Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(a) Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign;
(b) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure
or area of land;
(c) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines; and/or
(d) Creation of a new use.
(2) Zoning permit. A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application
complies with this chapter to the best knowledge of the applicable
Borough staff.
(a) A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of
any of the following activities:
[1] Erection, construction, movement, placement or
expansion of a structure, building or sign;
[2] Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a
structure or area of land;
[3] Creation of a new use; and/or
201. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:787
[4] Demolition of a building. (See Chapter 105, Demolition
Permits.)
(b) The Borough may issue combined or separate building permits
and zoning permits and/or may utilize one application for both
permits.
B. Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance to
existing structures shall not by itself be regulated by this chapter.
C. Types of uses.
(1) Permitted by right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
permitted by right if it meets all of the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Special exception use or application requiring a variance. A permit
under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a
written decision of the Zoning Hearing Board following a hearing.
D. Applications.
(1) Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit or a decision by the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the Borough. Such completed application, with required fees,
shall be submitted to a designated Borough staff-person.
(2) Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a
site plan with the application if the application involves a new
principal building, expansion of a principal building or addition of
three or more parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale
and show the following:
(a) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and locations of existing
and proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features
clearly distinguished from proposed features.
(b) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines.
(3) Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall
include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
determines such information is unnecessary to determine
compliance with this chapter:
(a) The address of the lot;
(b) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property if different from the applicant;
(c) A description of the proposed use of the property;
§ 220-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-3
1:788
(d) All other applicable information listed on the official Borough
application form; and
(e) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
(4) Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
Subsection D(3) above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this
chapter:
(a) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements.
(b) For a nonresidential use:
[1] A description of the proposed nonresidential operations
and storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential
nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic,
glare, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant public health and safety hazards;
[2] A list of the maximum hours of operation.
(c) A listing of any sections of this chapter being appealed, with
the reasons for any appeal.
(d) A listing of any special exceptions being requested by the
applicant, identifying the specific sections of this chapter
authorizing such special exception.
(e) A listing of all variances from requirements of this chapter
requested by the applicant, including a reference to the
specific sections from which variances are requested.
(5) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or their specifically
authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written permission of
the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see definition of
"landowner" in Article II).
E. Issuance of permits.
(1) At least one copy of each permit application and any other zoning
approval shall be retained in Borough files.
(2) PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a
Borough zoning or building permit shall be automatically
conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT highway occupancy
permit.
F. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:789
(1) Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in
case of one or more of the following:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based (Note: The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides for
penalties for providing false information to a municipal
employee in the carrying out of his/her duties);
(b) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a special exception use or variance;
(c) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in
such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an
approved site plan or approved permit application; and/or
(d) For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
(2) Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided
by state law, may appeal decisions under this chapter within the
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. Any such
appeal shall occur within the time period established in the State
Municipalities Planning Code. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, such provisions were in Sections 914.1 and 1002.A.)
G. Zoning permit for temporary uses and structures.
(1) A zoning permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for any of the following:
(a) Customary, routine and accessory short-term special events,
provided that only a temporary use that primarily serves a
charitable, public service or religious purpose shall be eligible
to receive approval for commercial-type activities in a district
where a commercial use would not otherwise be permitted;
(b) Temporary storage and office trailers that are necessary to
serve on-site construction, while such construction is actively
underway;
(c) Such other activities that the applicant proves are routine,
customary and temporary.
(2) Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum
time period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then
a six-month maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may
be renewed for just cause.
H. Compliance with Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development. If
an application under this chapter would also be regulated by the
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance ("SALDO"),
then any permit or approval under this chapter shall automatically be
§ 220-3 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-3
1:790
§ 220-4. General procedure for permits.
§ 220-5. Interpretation and uses not regulated.
conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO. See the definitions of
"land development" and "subdivision" in the SALDO.
(1) For example, if an applicant applies for a single-family detached
dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for such
dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision approval and the lot is officially recorded by the County
Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either
issue the applicable permit(s), or deny the application(s) as submitted
indicating one or more reasons.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified by the permit, in compliance with other
Borough ordinances. However, it is recommended that applicants wait
30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by
another party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of
construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the
risk of the applicant.
A. Minimum requirements. Where more than one provision of this chapter
controls a particular matter, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to any other applicable Borough ordinance.
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right,
or as a special exception use by this chapter within any zoning district,
the use is prohibited, except that the Zoning Hearing Board may permit
such use as a special exception use if the applicant specifically proves
to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that all of the
following conditions would be met:
(1) The proposed use would be less intensive in external impacts and
nuisances than uses that are permitted in the district;
(2) The proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character
to uses permitted in that district, considering the standards in
§ 220-61F;
(3) The use would meet the standards that would apply under 220-16C
to a special exception use; and
(4) The use is not specifically prohibited in that district.
C. Interpretation of chapter text and boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this chapter
and the location of all district boundaries to particular applications.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:791
§ 220-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter,
these provisions were primarily in Sections 616.1, 617 and 617.2 of such
Act.)
In any case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory
opinion from the Borough Solicitor or the Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor to aid in the Zoning Officer's determination.
(2) If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination
and believes that the chapter should be interpreted in the
applicant's favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. See § 220-11.
D. Undefined terms/interpretation of definitions. See § 220-18.
E. Interpretation of zoning boundaries. See § 220-23.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in use of land or
structure, or the erection, construction or alteration of any
structure or portion thereof, or the excavation of land to prepare
for the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or
portion thereof.
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit.
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with a
zoning permit.
(4) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance or special exception or other
approval.
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Borough
Council in granting a conditional use.
(6) Failure to secure a demolition permit prior to demolition of a
building.
(7) Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness where required
under Chapter 130, Historic District.
B. Enforcement notice. If the Borough has reason to believe that a
violation of a provision of this chapter has occurred, the Borough shall
initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as
provided in Section 616.1 of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 220-5 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-6
1:792
Prior to sending an official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may
at his/her option informally request compliance.
C. Time limits. An official enforcement notice shall state the deadline to
complete bringing the property into compliance with this chapter, and
shall state that the applicant has 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Causes of action; enforcement remedies. The causes of action and
enforcement remedies provisions of the State Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference. (Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 617 of
such law.)
(1) Enforcement action. If the enforcement notice is not complied with
promptly, the Zoning Officer shall notify Borough Council. Borough
Council may request the Borough Solicitor to institute in the name
of the Borough any appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful use of the
structure, building, sign, landscaping or land in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or the order or direction made pursuant
thereto. The Zoning Officer or Assistant Zoning Officer shall have
the authority to initiate a civil enforcement proceeding before a
District Justice, within the procedures established by Sections
616.1, 617, 617.1 and 617.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, which are hereby incorporated by
reference.
(2) Violations and penalties. Any person who has violated or permitted
the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all
court costs, including the reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
(a) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless a District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:793
§ 220-7. Fees.
A Borough fee schedule for permits and applications may be established and
amended by written resolution of Borough Council. No application or appeal
shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
§ 220-8. Amendments to chapter.
Within the requirements of the State Municipalities Planning Code, Borough
Council may amend or repeal any or all portions of this chapter on its own
motion, or after agreeing to hear a written request of any person, entity,
landowner or the Planning Commission.
§ 220-9. Curative amendments.
A landowner or Borough Council may utilize the curative amendment
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these such provisions were in Sections 609.1,
609.2 and 916.1 of such Act.)
§ 220-10. Appointment, powers and duties of Zoning Officer.
(b) All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees collected
for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Borough for the general use of the Borough.
(c) Imprisonment shall not be authorized under this chapter for
failure to pay fines.
(3) Remedies. In case any building, structure, sign or landscaping is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted
or maintained; or any building, structure, sign or land is used; or
any hedge, shrub, tree or other growth is maintained in violation of
this chapter or of any of the regulations made pursuant thereto or
any of the permits or certificates of use and occupancy issued
under this chapter or any conditions imposed upon the grant of a
special exception or variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or upon
the grant of a conditional use, then, in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, any appropriate action or proceeding
may be instituted or taken to prevent or restrain such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in and about such premises.
E. Enforcement evidence. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Borough shall have the responsibility of
presenting its evidence first.
A. Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by Borough
Council. The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office within the
Borough, but may hold other appointed offices. One or more Assistant
§ 220-6 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-10
1:794
§ 220-11. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
Zoning Officers may serve in the same manner and have the same
authority as the Zoning Officer, under the general direction of the
Zoning Officer.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer's duties and powers shall
include the following:
(1) Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms,
including to receive and examine all applications required under
the terms of this chapter, and issue or refuse permits within the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Conduct inspections to determine compliance, and receive
complaints of violation of this chapter;
(3) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions, and variances granted by the Board, and of enforcement
orders, with all such records being the property of the Borough and
being available for public inspection;
(4) Review proposed subdivisions and land developments for
compliance with this chapter; and
(5) Take enforcement actions as provided by the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.
A. Membership of Board.
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents of the
Borough appointed by Borough Council. The existing terms of
office shall continue, with terms of office being five years, and with
the terms being so fixed that the term of office of one member shall
expire each year. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the Borough.
(2) Alternate members. Borough Council may appoint alternate
members of the Zoning Hearing Board within the applicable
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code. [Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section
903(b) of such Act.]
B. Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of a term.
C. Organization. The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. [As of the adoption date of this
chapter, these provisions were in Sections 906(a), (b) and (c) of such
Act.]
D. Zoning Hearing Board jurisdiction and functions. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall be responsible for the following:
§ 220-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:795
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
an affected person, entity or Borough Council that the Zoning
Officer has improperly acted under the requirements and
procedures of this chapter.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in § 220-11F.
(2) Challenge to the validity of the chapter or map. The applicable
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
shall apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, these
provisions were primarily in Sections 909.1 and 916202 of such Act.)
(3) Variance.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Borough staff in writing.
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law. Note: As of the adoption date of this
chapter, Section 910.2 of the State Municipalities Planning
Code provided that all of the following findings must be made,
where relevant:
[1] There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
[2] Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property;
[3] Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
[4] The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
202. Editor's Note: See now Section 915.1 of the Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S.
§ 10915.1).
§ 220-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-11
1:796
[5] The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(c) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(d) The Borough Planning Commission should be provided with an
opportunity to provide a review of a variance request.
(4) Special exception.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Borough staff in writing. The Board
shall only permit a special exception that is authorized by this
chapter. See § 220-16.
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in the chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(c) The Borough Planning Commission should be provided with an
opportunity to review a special exception application.
(5) Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant
a special exception allowing modifications to specific requirements
of this chapter that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board are necessary to provide a "reasonable
accommodation" under the Americans With Disabilities Act and/or
the Federal Fair Housing Act and/or applicable state law, as
amended, to serve persons who the applicant proves have
"disabilities" as defined in and protected by such laws.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board shall also hear any other matters as set
forth in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Note:
As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
primarily within Section 909.1 of such law.)
E. Time limits for appeals. The applicable provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Section 914.1 of
such Act.)
F. Stay of proceedings. The stay of proceedings provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 915.1 of
such Act.)
G. Time limits on permits and approvals.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:797
§ 220-12. Board hearings and decisions.
The following requirements shall apply to procedures, hearings and
decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board:
(1) After a variance is approved or other zoning approval is officially
authorized, then any applicable zoning and building permits shall
be secured by the applicant within 12 months after the date of such
approval or authorization. The work authorized by such permits
shall then be completed within 12 months after the issuance of the
permits.
(2) Extension. In response to an applicant stating good cause in
writing, the Zoning Officer may extend in writing the time limit for
completion of work to a maximum total of 36 months after permits
are issued. The Zoning Hearing Board may also establish in writing
a time period longer than is provided in Subsection G(1) as part of
an approval.
(3) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits or begin
construction within the above time periods, or allows interruptions
in substantial construction of longer than 12 months, the Zoning
Officer may conclusively presume that the applicant has waived,
withdrawn or abandoned approvals and permits under this chapter
and may consider all such approvals and permits to have become
null and void.
(4) The time limits of this Subsection G shall also apply to permits and
approvals received under the Zoning Ordinance of 1967, as
amended, unless specifically provided for otherwise by applicable
law.
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by Section 107 of
the State Municipalities Planning Code. The notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to make sure that such notice is
posted and remains posted until the hearing.
(3) Persons given notice. The Borough shall provide written notice to
the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. The Borough
should also provide notice to the President of Borough Council. Any
such notices should be mailed or delivered to the last known
address.
§ 220-11 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-12
1:798
§ 220-13. Appeals to court.
The provisions for appeals to court that are stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Sections 1001-A,
1002-A, 1003-A, 1004-A, 1005-A and 1006-A of such Act.)
§ 220-14. Limited public utility exemptions.
See the provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were within
Section 619 of such Act.)
§ 220-15. Limited Borough and municipal authority exemption.
The minimum lot area, minimum lot width and minimum street frontage
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses or structures owned by
Columbia Borough or by a municipal authority created solely by Columbia
Borough for such uses and structures.
B. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision on each application
within 45 days after the last hearing on that application before the
Board, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) References shall be provided to the most pertinent section(s) of this
chapter and/or the State Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision shall be personally
delivered or mailed to the applicant or his/her representative or their
last known address not later than the time limit established by the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. Also, such notice shall be
given to any other person or group (including civic or community
organizations) who has made a written timely request for such notice.
[Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
within Sections 908(9) and 908(10) of such Act, including provisions
regarding notice to other parties.]
E. State law. See also Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:799
§ 220-16. Special exception use process.
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) See submission provisions in § 220-3.
(2) All site plans shall contain the information required in § 220-3D.
(3) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Board regarding
the compliance of the application with this chapter.
(4) The Board shall follow the procedures provided in § 220-12.
(5) The Borough Planning Commission should be provided with an
opportunity to provide a review.
C. Consideration of special exception applications. When special
exceptions are provided for in this chapter, the Board shall hear and
decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance with stated
standards and criteria. The Board may grant approval of a special
exception provided that the applicant complies with the following
standards for special exceptions and that the proposed special
exception shall not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
neighborhood. The burden of proof shall rest with the applicant.
(1) Compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall establish by
credible evidence compliance with all conditions on the special
exception enumerated in the section which gives the applicant the
right to seek the special exception. The applicant shall provide the
Board with sufficient plans, studies or other data to demonstrate
compliance with all applicable regulations.
(2) Compliance with other laws. The applicant shall establish by
credible evidence compliance with all applicable Borough, state
and federal ordinances, statutes and regulations. The applicant
shall provide the Board with sufficient plans, studies or other data
to demonstrate compliance with all applicable regulations.
(3) Traffic and public services. The applicant shall establish by credible
evidence that the proposed special exception shall be properly
serviced by all existing public service systems. The peak traffic
generated by the subject of the application shall be accommodated
in a safe and efficient manner or improvements made in order to
effect the same. Similar responsibilities shall be assumed with
respect to other public service systems including but not limited to
police protection, fire protection, utilities, parks and recreation.
(4) Site planning. The applicant shall establish by credible evidence
that the proposed special exception shall be in and of itself properly
§ 220-16 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-16
1:800
§ 220-17. Liability.
designed with regard to internal circulation, parking, buffering and
all other elements of proper design as specified in this chapter and
any other governing law or regulation.
(5) Neighborhood. The applicant shall establish by credible evidence
that the proposed special exception will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood, and that the use of property adjacent to the
area included in the special exception application will be
adequately safeguarded.
(6) Historic. The applicant shall establish that the proposed special
exception will not substantially damage the historic character of a
significant historic area.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines is necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the building permit issued pursuant
thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall be a
violation of this chapter.
A. Any review of activity within the floodplain, site plan review, subdivision
or land development approval, erosion control review, wetland
delineation review, stormwater runoff review, review of activity on
steep slopes, or any other review, approval or permit under this chapter
by an officer, employee, board, commission, solicitor, consultant or
agency of the Borough shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the Borough, or its employees, officials,
boards, solicitor(s), consultants or agencies of the practicality or safety
of any structure, use or subdivision, and shall create no liability upon
nor a cause of action against such entity or person for any damage that
may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
Borough shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit.
§ 220-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:801

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 220-18. General interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 220-19. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT or ABUTTING — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot
line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street or a perennial
waterway. See definition of "adjacent."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (includes ACCESSORY BUILDING) — A
structure serving a purpose customarily incidental to and subordinate to
the use of the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal
use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to a household garage,
household storage shed, detached carport, a household swimming pool, or
an accessory storage building to a business use. An "accessory building" is
any accessory structure that meets the definition of a "building." A portion
of a principal building used for an accessory use shall not be considered an
accessory building.
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. Unless stated otherwise, the singular shall also regulate the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
F. Any word or term not defined in this chapter shall have its plain and
ordinary meaning within the context of the section. A standard
reference dictionary should be consulted.
G. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
H. The word "person" includes a firm, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, organization or association, as well as an individual.
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:803
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use.
ADJACENT — Two or more lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway from each other.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use with over 15 square feet of total floor area
occupied by items for sale or rent, being books, films, magazines, video
tapes, coin- or token-operated films or video tapes, CD-ROM or DVD disks,
computer software, paraphernalia, novelties or other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by a clear emphasis on matter depicting,
displaying, describing or relating to uncovered male or female genitals or
specified sexual activities. This shall include but not be limited to materials
that would be illegal to sell to persons under age 18 under state law.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and
assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60 and/or mentally
retarded and/or physically handicapped who need such daily assistance
because of their limited physical abilities, Alzheimers disease, mental
abilities or mental retardation. This use shall not include persons who need
oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent. This use may
involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a residential
use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60 hours per
week per person.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A use including live
entertainment involving persons (which may include waiters, waitresses,
dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others) displaying uncovered
male or female genitals or nude or almost nude female breasts or engaging
in simulated or actual specified sexual activities related to some form
of monetary compensation paid to a person, company or organization
operating the use or to persons involved in such activity.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the presentation typically to
three or more persons at one time in a room of motion pictures, video
tapes or similarly reproduced images distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on depiction of specified sexual activities for observation by
patrons therein and that is related to some form of monetary compensation
paid by the persons viewing such matter.
ADULT USE — Includes any of the following uses: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment facility/use.
AFTER HOURS CLUB — A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by five or more unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid
by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
ALLEY — A vehicle right-of-way having a maximum right-of-way width of 20
feet and that usually provides secondary access to the side or rear on one
or more lots, and which is not intended for through traffic.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:804
ANTENNA, STANDARD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving any type of electronic signals or for
transmitting short-wave or citizens band radio frequencies. This shall
include antennas used by an amateur ham radio operator or by a
contracting business or utility to communicate with its employees, but shall
not include a communications antenna. This term includes any accessory
supporting structures.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APPLICANT — The person(s), company, partnership, profit or nonprofit
corporation or trust responsible for a particular application for an approval
or permit under this chapter, and his/her heirs, successors and assigns.
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — An
area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display, sale
or rental of one or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles, boats, or transportable mobile/
manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include an auto
repair garage as an accessory use provided that all requirements of such
use are complied with. This use shall not include a mobile/ manufactured
home park (unless the requirements for that use are also met) or a junkyard.
See requirements in § 220-30.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — An area where repairs, improvements and
installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles and/or boats are
conducted that involves work that is more intense in character than work
permitted under the definition of "auto service station." An auto repair
garage shall include, but not be limited to, any use that involves any of
the following work: major mechanical or body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of transmissions. Any use permitted
as part of an auto service station is also permitted as part of an auto
repair garage, such as a convenience store. This use shall not include a use
meeting the definition of a "truck stop." See requirements in § 220-30.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — An area where gasoline is dispensed into motor
vehicles, and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be
conducted that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and
installation of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories
and safety and emission inspections, and sale of pre-packaged propane.
This use may include a convenience store. A business that maintains an
accessory use of providing motor fuel only for use by vehicles operated by
that business shall not, by itself, be considered to be an auto service station.
This use shall not include a use meeting the definition of a "truck stop." See
storage limits and other requirements in § 220-30.
BASEMENT — An enclosed floor area partly or wholly underground. A
basement shall be considered a "story" if:
The majority of the basement has a clearance from floor to ceiling of
6.5 feet or greater; and
A.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:805
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A dwelling and/or its accessory structure
which includes the rental of overnight sleeping accommodations and
bathroom access for temporary overnight guests, and that meets the
maximum number of overnight guests specified in § 220-30 for this use, and
which does not provide any cooking facilities for actual use by guests, and
which only provides meals to overnight guests, employees and residents of
the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient visitors to the
area, employees and their family. See requirements in § 220-30.
BIOSOLIDS — Nutrient-rich organic materials derived from wastewater
solids (sewage sludge and residential septage) that have been stabilized,
meet specific processing and quality criteria and are suitable for land
application.[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A residential use in which
room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit are rented
for habitation, or a dwelling unit includes greater than the permitted
maximum number of unrelated persons. A boardinghouse shall not include
a use that meets the definition of a hotel, dormitory, motel, personal care
center, bed-and-breakfast, group home or nursing home. A college fraternity
or sorority house used as a residence shall be considered a type of
boardinghouse. A boardinghouse may either involve or not involve the
providing of meals to residents, but shall not include a restaurant open
to the public unless the use also meets the requirements for a restaurant.
A boardinghouse shall primarily serve persons residing on-site for five or
more consecutive days.
BOROUGH — Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER YARD — A strip of land that separates one use from another use
or feature, and is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or
any use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways. A buffer
yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance but land within an
existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet a buffer yard
requirement. See § 220-59.
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and walls and that
is intended for the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles, equipment or materials and that has a total area under
roof of greater than 50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including
"or part thereof." See the separate definition of "structure." Any structure
involving a permanent roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that
is attached to a principal building shall be considered to be part of that
principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the
maximum horizontal area in square feet of all principal and accessory
buildings and attached structures covered by a permanent roof on a lot by
the total lot area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
The top of the ceiling of the basement is an average of five or more
feet above the finished grade along the majority of the front side of the
building that faces onto a street.
B.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:806
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot, and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two vertical
structural walls that are generally parallel of one building, measured in one
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For attached
housing, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit, measured from
the center of each interior party wall and from the outside of any exterior
wall. For detached buildings, this width shall be measured from the outside
of exterior walls.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found
in the typical household or office for some productive reuse, but which
does not involve the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic
substances, and which does not primarily involve the processing of
nonrecycled solid waste, unless the use also meets the applicable
requirements for a solid waste transfer facility. This definition shall not
include a junkyard.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street designed for vehicular traffic and
on-street parking, but not including the shoulder of the street.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM or TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale of trees from November 15 to
December 30 that were produced on the premises.
CHURCH — See "place of worship." 203
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more communications antennas,
on an existing communications tower, or on any structure that has been
approved by the Borough, to support at least one communications
antenna.[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The DC, NC, HC, RC, LB, CR and MDRB Zoning
Districts.
COMMERCIAL USE — Includes but is not limited to retail sales, offices,
personal services, auto sales, auto repair garages and other uses of a similar
profit-making nonindustrial nature. The sale of goods or services from a
vehicle on a lot shall also be considered to be a commercial use.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A use that exists solely to provide primarily
indoor leisure and educational activities and programs and meeting space
to members of the surrounding community and/or certain age groups, and
which does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise producing
equipment. The use also may include the preparation and/or provision of
meals to low-income elderly persons, as accessory to leisure activities. This
shall not include residential uses or a treatment center.
203. Editor's Note: The former definition of “commercial communications tower or antenna,”
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718. This
ordinance also revised all occurrences in this chapter of “commercial communications
tower or antenna” to “communications tower or communications antenna.”
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:807
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service, or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") to operate such device,
which is attached to a wireless support structure. This definition shall not
include the following: private residence-mounted satellite dishes; television
antennas; amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or
citizens band radio antennas; or support structures for antennas or any
related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground-level.[Added
4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718; amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 375 square feet.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, other than a building, that
is constructed for the primary purpose of supporting one or more
communications antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
718; amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which is created under
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980 or Uniform Planned
Community Act of 1996,204 as amended.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A legal agreement granted by a property
owner that strictly limits the types and amounts of development that may
take place on such property. Such easement shall restrict the original and
all subsequent property owners, lessees and all other users of the land.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries, prepared ready-to-eat foods and similar miscellaneous
items to the general public, but that is not primarily a restaurant, and
that includes a building with a floor area of less than 4,000 square feet. A
convenience store involving the sale of gasoline shall be regulated as an
auto service station.
CRAFTS OR ARTISAN'S STUDIO — A use involving the creation, display
and sale of arts and crafts, such as paintings, sculpture and fabric crafts.
The creation of arts and crafts may also be permitted within a home
occupation, provided the requirements for such use are met.
CULTURAL CENTER — A facility primarily for the display of art and related
exhibits and for artistic and cultural performances. Retail sales shall only
204. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. and 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq., respectively.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:808
occur as an accessory use, unless the requirements for a retail store are
also met.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT, MUNICIPAL — A process provided in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code that permits a municipality to
address the potential invalidity of portions or all of its own zoning
ordinance.[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726]
DAY CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home primarily for periods of less than
18 hours during the average day. This use may also include educational
programs that are supplementary to state-required education, including a
nursery school or "Head Start" programs. See also the definition of "adult
day-care center."
DEFICIENCY-FREE — Free from health and safety issues as listed on the
Columbia Borough Change of Occupant Checklist.[Added 6-25-2019 by
Ord. No. 912]
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the lot area, unless otherwise stated.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and its
relevant bureaus.
DETACHED — A dwelling structure having open-yard areas on all
sides.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 912]
The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation
by this chapter: care of children by their own relatives; care of children
within a place of worship during regularly scheduled religious services;
and care of one to three children within any dwelling unit, in addition
to children who are relatives of the caregiver.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME (or CHILD DAY-CARE AS AN ACCESSORY
USE) — A type of day-care use that is accessory to and occurs within a
dwelling unit, and provides care for four to six children at one time who
are not relatives of the primary caregiver. See § 220-31.
B.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A type of day-care use that provides care
for between seven and 12 children at one time who are not relatives
of the primary caregiver; provides care within a dwelling unit; and is
registered with the applicable state agency. (Note: As of the adoption
date of this chapter, such agency was the Pennsylvania Department of
Public Welfare.)
C.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A type of day-care use that provides care
for seven or more children at any one time who are not relatives of
the primary caregiver; does not meet the definition of a group day-care
home; and is registered with the applicable state agency. (Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such agency was the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.) See § 220-30.
D.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:809
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY — A disability of a person which has
continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely; a disability which is:
DISTRICT (or ZONING DISTRICT) — A land area within the Borough within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An establishment where at least a portion of
patrons are served while the patrons remain in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned, constructed, and maintained vehicular
access from a street to one or two principal buildings or their accessory
buildings, and which does not meet the definition of a street or an alley.
DWELLING — A building used as nontransient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home." This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types:
A. Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism.
Found to be attributable to any other conditions found to be closely
related to mental retardation because such condition results in similar
impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior to
that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment and services
similar to those required for such persons.
B.
Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described in the
above Subsections A and B of this definition.
C.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Article IV and where permitted
by Article III and meeting the floor area requirements of this chapter.
A.
APARTMENTS — Two or more dwelling units within a building that
do not meet the definition of a single-family detached dwelling, twin
dwelling or townhouse/rowhouse. The individual dwelling units may be
leased or sold for condominium ownership.
B.
MID-RISE APARTMENTS — Three or more dwelling units within a
building that is higher than 35 feet or 3 1/2 stories.
C.
SECTIONAL OR MODULAR HOME — A type of dwelling that meets
a definition of single-family detached dwelling, single-family
semidetached dwelling, townhouse or low-rise apartment that is
substantially but not wholly produced in two or more major sections
off the site and then is assembled and completed on the site, and that
does not meet the definition of a "mobile/manufactured home" and
that is supported structurally by its exterior walls and that rests on a
permanent foundation.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open yard areas
E.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:810
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
family. (See definition of "family.") Each dwelling unit shall have its own
toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities, and separate
access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony that connects to
outside access at ground level. A dwelling unit shall not include either or
both of the following: two or more separate living areas that are completely
separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior access from one living
area to another; or two separate and distinct sets of kitchen facilities.
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. A
membership club may be included if it is a permitted use in that district.
This may include housing for emergency personnel while on call.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The creation, construction alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, supply or disposal systems
on all sides. A single-family detached dwelling may be a mobile/
manufactured home.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — A type of single-family
detached dwelling that meets all of the following requirements: is
transportable in a single piece, or two substantial pieces designed
to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated
for towing; is designed for permanent occupancy; which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations; is constructed so
that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation; and
is not a recreation vehicle. The terms "mobile home" and
"manufactured home" have the same meaning. This term is
different from a "sectional home," which is defined above. See
standards in § 220-30.
(1)
TWIN DWELLING UNIT — One dwelling unit accommodating one
family that is attached to and completely separated by a vertical
unpierced fire resistant wall to only one additional dwelling unit. One
side yard shall be adjacent to each dwelling unit. Each unit may or may
not be on a separate lot from the attached dwelling unit.
F.
TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached
to two or more dwelling units, and with each dwelling unit being
completely separated from and attached to each other by unpierced
vertical fire resistant walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own
outside access. Side yards shall be adjacent to each end unit. See
standards in § 220-30.
G.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:811
and their essential buildings, excluding communications towers and
communications antennas, central sewage treatment plants, solid waste
disposal areas or facilities, power generating stations, septic or sludge
disposal, offices, storage of trucks, or equipment or bulk storage of
materials.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718; amended 12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 877]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit, provided that not more
than three of such number are unrelated to all of the others by blood,
marriage or legal adoption. A family shall also expressly include any number
of unrelated persons who reside within a group home, as defined herein
and meeting the requirements of § 220-30. It is the express intent of the
Borough to comply with all provisions of the federal Fair Housing Act, as
amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, in the construction
of this term.[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 726; 5-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 790]
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 877]
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or similar
materials shall be considered a wall. The term "wall" does not include
engineering retaining walls, which are permitted uses as needed in all
districts. See § 220-31.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public, and that may include automatic transaction
machines.
FLAGPOLE — A narrow extension of property on a lot or parcel from the
buildable area of a lot to be public right-of-way, and which is not part of the
lot area, but serves as access to the lot parcel. See also the definition of
"lot."[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
FLEXIBLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential development
that meets the requirements of § 220-27 of this chapter. A flexible
residential development may be approved with less restrictive dimensional
requirements than a conventional development, provided it meets
additional standards regarding site design and other matters.
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL — The total floor space within a building(s) measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls
separating buildings. Floor area shall specifically include, but not be limited
to: fully enclosed porches; and basement or cellar or attic space that is
potentially habitable and has a minimum head clearance of at least 6.5 feet.
Floor area shall not include unenclosed porches, decks or breezeways.205
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:812
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus. See § 220-38.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY, OTHER THAN BOROUGH-OWNED — A use
owned by a government, government agency or government authority for
valid public health, public safety, recycling collection or similar
governmental purpose, and which is not owned by Columbia Borough. This
term shall not include uses listed separately in the table of uses in Article
III, such as publicly-owned recreation. This term shall not include a prison.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit operated by an individual, family or
organization with a program to provide a supportive living arrangement for
individuals where special care is needed by the individual served due to
age, emotional, mental or physical handicap. This definition shall expressly
include facilities for the supervised care of developmentally disabled
persons and all persons subject to protection under the Federal Fair
Housing Act Amendments of 1988. Group homes must be licensed where
required by any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any such
license must be delivered to the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the
use. Group homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations
by the Borough as the type of dwelling unit they occupy. It is the express
intent of the Borough to comply with all provisions of the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder, in the
construction of this term.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or material that could
adversely affect he safety of the public, as classified by the United States
Department of Transportation in 49 CFR 100-185.[Added 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 852]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed ground level along the front of the building to the highest
point of a structure. For a building with a defined and pitched roof, an area
equal to 20% of the building coverage may exceed the maximum height to
provide for the roof peak, provided such 20% is not occupied by persons.
A. A group home shall not include a treatment center.
See standards in § 220-30.
NOTE: The Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments defined "handicap"
as follows: "1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities, 2) a record of
having such an impairment, or 3) being regarded as having such an
impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title
21." This definition was subsequently adjusted by Section 512 of the
Americans With Disabilities Act to address certain situations related to
substance abuse treatment.
B.
205. Editor's Note: The former definition of “garage sale,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 775.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:813
See exemptions for certain types of structures in § 220-58. A maximum of
one more story may be exposed in the rear of a building compared to what is
visible in the front of a building. For height of signs, see Article VII, entitled
"Signs."
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.[Added 4-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 718]
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building and that meets all of the home occupation
requirements of § 220-31. A light home occupation shall be a home
occupation that meets the additional requirements for a light home
occupation stated in § 220-31. A general home occupation shall be a home
occupation that does not meet the requirements for a light home
occupation.
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical
care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring stays
overnight. A medical care use that does not involve any stays overnight
shall be considered a medical office. A hospital may involve care and
rehabilitation for medical, dental or mental health, but shall not primarily
include housing or treatment of the criminally insane or persons actively
serving an official sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital may
also involve medical research and training for health care professionals.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 30 days shall be considered a boardinghouse and shall meet the
requirements of that use. See also bed-and-breakfast use. A hotel or motel
may also include a restaurant, meeting rooms, nightclub, newsstand, gift
shop, swim club or tavern, provided that such use(s) is not the principal use
of the property.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — The LI and GI Zoning Districts.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The maximum percentage of a lot covered
by buildings, concrete, paving, stone parking areas and other man-made
surfaces that have a coefficient of runoff greater than 0.8.
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles, such as the following types: metal, furniture,
appliances, motor vehicle parts, aircraft, glass, plastics, machinery,
equipment, containers and building materials. Junk shall not include: solid
waste that is temporarily stored as is customary in an appropriate container
that is routinely awaiting collection and disposed of in a manner consistent
with state regulations; toxic wastes; grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs or
similar yard waste materials; or items clearly awaiting imminent recycling
at an approved recycling facility.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:814
JUNK VEHICLE — (See also the definition of "unregistered vehicle.")
Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following conditions:
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs and/or cats than are
permitted under the "keeping of pets" or "crop farming" provisions of this
chapter. A kennel may also serve other animals.
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease
to exercise the right of the landowner and if such lease is for a remaining
period of at least 12 months) or authorized officers of a partnership or
corporation that is a landowner.
LARGE SOLAR ENERGY PRODUCTION FACILITY — An area of land or
other area used for a solar collection system principally used to capture
solar energy and convert it to electrical energy. Large solar energy
production facilities consist of one or more freestanding ground or roofmounted
solar collector devices, solar-related equipment and other
Cannot be moved under its own power, in regards to a vehicle designed
to move under its own power, other than a vehicle clearly needing only
minor repairs;
A.
B. Cannot be towed, in regards to a trailer designed to be towed;
C. Has been demolished beyond repair;
D. Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis; and/or
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
E.
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) "Junk" (see definition).
Three or more junk vehicles or unregistered vehicles that are partly
or fully visible from an exterior lot line, dwelling and/or public
street. This shall not apply to such vehicles allowed to be stored
within the requirements of § 220-30 for an auto repair garage or
auto service station.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse.
B.
A junkyard specifically shall include but not be limited to any metal
scrap yard or auto salvage yard.
C.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:815
accessory structures and buildings, including light reflectors,
concentrators, and heat exchangers, substations, electrical infrastructure,
transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. A facility
is considered a large solar energy production facility if it supplies electrical
or thermal power primarily for off-site use.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
813]
LIGHTING, DIFFUSED — Illumination that passes from the source through
a translucent cover or shade.
LIVESTOCK, RAISING OF or ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and
keeping of livestock, horses, poultry or insects for any commercial purposes
or the keeping of any animals for any reason beyond what is allowed
under the "keeping of pets" section of § 220-31 and beyond what is allowed
within the definition of "crop farming." For the purposes of this chapter, the
"keeping of livestock" shall have the same meaning as "animal husbandry."
Raising of livestock shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a stockyard used
for the housing of animals awaiting slaughter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. A lot may or may not coincide with a lot of record and includes one or
more adjacent pieces, parcels or plots of land of record held in single and
separate ownership, including adjacent pieces, parcels or plots bisected by
public or private streets. The area and depth of a lot shall be measured to
the legal right-of-way line of the street, and all lots shall front on public or
private streets.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a
lot (measured in acres or square feet). For the purposes of determining
compliance with the minimum lot area, the following shall be excluded:
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135°.
LOT, FLAG — A parcel of land created by a subdivision or partition which
includes a narrow projection or "flagpole" to the public right-of-way.[Added
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
Areas within the designated future or existing legal rights-of-way of:
any proposed or existing public streets or alleys; or any proposed or
existing commonly maintained private streets that serve more than one
lot (Note: Other sections of this chapter may specifically allow these
features to be included in lot area for a particular use); and
A.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
open space on a separate lot (Note: Other sections of this chapter may
specifically allow these features to be included in lot area for a specific
use).
B.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:816
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, the lot line shall be considered to be the existing
street right-of-way line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, such lot width at the minimum prescribed
front yard setback line shall be measured along the curve. Where buildings
are permitted to be attached, the lot width shall be measured from the
center of the party wall. In flag lots, lot width shall be measured at the
end of the flagpole where the lot width expands.[Amended 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 852]
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person's (or persons') skin
other than the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain
monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who are
related to each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building routinely used by
a recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation
that are limited to members and their occasional guests, and persons
specifically invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open
to members of the general public and which is not primarily operated as
a for-profit business. This use shall not include a target range for outdoor
shooting of firearms, boardinghouse, tavern, restaurant or retail sales
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot from
the existing street right-of-way.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a front street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot
having no street frontage, or a lot of an odd shape, or a flag lot, only the
one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
A. Massages are conducted.
The person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional or a licensed massage therapist by the state.
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor.
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a
permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic program.
E.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:817
unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the requirements
of that use are met. See § 220-30. See also "after hours club."
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
This use also includes accessory stockpiling and processing of mineral
resources. “Mineral extraction” includes but is not limited to the extraction
of sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, oil, coal, clay, shale and
iron ore. The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during
construction shall not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction.
MIXED USE — A building containing a residential use and a nonresidential
use.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 912]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See under "dwelling types."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which includes three or more mobile/manufactured homes for
residential use. The individual manufactured homes may be individually
owned. A development of mobile/ manufactured homes that is subdivided
into individual lots shall be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision
of site-built homes, and shall not be considered to be a mobile home park.
See § 220-30.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247,206 as reenacted and amended.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or amendments hereinafter enacted.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
that does not comply with the applicable lot coverage, dimensional and
other provisions in this chapter, as amended, where such structure lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of such chapter or applicable amendment(s).
Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to signs. See
§ 220-61.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or amendment(s), where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or applicable amendment(s). A use granted by
variance is not a nonconforming use. See § 220-61.
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully skilled nursing care of three or more persons. See
§ 220-30.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but may
206. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:818
include business offices, medical offices, laboratories, photographic studios
and/or television or radio broadcasting studios.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map as adopted by Borough Council which
designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts.207
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards:
ORDINANCE, THIS — The Columbia Borough Zoning Ordinance, including
the Official Zoning Map, as amended.
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public;
A.
Is covered by a system that ensures perpetual maintenance, if not
intended to be publicly owned;
B.
Will be deeded to the Borough and/or deed restricted to permanently
prevent uses of land other than common open space and
noncommercial recreation; and
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements:
(1) Existing street rights-of-way;
(2) Vehicle streets or driveways providing access to other lots;
Land beneath building(s) or land within 20 feet of a building (other
than accessory buildings and pools clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation and other than agricultural buildings
and a farmstead which are permitted within land approved by the
Borough for agricultural preservation);
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation);
(4)
(5) Area(s) needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot;
For land intended to be open to the public, that does not have
provisions for entry with a 20 foot minimum width by pedestrians
from a street open to the public or from an adjacent common open
space area that has access to such a street;
(6)
Land that includes a stormwater detention basin, except for a basin
or portions of a basin that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
Borough Council would be reasonably safe and useful for active or
passive recreation during the vast majority of weather conditions;
(7)
(8) Portions of land that have a width of less than 20 feet.
D.
207. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:819
OVERNIGHT GUEST — A person not originally part of the single entity
scheduled to occupy the short-term rental.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
912]
PA — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicle movement unless
otherwise stated.
PennDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES — Uses that do not have to be approved
as uses by the Zoning Hearing Board. A nonconforming use shall not be
considered to be a permitted by right use, a special exception use or a
conditional use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — A residential use providing
residential and support services primarily to persons who are over age
60, physically handicapped and/or developmentally disabled, and that is
licensed as a personal care center by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, photography studios, shoe repair shops,
household appliance repair shops, and other similar establishments, but
shall not include any adult uses, as herein defined.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The person who leased the property or represents
the entity that leased the property for the short-term rental. The person in
charge shall be noted as such by the property owner when notifying the
Borough of Columbia of the new occupancy and shall be the person to be
contacted in the event of an issue of the property. The person in charge must
personally occupy the short-term rental during the period of rental.[Added
6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 912]
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domestic animals that are ordinarily
considered to be kept in conjunction with the dwelling for the pleasure of
the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, Vietnamese pot-bellied
pigs, small birds, gerbils, rabbits, and other animals commonly sold in retail
pet shops. See § 220-31.[Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 775]
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship and that are operated for nonprofit and
noncommercial purposes. If a religious use is primarily residential in
nature, it shall be regulated under the appropriate dwelling type. See
standards in § 220-30.
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "Commission."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A principal structure which is also a building.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:820
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure in which the principal use of a
lot is conducted. Any structure that is physically attached to a principal
structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Leisure facilities owned, operated or
maintained by governmental entities for use by the general public.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, for a Zoning
Hearing Board hearing or an amendment to this chapter, such Act generally
required a legal advertisement published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, which states
that time and place of a meeting/hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30
days and the second publication not less than seven days from the meeting/
hearing date.)
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSIONS TOWER — A structure owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718]
RECREATION — The offering of leisure-time activities to unrelated persons.
This term shall not include any adult use. For the purposes of this chapter,
recreation facilities shall be permitted by right as an accessory use when
clearly limited to residents of a development and their occasional invited
guests. Publicly-owned recreation is a distinctly different use from indoor
recreation or outdoor recreation.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
and their customary collection, which is a permitted by right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted by right accessory use to a public or private
INDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that does not meet
the definition of “outdoor recreation,” and is used principally for active
or passive recreation, such as a bowling alley, roller skating, ice
skating, commercial batting practice use and similar uses. This term
shall not include any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 220-25.
A.
OUTDOOR RECREATION — A type of recreation use that has a total
building coverage of less than 15%, and is used principally for active or
passive recreation, such as a golf driving range, miniature golf course,
amusement park and similar uses. This term shall not include any use
listed separately as a distinct use by § 220-25, such as a firearms target
range.
B.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:821
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Borough-owned use or
an emergency services station.
RELATED EQUIPMENT or BASE STATION — Any structure or equipment
at a fixed location, not including a tower, that enables FCC license
communications between a user and a wireless network.[Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first cousin. This term
specifically shall not include relationships such as second, third or more
distant cousins. See definition of "dwelling unit."
REPAIR SERVICE — Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns,
bicycles and other household items.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A use
or structure that is accessory, customary and incidental to a principal
residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that are very
similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court, garage sale,
basketball backboard, household swimming pool, gazebo, storage shed,
greenhouse, children's playhouse or children's play equipment. No business
shall be conducted in a household garage or storage shed that is accessory
to a dwelling, except as may be allowed as a home occupation.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The C, RR, LDR, MDR, HDR and HDRM Zoning
Districts.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that contains an existing
primarily residential use, or is undeveloped and zoned as a residential
district.
RESTAURANT —
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store or any
restaurant.
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink and that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food on
the premises.
A.
A restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages.
However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of the total
trade, the requirements of a tavern or nightclub, as applicable, must be
met.
B.
C. See "drive-through service" in this section.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:822
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A residential development exclusively
serving persons 55 years and older, and their spouses. In addition, other
persons of any age should be permitted to live within a nursing home or
personal care center portion of a retirement community if they have illness
or disabilities that require such a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area or strip of land which is reserved for use by or as
a street or by one or more utilities or by the public or by others. The term
"right-of-way" by itself shall mean the existing street right-of-way, unless
another meaning is otherwise stated or clearly implied from the context in
which it is used.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include trade schools (such as privately
operated schools of trade, vocation or business).
SCREENING — Year-round plant material of substantial height and density
designed to provide a buffer. See requirements in § 220-59D.
SECTIONAL DWELLING — See under "dwelling units."
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SETBACK LINE —
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The official
established street right-of-way that either the Borough or the state
presently owns or holds another interest in the land, or will own after
the completion of any proposed subdivision, land development or
development of a use under this chapter, whether by dedication or
otherwise.
A.
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
future street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the property is not
abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured at right angles
from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-ofway
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured. See
exceptions for eaves and cornices in § 220-59B.
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such a
D.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:823
SHORT-TERM RENTAL (STR) — Any dwelling unit meeting the definition
of "hotel," as defined in Lancaster County Ordinance No. 45, enacted
September 15, 1999, and offered for rent for a period of less than 31
days.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 912]
SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE — An area required to be kept free of certain
visual obstructions to traffic. See § 220-59.
SIGN — Any physical device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of attracting attention from the public and that is visible from
beyond an exterior lot line, including all symbols, words, models, displays,
banners, flags, devices or representations. See definitions of types of signs
in §§ 220-55 and 220-47. This shall not include displays that only involve
symbols that are clearly and entirely religious in nature, and which do not
include advertising.
SIGN AREA — See § 220-55.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot
upon which the sign is located.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SINGLE ENTITY — A person or a group occupying the short-term
residence.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 912]
SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar collection system consisting
of one or more roof- and/or ground-mounted solar collected devices and
solar-related equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption
of utility power. A system is considered a small solar energy system only if
it supplies electrical or thermal power for on-site use, except that when a
property upon which the facility is installed also receives electrical power
supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not
presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company.[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — Land or structures where solid
waste is received and temporarily stored, at a location other than the
site where it was generated, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal.
Such facility may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from solid
waste. Such facility shall not include a junkyard, leaf composting, clean fill
or septage or sludge application.
SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array,
or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation
as an energy source for collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of
street, if a right-of-way exists. If a private street does not have a rightof-
way, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:824
solar energy for electricity generation or transfer of stored heat.[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
SOLAR-RELATED EQUIPMENT — Items including a solar photovoltaic cell,
panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device panels, lines,
pumps, batteries, mounting brackets, framing and possibly foundations
used for or intended to be used for collection of solar energy.[Added
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 220-16.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications facilities which render them more visually appealing or
blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop
in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer.
Such methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened
roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the
existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs,
flagpoles, and light poles.[Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718; amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
STORY (and HALF-STORY) — A level of a building routinely accessible to
humans having an average vertical clearance from floor to ceiling of 6.5
feet or greater shall be considered a full story, except as provided for in the
definition of "basement." Any level of a building having an average vertical
clearance from floor to ceiling of less than 6.5 feet shall be considered a half
story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of vehicle access to three or more lots or that is an expressway,
but not including an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and
"road" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having a stationary location on, below
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Any structure shall be
subject to the principal or accessory setbacks of this chapter, as applicable,
unless specifically exempted or unless a specific setback is established for
that particular type of structure by this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The definition in Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall apply.
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals. See definition of
"adult use."
C.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:825
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE or SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE — The Columbia Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,208 as amended.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification
to an existing wireless communications facility that changes the physical
dimensions of a communications tower or base station if it meets any of the
following criteria:[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests. See § 220-31.
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household
swimming pool.”
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
For a communications tower outside the public rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or by
the height of one additional antenna array with separation from
the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is
greater;
(1)
It protrudes from the edge of the wireless communications facility
by more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower
structures are the level off the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
(2)
A.
For a communications tower in the rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10% or 10 feet,
whichever is greater;
(1)
(2) It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
It involves installation of more than the standard number of new
equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed
four cabinets;
(3)
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site of
the communications tower; or
(4)
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior approval
of construction or modification of the communications tower unless
the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in
width, or addition of cabinets.
(5)
B.
208. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:826
of a "nightclub" or an "after hours club." The sale of food may also occur.
See also the definition of “restaurant.”
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 150 used tires on a lot.
See "outdoor storage" in § 220-31.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling types."
TRADE/HOBBY SCHOOL or TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that is primarily
intended for education of a work-related skill or craft or a hobby, and does
not primarily provide state-required education to persons under age 16.
Examples include a dancing school, martial arts school, cosmetology school
or ceramics school.
TRADESPERSON — A person involved with building trades, such as but
not limited to plumbing, electrical work, building construction, building
remodeling, and roofing.
TREATMENT CENTER —
TRUCK STOP — A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel
to tractor-trailer trucks owned by numerous different companies. Such use
may also include related retail sales and repair services.
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the highest point of
the extended wind turbine blade tip or highest point of the wind energy
conversion system to the ground level.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
813]
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer that does not
display a license plate with a current registration sticker and does not have
a valid state safety inspection sticker. This term shall not apply to vehicles
(such as licensed antique cars) for which state regulations do not require an
inspection sticker. The term also shall not include motor vehicles displaying
a license and inspection stickers that have each expired less than 90 days
previously.
A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for three or
more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/
or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
Current addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance that was
used in an illegal manner; and/or
(2)
A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
A.
B. See standards in § 220-30.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:827
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a structure, activity outside of a structure, any structure, recreational
vehicle storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of this chapter.
Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. See § 220-11.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.).[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
WIND CHARGER — A wind-driven direct-current generator used for
charging storage batteries.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A device such as a
wind charger, wind turbine or windmill and/or other electric generation
facility whose main purpose is to convert wind power into another form of
energy such as electricity or heat, consisting of one or more wind turbine
and other structures in buildings, including substations, meteorological
towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant
structures and facilities.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
WIND ENERGY PRODUCTION FACILITY — An area of land or other area
used for a wind energy conversion system principally used to capture wind
energy and convert it to electrical energy. Large wind energy production
facilities consist of one or more wind turbines, tower, an associate to control
a conversional electronics and other accessory structures and buildings
including substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other
appurtenant structures and facilities. A facility is considered a wind energy
production facility if it supplies electrical power primarily for off-site
use.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts wind energy into electricity
through the use of a wind turbine generator and includes the nacelle, rotor,
tower and pad transformer, if any.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
WIND TURBINE TOWER — The vertical component of a wind energy
conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached
blades above the ground.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:828
WINDMILL — A device that runs on an energy generated by a wheel of
adjustable blades or slats rotated by the wind.[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 813]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited
to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and
other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services.[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as a
communications tower or any other support structure, that could support
the placement or installation of a wireless communications facility if
approved by the Borough.[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as
the subject structure or use and which is measured inward from a lot line.
Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal and accessory structures
within specified required minimum yard setbacks.
YARD, FRONT or MINIMUM FRONT SETBACK — A yard measured from
along the front lot line (which is the existing street right-of-way line where
it abuts a street) and that extends the full width of the lot from side lot line
to side lot line.
YARD, REAR or MINIMUM REAR SETBACK —
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot.
A.
When a lot abuts onto two or more public streets, the applicant may
choose which is the front yard, unless the Zoning Officer determines
that the front yard should follow the clearly predominant front yard
orientation of the development of abutting lots.
B.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required
front yard, except as provided in this chapter. See special front yard
provisions, including those regarding corner lots, through lots and front
yard exceptions, in § 220-59.
C.
D. Every lot shall include at least one front lot line.
A yard extending the full width of the lot and which is always measured
from along the rear line and which establishes the minimum setback
for the subject structure, and which stretches between the side lot lines
parallel to the rear lot line.
A.
A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard setback
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
B.
§ 220-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:829
YARD, SIDE or MINIMUM SIDE SETBACK —
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Columbia Borough, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The person charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, and any officially designated assistant.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Columbia Borough Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in
this chapter.
C. Every lot shall include a rear lot line.
A yard which establishes the minimum setback for the closest portion
of the subject structure, and which is measured from along the entire
length of the side lot line, and which extends from the front lot line to
the rear lot line.
A.
A structure shall not extend into the applicable minimum side yard
setback, except as provided for in this chapter.
B.
C. See "corner lot" provision in § 220-59B.
Every lot shall include at least one side lot line, although such lot line
may be regulated as a front yard under § 220-59B.
D.
§ 220-19 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-19
1:830
ARTICLE III
District Regulations
§ 220-20. Designation of districts and purposes.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, Columbia Borough is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts, with the following abbreviations:
P Park and Open Space District
C Conservation District
RR Rural Residential District
LDR Low Density Residential District
MDR Medium Density Residential District
HDR High Density Residential District
HDRM High Density Residential - Multifamily District
INSR Institutional - Residential District
DC Downtown Commercial District
MDRB Medium Density Residential - Light Business District
LB Light Business District
CR Commercial Recreation District
NC Neighborhood Commercial District
HC Highway Commercial District
RC Riverfront Commercial District
LI Light Industrial District
GI General Industrial District
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts named in
Subsection A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the Official Zoning Map. Any use of the abbreviations listed in
Subsection A shall mean the district name that is listed beside the
abbreviation.
C. Floodplain. The floodplain area, as defined by Article V, shall serve as
an overlay area to all of the underlying districts.
D. Purposes of each district. The purposes of each zoning district are
summarized below:
(1) P Park and Open Space District: To recognize major public parks
and open spaces.
(2) C Conservation District: To provide for development at very low
intensity in areas that are not naturally suited for development
because of steep slopes, flood-proneness, limited road access or
similar characteristics.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-20
1:831
(3) RR Rural Residential District: To primarily provide for development
of single-family detached houses at low densities of approximately
two homes per acre. To carefully control conversions of existing
homes into additional numbers of units to promote neighborhood
stability. To protect neighborhoods against incompatible
nonresidential development.
(4) LDR Low Density Residential District: To primarily provide for
development of single-family detached houses at approximately
four homes per acre. To carefully control conversions of existing
homes into additional numbers of units to promote neighborhood
stability. To protect neighborhoods against incompatible
nonresidential development.
(5) MDR Medium Density Residential District: To primarily provide for
development of single-family detached, twin and townhouse
dwellings in a traditional setting at medium densities. To offer
opportunities for higher densities if an exceptionally high-quality
design is proposed that would be highly compatible with nearby
homes. To carefully control conversions of existing homes into
additional numbers of units to promote neighborhood stability. To
protect neighborhoods against incompatible nonresidential
development. To extend the best features of older development into
newer development.
(6) HDR High Density Residential District: To primarily provide for
single-family detached, twin and townhouse dwellings in a
traditional setting at moderately high densities. To offer
opportunities for higher densities if an exceptionally high-quality
design is proposed that would be highly compatible with nearby
homes. To carefully control conversions of existing homes into
additional numbers of units to promote neighborhood stability. To
protect neighborhoods against incompatible nonresidential
development. To extend the best features of older development into
newer development.
(7) HDRM High Density Residential - Multifamily District: To provide
for a range of housing types at moderately high densities, including
contemporary apartment development.
(8) MDRB Medium Density Residential - Light Business District: To
provide for residential development similar to the Medium Density
Residential District. In addition, to provide for offices and certain
other light business uses that would be highly compatible with
nearby dwellings and the historic character of the area.
(9) INSR Institutional - Residential District: To primarily provide for
health care facilities and other institutional uses. In addition, to
provide for residential development similar to the Medium Density
Residential District.
§ 220-20 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-20
1:832
§ 220-21. Application of district regulations.
(10)DC Downtown Commercial District: To promote a strong downtown
with a balanced mix of retail, service, office, public, institutional
and residential uses. To encourage a pedestrian orientation, while
avoiding intense auto-related uses that would damage the urban
fabric and streetscape.
(11) LB Light Business District: To provide for a range of light
commercial, institutional and industrial uses, in a manner that is
compatible with adjacent homes. To also provide for continuation of
the airport, if desired by the property owner.
(12)CR Commercial Recreation District: To provide for a range of light
business and institutional uses, in a manner that is compatible with
the natural features of the land. To take advantage of scenic views
from the Borough Farm.
(13)NC Neighborhood Commercial District: To provide for light
commercial uses that would be compatible with adjacent relatively
dense residential neighborhoods. This district is intended to be a
transitional district between residential and commercial areas.
(14)HC Highway Commercial District: To provide for a wide range of
commercial uses along the Route 462 corridor.
(15)RC Riverfront Commercial District: To encourage a mix of
entertainment, restaurant and other commercial uses that will take
advantage of proximity to the river and the downtown, and that will
be compatible with a proposed recreation trail.
(16) LI Light Industrial District: To provide for a mix of light industrial
uses, offices and certain related commercial uses. To avoid the
heaviest types of industrial uses.
(17) GI General Industrial District: To provide for a range of industrial
uses, to meet the Borough's obligation under state law to offer
opportunities for all legitimate land uses.
A. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this chapter.
B. No structure shall hereafter be erected, used, constructed,
reconstructed, structurally altered or occupied and no land shall
hereafter be used, developed or occupied unless it is in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the use and district in which it is
located.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:833
§ 220-22. Zoning Map.
§ 220-23. District boundaries.
The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map:
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
D. Boundary change. Any territory which may hereafter become part of
the Borough through annexation or a boundary adjustment shall be
classified as the zoning district of Columbia Borough that is mostly
closely adjacent to such land (as determined by the Zoning Hearing
Board) until or unless such territory is otherwise classified by Borough
Council.
A. A map entitled "Columbia Borough Zoning Map" accompanies this
chapter and is declared a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map,
which should bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map," shall be retained in the Borough Building.
B. Map changes. Changes to the boundaries and districts of the Official
Zoning Map shall only be made in conformity with the amendment
procedures specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
All changes should be noted by date with a brief description of the
nature of the change, either on the map or within an appendix to this
chapter.
C. Replacement map. If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of changes and
additions, or needs to have drafting errors or omissions corrected,
Borough Council may, by resolution, adopt a new copy of the Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any remaining parts shall be preserved
together with all available records pertaining to its previous adoption or
amendment.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-way, streams and railroads, and lot lines
as they existed on a recorded deed or plan of record in the County
Recorder of Deeds' office at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to
follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. The location of a district boundary on unsubdivided land or where a
district boundary divides a lot shall be determined by the use of the
§ 220-21 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-23
1:834
§ 220-24. Setbacks across municipal boundaries.
§ 220-25. Table of Permitted Uses by District.209
scale appearing on the maps unless the same is indicated by
dimensions.
D. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall
be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s) are
located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law.
A. Intent: to continue the objective of compatible land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. This chapter requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer
yards when certain uses would abut an existing dwelling or a
residential zoning district.
C. These same additional setback and buffer yard provisions shall be
provided by uses proposed within Columbia Borough regardless of
whether such abutting existing dwelling or principally residential
zoning district is located in an abutting municipality and/or in
Columbia.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings:
P = Permitted by right (zoning decision by Zoning Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning
Hearing Board)
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Borough Council)
N = Not Permitted
(S. 220-30) = See additional requirements in § 220-30
(S. 220-31) = See additional requirements in § 220-31
B. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically stated in this chapter
(including § 220-5B), any land or structure shall only be used or
occupied for a use specifically listed in this chapter as permitted in the
zoning district where the land or structure is located. Such uses shall
only be permitted if the use complies with all other requirements of this
chapter.
(1) This table is divided into two sections: Primarily Residential
Districts; and Primarily Nonresidential Districts.
(2) See § 220-5B, which generally provides a process for approval of a
use that is not listed, based upon similarity to permitted uses and
other criteria. Except as provided in such § 220-5B, any other
209. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Uses by District is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 220-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-25
1:835
principal use that is not specifically listed as P or SE in the
applicable district in this table is prohibited in that district.
(3) For temporary uses, see § 220-3G.
(4) See also the following requirements, among other sections:
(a) Article V, Environmental Protection.
(b) Article VI, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
(c) Article VII, Signs.
(d) Chapter 130, Historic District (if within the designated historic
district).
C. Permitted accessory uses in all districts. An accessory use of a dwelling
is only permitted if such use is customarily incidental to the residential
use and is specifically permitted by this chapter. The following are
permitted by right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all
districts, within the requirements of § 220-31 and all other
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Adult or child day care as an accessory use, including care of a
maximum of three persons.
(2) Standard antennas, including antennas used by contractors to
communicate with their own vehicles. [Note: See standard in
§ 220-31.]
(3) Fence or wall. [Note: See standard for each in § 220-31.]
(4) Garage, household.
(5) Garage sale. [Note: See standard in § 220-31.]
(6) Keeping of pets. [Note: See standard in § 220-31.]
(7) Parking or loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted
in that district.
(8) Recreational facilities, limited to use by residents of a development
or students and employees of an adjacent educational institution,
and their occasional invited guests.
(9) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II). [Note:
See standard in § 220-31.]
(10) Signs, as permitted by Article VII.
(11) Swimming pool, household. [Note: See standard in § 220-31.]
(12) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
§ 220-25 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-25
1:836
§ 220-26. Dimensional requirements in each district.
incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or conditional
principal use.
(13) Small solar energy production facility, subject to the provisions of
§ 220-30. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
D. Permitted accessory uses to business and institutional uses. The
following are permitted by right accessory uses only to a permitted by
right, special exception or conditional commercial, industrial or
institutional use, provided that all requirements of this chapter are met:
(1) Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
(2) The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly
limited to employees, patients, residents and families of employees
of the use and their occasional invited guests:
(a) Internal cafeteria without drive-through service;
(b) Day-care center; or
(c) Recreational facilities.
A. The following area, yard and building requirements210 shall apply for
the specified zoning district, unless a more restrictive requirement for a
specific use is required by §§ 220-30 or 220-31 or another section of this
chapter. All measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise stated. See
definitions of terms (such as lot width) in § 220-19.
B. Height. The following height provisions shall apply unless specifically
stated otherwise for a specific use:
(1) Within the C, RR, LDR, MDR, HDR, MDRB, NC and P districts:
(a) The maximum height for principal buildings shall be 3.5 stories
and 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) The maximum height for residential accessory structures shall
be 1.5 stories (with the 1/2 story limited to nonhabitable
storage areas) and 25 feet.
(2) The maximum height for a retirement community in the INS
District shall be regulated by § 220-30.
(3) Within all other districts, the maximum height for all buildings shall
be six stories or 90 feet, whichever is more restrictive, provided
that the maximum height shall be 35 feet within 50 feet of an
existing dwelling within a residential district.
210. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 220-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:837
(4) See also § 220-58, Height exceptions.211
C. Sewage and water service.
(1) Every principal building constructed after the adoption date of this
chapter that will not be served by both public water service and
public sewage service prior to occupancy shall require a minimum
lot area of one acre, unless a larger lot area is required by another
section of this chapter.
(2) Every principal building constructed after the adoption date of this
chapter that will be served by public water service or public
sewage service, but not both, prior to occupancy shall require a
minimum lot area of 35,000 square feet, unless a larger lot area is
required by another section of this chapter.
D. Steep slopes in the C, CR and RR Districts. If a new lot is proposed to be
created within the C, CR or RR District after the adoption date of this
chapter, and slopes over 15% on such lot will be used for building
purposes, then the following additional requirements shall apply:
(1) Site plan.
(a) The applicant shall provide a site plan and grading plan drawn
to scale that shows: the proposed lot lines; the existing and
proposed contours; and existing and proposed building
locations, or the outer perimeter of areas that will be
authorized for use for a principal building, and adjacent
construction areas 30 feet to the rear, 10 feet to each side and
20 feet to the front of such building location.
(b) Through statements and designations on the site plan, an
applicant may limit the area upon which new principal
buildings are permitted. In such case, an applicant may
provide that no new principal building shall be located on
slopes of over 15% or slopes of 25% or greater, and thereby
avoid the regulations of this Subsection D.
(2) If a proposed new lot would involve a new principal building or
adjacent construction areas on an area with an average slope of
over 15% but less than 25%, then the minimum lot area shall be
43,560 square feet (one acre).
(3) If a proposed new lot would involve a new principal building or
adjacent construction areas on an area with an average slope of
25% or greater, then the minimum lot area shall be three acres, and
the maximum percent of the lot covered by impervious surfaces
shall be 10%.
211. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding the Borough Airport Approach
Ordinance, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 919.
§ 220-26 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-26
1:838
(4) This Subsection D shall not apply to slopes that were man-made.
Natural slopes of over 15% shall not be regraded in such a manner
as to circumvent the requirements of this chapter. Sloped areas
less than 40 feet in total width across an entire tract of land shall
not be regulated under this Subsection D.
(5) As part of development under this Subsection D, the applicant shall
prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that the removal of
healthy trees with a trunk width of over six inches (measured at a
height 3.5 feet above the ground level) and other attractive natural
vegetation will be minimized. The site plan shall show wooded
areas to be removed or preserved, and methods to be used to make
sure they are protected during the construction process.
E. River and creek setbacks in the C District.
(1) Within the C District, no new or expanded building and no new or
expanded off-street parking area or commercial or industrial
storage area shall be located within the following distances:
(a) Seventy-five feet from the average water level of the
Susquehanna River;
(b) Fifty feet from the center line of any other perennial creek.
(2) Any street or driveway crossing of the areas established by
Subsection E(1). above shall be approximately perpendicular to the
waterway, to the maximum extent reasonable.
(3) The setbacks established by Subsection E(1) above shall not extend
beyond the boundaries of the C District.
F. Maximum front setback and front yard parking.
(1) In the DC, MDR and HDR districts, where a new principal building
is proposed on a block, and 90% or more of the lots on such block
frontage include existing principal buildings of a certain prevailing
front yard setback distance, then the new principal building shall
be constructed with its front yard or front porch setback within 10
feet of the prevailing existing front yard setback of such block. See
also § 220-59B(3).
(2) In the DC, MDR and HDR Districts, special exception approval shall
be required for any new off-street parking space(s) proposed
between the street curb along the front lot line and a new principal
building if such parking space(s) are at least partially within 50 feet
of the curb. The Zoning Hearing Board shall only approve such
parking if the applicant proves there are no feasible alternatives
and that the parking will be designed to minimize the visual impact
along the streetscape and to minimize conflicts with pedestrian
traffic.
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:839
§ 220-27. Flexible residential development option.
A. Purposes. This section is intended to serve the following purposes, in
addition to the overall community development objectives of this
chapter and the purposes of the applicable district:
(1) To provide an option to the normally required zoning provisions in
residential districts to permit reasonable adjustments in certain
standards, to encourage design innovations and creativity.
(2) To make sure that infill development is compatible with adjacent
existing buildings.
(3) To provide an option that would allow the efficient use of lots with
unusual lot lines.
(4) To provide for a scale and character of new development that is
compatible with the existing neighborhood.
(5) To provide a higher density than would otherwise be permitted, as
a bonus for development that meets the higher standards of this
section.
(6) To provide a mechanism that can be combined with the waiver/
modification approval process of Chapter 190, Subdivision and
Land Development, to tailor new development standards to urban
conditions.
B. Applicability. This § 220-27 provides an optional set of standards for
residential development in certain districts as provided in the table of
uses in § 220-25.212 All requirements of this chapter shall apply to a
flexible residential development, except for provisions that are
specifically modified by this § 220-27. In addition, all other
requirements of Borough ordinances shall apply.
C. Procedures.
(1) A flexible residential development shall need conditional use
approval from Borough Council, after review by the Borough
Planning Commission. The procedural requirements for a
conditional use shall apply, as stated in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. At the option of the applicant, such
conditional use approval may occur at the same time as or prior to
approvals under Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) A sketch plan submittal is very strongly encouraged. The review of
a sketch plan can allow key site planning issues to be resolved
before an applicant expends significant costs for detailed
engineering.
212. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Uses by District is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 220-27 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-27
1:840
(3) The conditional use application shall include the following
information at a minimum, in addition to the information on the
Borough application form. Plans shall be drawn to a suitable scale,
with existing features distinguished from proposed features.
(a) The address of the property, and a site location map.
(b) A site plan showing the locations and dimensions of existing
and proposed structures, walls, lot lines, parking, driveways,
streets, alleys and sidewalks. Any structures to be demolished
shall be highlighted. Existing uses of the property shall be
described.
(c) Dimensions of all proposed buildings from lot lines.
(d) Existing and proposed street trees and other landscaping, with
the general species, sizes and locations stated.
(e) The name and address of the landowner, applicant and plan
preparer.
(f) Architectural elevations of proposed principal buildings and
any walls, as viewed from a public street. Such architectural
designs shall be prepared by a registered architect. If the plans
state that similar architectural designs will be used for each
building, then only a typical elevation shall be required. The
types of materials to be used on the exterior of buildings and
fences and walls shall be stated. The substance of proposed
deed restrictions shall be submitted that will regulate such
exterior materials in the future.
(g) An initial list of any modifications/waivers to the requirements
of Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development, that are
being requested or will be requested.
(h) The site plan shall also show the approximate locations of
existing or approved buildings and streets, driveways and
alleys within 100 feet of the boundaries of the tract.
Photographs of the site and adjacent lots shall also be
submitted.
(i) Storm drainage, utility, grading and erosion control plans are
not required as part of a flexible residential development
submission if they will be addressed under another Borough
ordinance.
(j) A written statement describing how the application meets the
conditional use standards of this section.
(k) The substance of legally binding provisions (such as a recorded
easement agreement) that will perpetually provide for the
proper maintenance and shared use of any common
infrastructure, such as a shared driveway. All such restrictions
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:841
regarding such matters shall be in a form that is subject to
acceptance by the Borough Solicitor.
D. Tract size. To be eligible as a flexible residential development, a tract
shall include a minimum of 2,400 square feet and be able to
accommodate a minimum of two dwelling units.
E. Housing types.
(1) A flexible residential development shall only include the following
types of uses, and their customary accessory uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Twin dwellings (side by side).
(c) Townhouses/rowhouses. (Note: The definition does not require
the units to be side by side, but instead would allow back-toback
or staggered units.)
(2) Each dwelling unit shall be on its own fee-simple lot or be in
condominium ownership.
(3) Mobile/manufactured homes shall not be permitted as part of a
flexible residential development. However, sectional/modular
construction may be permitted if the other provisions of this
section are met.
F. Dimensional requirements.
(1) No minimum lot area shall be required. Instead, a maximum
average of one dwelling unit shall be permitted for each 1,200
square feet of lot area in the HDR or HDRM District, and for each
1,500 square feet of lot area in the MDR District. The entire initial
lot area of the tract shall be used to determine average density,
except that areas within the rights-of-way of existing or proposed
public streets or alleys shall be deleted.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum building width of 15 feet.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum outdoor private area of
200 square feet per dwelling unit. Such private area shall be for the
exclusive use of the residents of that dwelling unit. Such private
area may be a wood deck, a balcony, within a walled or fenced area,
or otherwise be distinguished as being private as opposed to
common area.
(4) No setback is required for buildings or other structures from the
right-of-way of a public street. However, structures shall provide
for safe sight distances at intersections of streets and alleys. A
garage door entrance onto a street shall be set back a minimum of
15 feet from the sidewalk along a public street.
§ 220-27 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-27
1:842
(a) A new garage door shall not face onto and enter onto a public
street unless the applicant proves that there is no other
alternative that allows the reasonable development of the site.
Where a garage door(s) is determined to be necessary onto a
public street, the number and width shall be minimized. For
example, one car garage door per dwelling might enter onto a
street, while a second parking space per dwelling might be
accessed from an alley (such as within a shared carport).
(b) If two or more off-street parking spaces per dwelling or garage
doors for two or more vehicles are located within 20 feet of a
public street, then the lot width per dwelling along such street
shall be a minimum of 24 feet.
(5) A five-foot minimum setback shall be maintained from side and rear
lot lines exterior to the tract. However, one new dwelling unit may
be permitted to be constructed attached to an existing building
along the lot line of the tract if a building was previously attached
to such existing building. See conditional use standards below.
(6) A five-foot minimum setback shall apply between detached
buildings within the development, to allow for proper maintenance.
(7) Dwellings and new lots within a flexible residential development
shall not be required to have direct access to a public street,
provided that suitable perpetually guaranteed access is available to
connect to a public street. See conditional use standards below.
(8) A sidewalk meeting Borough standards shall be required along
each public street. An average of one deciduous shade tree shall be
planted along each 40 feet of adjacent public street right-of-way,
unless existing trees will serve that purpose. The species and
locations of such trees shall meet Borough requirements.
(9) A minimum of 20% of the total land area of the development, not
including areas within public street or alley rights-of-way, shall be
permanently maintained as landscaped areas, with trees, shrubs
and other attractive vegetative ground cover. Hard-surface
pedestrian areas may count towards this 20% minimum if they will
include significant canopy trees.
(10) A maximum of 50% of the total land area of the development, not
including areas within public street or alley rights-of-way, shall be
covered by buildings.
G. Conditional use standards. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction
of Borough Council that the flexible residential development would
meet the following standards:
(1) The development shall not cause or result in a demolition of a
building with historically significant architecture that is in
condition that would reasonably allow rehabilitation.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:843
(a) This Subsection G(1) shall only apply to buildings categorized
as "Level 1 Exceptional" or "Level 2 Significant" under the
historic preservation section of the 1995 Columbia Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
(b) This subsection shall not apply within the historic district if
demolition is approved under the provisions of the historic
district.
(2) The development shall be compatible with the scale, character and
design of adjacent buildings and the neighborhood. In most cases,
this is intended to involve primarily red brick construction along a
street, interesting rooflines and front porches.
(3) The development shall involve fire-resistant construction.
(4) The development shall minimize the visual prominence of
driveways, garages and vehicle parking. In most cases, garages,
carports or parking courts are intended to be accessed using rear
or side alleys or an interior shared driveway.
(5) The development shall include substantial landscaping. See Article
VIII.
(6) The development shall include suitable measures of attractive
design to maximize privacy and security between dwelling units. In
most cases, this is intended to involve brick walls, fences
constructed of weather-resistant wood or decorative metal pickets
or materials with a similar appearance, and landscaping. Such
measures shall also be designed to provide reasonable privacy for
residents of dwellings on lots contiguous to the development.
(7) Any alleys, common driveways or new streets shall be sufficient in
width for the one-way or two-way traffic they are intended to
accommodate, and for access by emergency vehicles from existing
public streets. In no case shall a new alley or shared driveway have
a paved width of less than 10 feet. The applicant shall submit the
layout plans and plans showing water lines and hydrant locations to
the appropriate local fire protection personnel to request a review,
at the same time submittal is made to the Borough.
(8) Any common driveway or new or adjacent alley that serves the
development shall be sufficient in construction to minimize future
expenses for repair to the Borough and/or the homeowners.
H. Site features.
(1) Mailboxes shall be provided in a manner that will minimize their
visual impact along street cartways. For example, mailboxes might
be clustered, as opposed to being individually spaced along a street
20 feet apart.
§ 220-27 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-27
1:844
§ 220-28. Additional requirements within NC District.
The following additional requirements shall apply within the NC District:
§ 220-28.1. (Reserved)213
§ 220-28.2. SR Shawnee Run Riparian Corridor Overlay District.
[Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
The zoning ordinances of the Borough of Columbia be and hereby are
amended by adding the following provisions to create a new zoning overlay
district to be known as the "SR Shawnee Run Riparian Corridor Overlay
District" ("SR Overlay District"):
(2) If dumpsters or other common waste and recycling containers are
used, they shall be located in a manner that will minimize their
visual impact and nuisances. See screening provisions in § 220-62.
A. No use shall be open to the public for business between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Lighting. See § 220-38. All lighting shall be downcast. No light fixture
shall exceed 20 feet in total height above the ground.
C. A minimum of 10% of the total lot area shall be landscaped in trees,
shrubs and vegetative ground cover.
D. No restaurant shall include drive-through facilities.
A. Purpose. This overlay district is intended to protect the tree canopy and
water quality of Shawnee Run and its tributary. It is recognized that
these waterways and their riparian corridors contain important natural
resources unique within Columbia Borough and should be conserved
despite their presence in an urban area. The standards within this
district are designed to minimize adverse impacts to these resources,
thereby protecting the rights of the residents of Columbia Borough to
clean air, pure water and the natural, scenic, historic and aesthetic
values of the environment, as set forth in Article I, Section 27 of the
Pennsylvania Constitution.
B. Applicability. This section provides additional standards for areas
shown on the Official Zoning Map as lying within the SR Overlay
District.214 All provisions of the underlying base zoning district still
govern, except in the case of conflicting standards, in which case the
more stringent shall apply.
C. Defining criteria.
213. Editor's Note: Former § 220-28.1, Airport District Overlay, added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 828,
was repealed 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 919.
214. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28.2
1:845
(1) Except as provided in Subsections D and E below, the SR Overlay
District shall extend a minimum width of 50 feet on each side of the
watercourse, measured from the top of each stream bank.
(2) The district shall be extended to also encompass the entire onehundred-
year floodplain as defined in § 220-35E.
(3) If any wetland area is directly adjacent to the SR Overlay District,
the entire wetland area shall be included within the SR Overlay
District and shall be subject to all standards for wetlands within
this section.
D. Performance standards.
(1) Existing vegetated areas within the SR Overlay District shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible.
(2) At least 75% of trees on a lot having a dbh (diameter at breast
height) of four inches or greater within the SR Overlay District
shall be retained, unless a lesser percentage is proposed, which
shall be subject to the mitigation requirements of Subsection E.
(3) The planting of additional native trees, shrubs and other plant
material, the removal of dead or damaged trees, and the removal of
invasive species as determined necessary in order to create a
suitable riparian canopy and understory shall be permitted.
(4) Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be
permitted within the SR Overlap District and shall maintain a
minimum distance of 100 feet from the top of the stream bank.
(5) Solid waste disposal facilities shall not be permitted within 300 feet
of the top of the stream bank.
(6) Above or underground petroleum storage facilities shall not be
permitted within 150 feet of the top of the stream bank.
(7) The application of biosolids shall not be permitted within 100 feet
of the top of the stream bank.
(8) Any storage and handling areas of any hazardous materials must
have impermeable surfaces designed to contain materials stored/
handled. After use, materials shall be directed to a predetermined
collection point, which shall not be located within the SR Overlay
District.
E. Mitigation standards.
(1) If the percentage of trees having a dbh of four inches or greater
being retained within the SR Overlay District is less than 75% as
part of a proposed land disturbance, mitigation shall be required.
Mitigation of qualified trees that are intended to be removed, in
accordance with Subsection D(2), can be accomplished by
§ 220-28.2 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-28.2
1:846
replacing and/or replanting them on the lot. Replacement trees
shall be provided in accordance with the table below. The
landowner shall be required to maintain all replacement trees for
two years after the trees are planted and to replace any tree that
dies within the two-year guarantee period.
Size of Removed Tree
(dbh)
(diameter at breast height
in inches)
Number of Required
Replacement Trees With a dbh
of at Least 2 Inches
4.0 to 11.9 1
12.0 to 17.9 2
18.0 or greater 3
(2) The species replacing native trees should be similar to those being
removed. Tree species classified as invasive by the Pennsylvania
Department of Natural Resources shall be replaced by native
species.
§ 220-28.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28.2
1:847

ARTICLE IV
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses
§ 220-29. Applicability.
§ 220-30. Additional requirements for specific principal uses.
A. This article establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two requirements conflict, the stricter requirement
shall apply.
B. For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as special exception
uses, see also the procedures and standards in § 220-16.
A. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
(1) Adult use (this is limited to the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment use):
(a) No such use shall be located within 500 linear feet of the lot
line of Glatfelter Memorial Field, or any library, public park,
existing dwelling, or within 1,000 linear feet of the lot line of
any primary or secondary school, place of worship, day-care
center or child nursery. [Amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No.
860]
(b) No such use shall be located within 1,000 lineal feet of any
existing adult use.
(c) A forty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines in accordance with
§ 220-59, but with plantings of an initial minimum height of five
feet.
(d) No pornographic material, displays or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside of the establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
(e) No such use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or municipal law.
(f) See § 220-53, Prohibited signs.
(g) The use shall not include the sale or display of obscene
materials, as defined by state law, as may be amended by
applicable court decisions.
(h) These uses are specifically prohibited in all districts except
where specifically permitted by Article III.
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:849
(i) A minimum lot area of one acre is required.
(j) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing
booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically includes,
but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers. No room of any kind accessible to customers shall
include less than 150 square feet.
(k) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts or any
sexual contact between entertainers or between entertainers
and customers.
(l) Only lawful massages as defined by state court decisions shall
be performed in a massage parlor.
(m) All persons within any adult use shall wear nontransparent
garments that cover their genitals and the female areola,
except within a permitted lawful adult live entertainment use.
(n) Any application for such use shall state the names and home
addresses of all individuals intended to have more than a 5%
ownership in such use or in a corporation owning such use, and
of an on-site manager responsible to ensure compliance with
this chapter on a daily basis. Such information shall be updated
at the beginning of each year in writing to the Zoning Officer.
(2) Adult day-care center:
(a) Shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the state.
(b) Shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(c) Shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
(3) After hours club: See State Act 219 of 1990,215 which generally
prohibits this use.
(4) Apartments: see Subsection A(36), Rowhouses/townhouses and
apartments, in this section.
(5) Auto, boat or mobile/manufactured home sales:
(a) No vehicle, boat or home on display shall occupy any part of
the existing or future street right-of-way or required customer
parking area. See buffer yard provisions in § 220-59.
(b) See light and glare standards in § 220-38.
(c) See parking requirements in Article VI.
215. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7327.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:850
(d) Any mobile/manufactured homes on a sales site shall meet the
required principal building setbacks from the perimeter lot
lines.
(6) Auto repair garage:
(a) All paint work shall be performed within a building, with a
fume collection and ventilation system that directs fumes away
from any adjacent dwellings. Outdoor major repairs (such as
body work and grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur
within 250 feet of a residential lot line.
(b) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to
adjacent lots. See standards in Article V. See buffer yard
requirements in § 220-59.
(c) Motor vehicles shall not be kept or parked within a required
buffer yard, nor within the legal street right-of-way.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of junk other than permitted junk
vehicles shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a
dwelling.
(e) Any junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
for more than 20 days within view of a public street or a
dwelling. A maximum of six junk vehicles may be parked on a
lot outside of an enclosed building at any one time. Any junk
vehicle stored outside overnight shall be screened from view of
adjacent dwellings.
(f) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling (not including a dwelling separated from the garage
by a street) if another reasonable alternative exits.
(7) Auto service station:
(a) See definition of this term and "auto repair garage" in Article
II. The uses may be combined, if the requirements for each are
met.
(b) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel or air
pumps shall be performed within a building. The use shall not
include spray painting.
(c) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from the existing street
right-of-way and shall meet side yard principal building
setback requirements.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of junk shall be prohibited within
view of a public street or dwelling. Any junk vehicle stored
outside overnight shall be screened from view of adjacent
dwellings.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:851
(e) Any junk vehicle (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
more than 20 days within view of a public street or a dwelling.
No junk vehicles shall be stored within 20 feet of an existing
street right-of-way. No more than six junk vehicles shall be
stored on the lot outside of an enclosed building at any point in
time.
(f) The use may include a convenience store if the requirements
for such use are also met.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast inn:
(a) Within a residential district (where permitted under Article
III), a maximum of five rental units shall be provided, no more
than three adults may occupy one rental unit and no more than
12 total guests may occupy the facility at one point in time.
Within an MDRB District, a maximum of nine rental units and
21 total guests shall apply. No maximums shall apply within
another nonresidential district.
(b) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental
unit. The off-street parking spaces for the bed and breakfast
shall be located either to the rear of the principal building or
screened from the street and abutting dwellings by
landscaping.
(c) There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of
display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except
for a single nonilluminated sign with a maximum sign area of
four square feet on each of two sides and with a maximum
height of eight feet.
(d) The use shall have a residential appearance and character.
(e) The use shall be operated and/or managed by permanent
residents of the lot.
(f) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest
room. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying
overnight, unless a restaurant is also permitted.
(g) No guest shall stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(h) The use shall be restricted to buildings that existed prior to
January 1, 1940.
(9) Boardinghouse (or rooming house):
(a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum side yard building setback: 20 feet side.
(c) Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:852
(d) Maximum density: a minimum of 5,000 square feet of lot area
per bedroom. The use shall serve a maximum total of 20
persons.
(e) Each bedroom shall be limited to two adults each.
(f) A buffer yard with screening meeting § 220-59 shall be
provided between any boardinghouse building and any
abutting dwelling.
(g) See the Borough Housing Ordinance.
(h) See also standards for "personal care home" which is a
separate use.
(i) Signs shall be limited to two wall signs with a maximum of two
square feet each.
(j) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five
consecutive days.
(10) Campground:
(a) For each acre of total lot area, there shall be a maximum
average of three recreational vehicle sites, four tent sites, or
cabin sleeping capacity for eight persons. Such sites may be
clustered in portions of the tract.
(b) Any store shall be limited to sales of common household and
camping items to persons camping on the site.
(c) A commercial campground shall include at least one gravel or
paved entrance road from a public street, with a minimum
width of 20 feet.
(d) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(e) All campsites, recreational vehicle sites, buildings and vehicle
parking shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from all
residential lot lines. Any existing healthy trees within such
setback shall be preserved, except at needed perpendicular
crossings.
(11) Car wash:
(a) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and
convenient disposal of refuse. The applicant shall provide
evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent
pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or
waterways. Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:853
life shall be stored within an area that will completely contain
any leaks or spills.
(c) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets in such a manner as could cause ice
hazards.
(d) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(12) Communications antennas and communications equipment
buildings: [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718; 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 877]
(a) General and specific requirements for communications
antennas. The following regulations shall apply to all
communications antennas, except those operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator, or a Boroughrecognized
police, fire or ambulance organization:
[1] Standard of care. All communications antennas shall be
designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired,
modified and removed in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes,
including but not limited to the most recent editions of the
Pennsylvania Uniform Commercial Code, American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and National
Electrical Code. Any communications antennas shall at all
times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and
repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of
any person or any property in the Borough.
[2] Historic areas. No communications antenna may be
located upon any property, or on a building or structure,
that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania
Registers of Historic Places, that is within the Borough's
historic district (either inside or outside the public rightsof-
way) as defined by Chapter 130, or that is recognized by
the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster County as
being historically significant (a lot that contains an historic
property shall also be considered an historic property).
The applicant shall demonstrate that the installation of the
communications antenna and the erection of any
communications equipment building complies with all
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act
and shall present copies of applicable communications
with the State Historic Preservation Office of the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission,
including but not limited to the letter of determination.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:854
The applicant shall also comply with any applicable
provisions of Chapter 130, Historic District.
[3] Wind. All communications antennas structures shall be
designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least
100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by
the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry
Association, and Communications Industry Association
(ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
[4] Aviation safety. Communications antennas shall comply
with all federal and state laws and regulations concerning
aviation safety.
[5] Public safety communications and other communications
services. Communications antennas shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication
services enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
[6] Radio frequency emissions. A communications antenna
shall not, by itself or in conjunction with other
communications antennas and/or communications towers,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the
standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not
limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[7] Removal. In the event that use of a communications
antenna is discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and
the date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or
abandoned communications antennas, or portions of
communications antennas, shall be removed as follows:
[a] All abandoned or unused communications antennas
and related equipment shall be removed within two
months of the cessation of operations at the site unless
a time extension is approved by the Borough.
[b] If the communications antenna or related equipment
is not removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period
approved by the Borough, the communications
antenna and/or related equipment may be removed by
the Borough. As security, the Borough reserves the
right to the salvage value of any removed
communications antenna and/or related equipment, if
such communications antenna and/or related
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:855
equipment are not removed by the owner within the
specific time frame enumerated in this chapter.
[8] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance, naming the Borough as an
additional insured, and evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the communications antenna.
[9] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications antenna shall, at its sole cost and
expense, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Borough, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents, at all times against any and all claims for
personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected
with any act or omission of the person, its officers, agents,
employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to,
the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the communications antenna. Each person that
owns or operates a communications antenna shall defend
any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it
is claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a
communications antenna. The obligation to indemnify,
hold harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited
to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert
fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[10] Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[a] The communications antenna shall be fully automated
and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited
only for maintenance or emergency repair.
[b] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety
and security of the Borough's residents.
[c] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less
than the best available technology for preventing
failures and accidents.
[11] Removal, replacement and modification.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:856
[a] To the extent permitted by law, the removal and
replacement of communications antennas and/or
related equipment for the purpose of upgrading or
repairing the communications antenna is permitted,
so long as such repair or upgrade does not
substantially change the overall size of the wireless
support structure or the numbers of communications
antennas.
[b] To the extent permitted by state law, any material
modification to a communications antenna shall
require notice to be provided to the Borough, and
possible supplemental permit approval to the original
permit or authorization.
(b) In addition to the regulations enumerated in § 220-30(12)(a),
the following regulations shall apply to communications
antennas that fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act:
[1] Permit required. Communications antenna applicants
proposing the modification of an existing communications
tower, which does not substantially change the dimensions
of the existing structure, shall obtain a building permit
from the Borough. In order to be considered for such
permit, the applicant must submit a permit application to
the Borough in accordance with applicable permit policies
and procedures.
[2] Timing of approval for applications that fall under the
WBCA. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a communications antenna is filed with the
Borough, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing
of any information that may be required to complete such
application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
[3] Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application
for approval of a communications antenna not to exceed
the amounts set by applicable state law.
(c) In addition to the regulations enumerated in § 220-30(12)(a),
the following regulations shall apply to communications
antennas that do not fall under the Pennsylvania Wireless
Broadband Collocation Act:
[1] Prohibited on residential dwellings. No communications
antenna shall be located on any residential dwelling.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:857
[2] Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any
consultant(s) and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the
Borough in reviewing and evaluating the application for
approval of the communications antenna and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these
communications antenna provisions. The applicant and/or
owner of the communications antenna shall reimburse the
Borough for all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection
with these activities.
[3] Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's
actual costs in reviewing and processing the application
for approval of a communications antenna, as well as
related inspection, monitoring and related costs.
[4] Development regulations. To the extent permitted by
federal and state law, communications antennas shall be
co-located on existing wireless support structures subject
to the following conditions:
[a] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted communications antenna shall not exceed 20
feet above the maximum height permitted in the
underlying zoning district.
[b] In accordance with industry standards and where
permitted by state or federal law, all communications
antenna applicants must submit documentation to the
Borough justifying the total height of the
communications antenna. Such documentation shall
be analyzed in the context of such justification on an
individual basis.
[c] If the applicant proposes to locate the related
equipment in a separate communications equipment
building, the building shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for the applicable zoning
district, and landscaping shall be required to screen
as much of the equipment building as possible.
[5] A security fence with a maximum height of eight feet shall
surround any separate communications equipment
building. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building, or any structure housing related
equipment, shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulations on the site for the principal use.
[6] Noncommercial usage exemption. Borough residents
utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:858
maintaining television, phone, radio and/or internet
connections at their respective residences shall be exempt
from the regulations enumerated in this section of the
Zoning Ordinance. Amateur radio operators are exempt
from the regulations enumerated in this ordinance.
[7] Design regulations. Communications antennas shall
employ stealth technology and be treated to match the
wireless support structure in order to minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen
by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough.
[8] Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any
communications antenna to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other
provisions found within the Borough Code or state or
federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall have the
authority to enter the property upon which a
communications antenna is located at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the operator, to ensure such
compliance.
(d) Regulations applicable to all communications antennas located
in the public rights-of-way. In addition to the regulations
enumerated in § 220-30(12)(a), the following regulations shall
apply to communications antennas located in the public rightsof-
way:
[1] Co-location. Communications antennas in the ROW shall
be co-located on existing poles, such as existing utility
poles or light poles. If co-location is not technologically
feasible, the applicant, with the Borough's approval, shall
locate its communications antennas on existing poles or
freestanding structures that do not already act as wireless
support structures.
[2] Design requirements:
[a] Communications antenna installations located above
the surface grade in the public ROW including, but not
limited to, those on streetlights and utility poles, shall
consist of equipment components that are no more
than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale
and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least
visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
[b] Communications antennas and related equipment
shall be treated with stealth technology by the
communications antenna owner or applicant to match
the wireless support structure and may be required to
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:859
be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which
they are mounted.
[3] Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all communications antennas in
the ROW based on public safety, traffic management,
physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations.
For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility
Code.
[4] Equipment location. Communications antennas and
related equipment shall be located so as not to cause any
physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Borough. In addition:
[a] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located
between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of
safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither
protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.
[b] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be
placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Borough.
[d] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any
related equipment shall be removed at the sole
expense of the owner.
[e] Any proposed underground vault related to
communications antennas shall be reviewed and is
subject to approval by the Borough.
[5] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months
following written notice from the Borough, or such longer
period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary
or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, the
owner of a communications antenna in the ROW shall, at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:860
communications antenna when the Borough, consistent
with its police powers and applicable Public Utility
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary under the following circumstances:
[a] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation
of any Borough or other public improvement in the
right-of-way;
[b] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[c] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[d] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(13) Communications towers. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 718]
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission to operate a
communications tower, if applicable, and communications
antennas.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
communications tower and communications antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all applicable
standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic
radiation.
(c) Communications towers shall comply with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of
Aviation, and applicable airport zoning regulations, and the
Airport Approach Ordinance.
(d) Any applicant proposing construction of a new
communications tower shall demonstrate that a good faith
effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the
communications antennas on an existing building, structure, or
communications tower. A good faith effort shall require that all
owners of potentially suitable structures within a one-fourthmile
radius of the proposed communications tower site be
contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for not
selecting such structure apply:
[1] The proposed communications antennas and related
equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost;
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:861
[2] The proposed communications antennas and related
equipment would cause radio frequency interference with
other existing equipment for that existing structure and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
costs;
[3] Such existing structures do not have adequate location,
space, access or height to accommodate the proposed
equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function;
[4] Addition of the proposed communications antennas and
related equipment would result in electromagnetic
radiation from such structure exceeding applicable
standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation; or
[5] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owners of such structures.
(e) Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
communications equipment building by means of a public
street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to a width
of at least 10 feet with a dust-free all-weather surface for its
entire length.
(f) A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by
other principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel
within a lot which meets the minimum lot size requirements for
the zoning district.
(g) Recording of a plot of subdivision or land development shall
not be required for a leased parcel on which a communications
tower has proposed to be constructed, providing the
communications equipment building is unmanned.
(h) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of
the communications tower is the minimum height necessary to
perform its function.
(i) In all zoning districts except industrial districts, the maximum
height of any communications tower shall be 150 feet;
provided, however, that such height may be increased to no
more than 200 feet, provided that the required setbacks from
adjoining property lines (not lease lines) are increased by one
foot for each one foot in height in excess of 150 feet. In the
industrial districts, the maximum height of any
communications tower shall be 180 feet.
(j) The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be
set back from a property line (not lease line) located in any
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:862
residential district at least 100 feet and shall be set back from
any other property line (not lease line) at least 50 feet.
(k) The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped so as
to screen the foundation, base and communications equipment
building from abutting properties with evergreen plantings or
preserved vegetation. The evergreen plantings can be either a
hedge or row of evergreen trees which shall be a minimum
height of six feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum
height of 15 feet at maturity.
(l) The communications equipment building shall comply with the
required yards and height requirements of the applicable
zoning district for an accessory structure.
(m) The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer that a proposed
communications tower will be designed and constructed in
accordance with the current structural standards for steel
antenna towers and antenna supporting structures published
by the Electrical Industrial Association/Telecommunications
Industry Association and applicable requirements of the
Borough of Columbia's Building Code.
(n) The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license; the name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications tower; and a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage
in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
the communications tower and the communications antennas.
(o) All guy wires associated with the guyed communications tower
shall be clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall
be located within a fenced enclosure.
(p) The site of a communications tower shall be secured by a fence
with a minimum height of six feet and a maximum height of
eight feet to limit accessibility by the general public, which
fence shall be nonclimbable and shall contain a self-locking
gate.
(q) No signs or lights shall be mounted on the communications
tower accept as may be required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation
Administration, or any other governmental agency that has
jurisdiction.
(r) Communications towers shall be protected and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough of
Columbia's Building Codes.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:863
(s) Visual appearance. Communications towers shall employ
stealth technology. All communications towers and related
equipment shall be aesthetically and architecturally
compatible with the surrounding environment and shall
maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible. The Borough Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
whether its decision upon the subject application will promote
the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district
involved; encourage compatibility with the character and type
of development existing in the area; benefit neighboring
properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic
character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees
existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and
encourage sound engineering and land development design
and construction principles, practices and techniques. Any
utilities extending to the communications tower shall be placed
underground. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(t) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any applicant proposing
the modification of an existing communications tower, which
increases the overall height of such wireless support structure,
shall first obtain a building permit from the Borough.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(u) Gap in coverage. An applicant for a communications tower
must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage
or capacity exists in the applicable area and that the type of
communications tower being proposed is the least intrusive
means by which to fill that gap. The existence or non-existence
of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity shall be a factor in the
Borough Zoning Hearing's decision on an application for
approval of communications tower. [Amended 12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 877]
(v) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all
communications towers, the WCF applicant shall provide the
Borough with a written commitment that it will allow other
service providers to co-locate communications antennas on
communications towers where technically and economically
feasible. To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the
owner of a communications tower shall not install any
additional communications antennas without obtaining the
prior written approval of the Borough. [Added 12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 877]
(w) Wind. Any communications tower structures shall be designed
to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per
hour in addition to the standard designed by the American
National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:864
departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Communications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as
amended. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(x) Related equipment. To the extent permitted by federal or state
law, either a one single-story wireless communications
equipment building not exceeding 250 square feet in area, or
up to five metal boxes placed on a concrete pad not exceeding
10 feet by 20 feet in area housing the receiving and
transmitting equipment, may be located on the site for each
unrelated company sharing space on the communications
tower. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(y) Public safety communications and other communications
services. No communications tower shall interfere with public
safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 877]
(z) Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall
apply: [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
[1] Any communications tower shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
maintenance or emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the communications tower in order to promote
the safety and security of the Borough's residents, and
utilize the best available technology for preventing failures
and accidents.
(aa) Historic areas. No communications tower may be located upon
any property, or on a building or structure, that is listed on
either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic
Places, that is within the Borough's historic district (either
inside or outside the public rights-of-way). [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(bb) Noise. Communications towers shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable
noise standards under state law and the Borough Code, except
in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup
generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a
temporary basis only. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(cc) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the communications
tower and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any
potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:865
provisions. The applicant and/or owner of the communications
tower shall reimburse the Borough for all costs of the
Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities. [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(dd) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a communications tower is filed with the
Borough, the Borough shall notify the applicant in writing of
any information that may be required to complete such
application. All applications for communications towers shall
be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a fully
completed application for the approval of such
communications towers and the Borough shall advise the
applicant in writing of its decision. If additional information
was requested by the Borough to complete an application, the
time required by the applicant to provide the information shall
not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day review
period. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(ee) Removal. In the event that use of a communications tower is
planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
communications towers or portions of communications towers
shall be removed as follows: [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
877]
[1] All unused or abandoned communications towers and
related equipment shall be removed within two months of
the cessation of operations at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the Borough.
[2] If the communications tower and/or related equipment is
not removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period approved
by the Borough, the communications tower and related
equipment may be removed by the Borough and the cost of
removal assessed against the owner of the
communications tower. As security, the Borough reserves
the right to the salvage value of any removed
communications tower and/or related equipment, if such
communications tower and/or related equipment are not
removed by the owner within the timeframes enumerated
in this chapter.
[3] Any unused portions of communications towers, including
antennas, shall be removed within two months of the time
of cessation of operations. The Borough must approve all
replacements of portions of a communications tower
previously removed.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:866
(ff) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual
costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of a communications tower, as well as related inspection,
monitoring, and related costs. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 877]
(gg) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
communications tower shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected
and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times
against any and all claims for personal injury, including death,
and property damage arising in whole or in part from, caused
by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its
officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but
not limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the communications tower. Each
person that owns or operates a communications tower shall
defend any actions or proceedings against the Borough in
which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or
property damage was caused by the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of the communications
tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend
shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(hh) Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a communications tower, the
applicant shall provide to the Borough financial security
sufficient to guarantee the construction of the communications
tower. Said financial security shall remain in place until the
communications tower is fully constructed. Should the
communications tower be abandoned by the owner and/or
operator, and not removed within two months of such
abandonment, the Borough shall have the authority to remove
the communications tower and sell all of its pieces, as well as
related equipment, used in the operation of the
communications tower, in order to recover the cost of said
removal. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(ii) Location. Communications towers shall not be located in, or
within 75 feet of, an area in which all utilities are located
underground. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(jj) Design regulations. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
[1] The communications tower shall employ the most current
stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately
blend into the surrounding environment and minimize
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:867
aesthetic impact. Application of the stealth technology
chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval of
the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
[2] To the extent permissible by law, any height extensions to
an existing communications tower shall require prior
approval of the Borough.
[3] Any proposed communications tower shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's communications
antennas and comparable communications antennas, for
the maximum amount of future users based on the size of
the proposed communications tower.
(kk) Inspection. To the extent permissible under federal and state
law, the Borough reserves the right to inspect any
communications tower to ensure compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Borough
Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its agents
shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
communications tower is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance. [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
(ll) In addition to the regulations enumerated in § 220-30A(13)(a)
through (d), (h), (m) through (n), (s) through (w), and (y)
through (dd), the following regulations shall apply to
communications towers located in the Public Rights-of-Way.
[Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 877]
[1] Location and development standards. Communications
towers in the ROW shall not exceed a height comparable to
the average height of utility poles or electrical poles within
a two-block radius of the proposed facility.
Communications towers are prohibited in areas in which
all utilities are located underground. Communications
towers shall not be located in the front facade area of any
structure.
[2] Communications towers shall be permitted along certain
roads by special exception throughout the Borough,
regardless of the underlying zoning district. A listing of
such roads is kept on file at the Borough Zoning Office and
is adopted via Resolution of Borough Council.
[3] Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all communications towers in the
ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical
burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:868
utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the
requirements of the Public Utility Code.
[4] Equipment location. Communications towers and related
equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical
or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or
to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:
[a] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located
between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of
safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither
protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.
[b] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be
placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest
extent possible, through the use of landscaping or
other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened
to blend in with the surrounding area to the
satisfaction of the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
[d] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment
shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
[e] Any underground vaults related to communications
towers shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
[5] Design regulations.
[a] The communications tower shall employ the most
current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding environment
and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the Borough Zoning Hearing
Board.
[b] Communications towers in the public ROW shall not
exceed a height comparable to the average height of
utility poles or electrical poles within a two-block
radius of the proposed facility.
[c] To the extent permissible under state and federal law,
any height extensions to an existing communications
tower shall require prior approval of the Borough, and
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:869
shall not increase the overall height of the
communications towers to more than 40 feet.
[d] Any proposed communications towers shall be
designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects
to accommodate both the applicant's communications
antennas and comparable communications antennas
the maximum amount of future users based on the size
of the proposed communications tower.
[6] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days
following written notice from the Borough, or such longer
period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary
or such shorter period in the case of an Emergency, an
owner of a communications tower in the ROW shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any
communications tower when the Borough, consistent with
its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall determine that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
[a] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation
of any Borough or other public improvement in the
right-of-way;
[b] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[c] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[d] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
[7] Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every communications tower in
the ROW is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a
fair and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of
the ROW. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly
related to the Borough's actual ROW management costs,
including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Borough. The owner of each
communications tower shall pay an annual fee to the
Borough to compensate the Borough for the Borough's
costs incurred in connection with the activities described
above.
(14) Conversion of an existing building (including an existing dwelling)
into dwelling units:
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:870
(a) See § 220-25, which establishes where conversions into
dwelling units are permitted. Within a residential district, a
residential building shall not be converted into additional
numbers of dwelling units.
(b) Applicable state firesafety requirements shall be met.
(c) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing one-family dwelling into a greater number of dwelling
units:
[1] The building shall maintain the appearance of a one-family
dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional entrances
may be placed on the side or rear of the structure. The
dwelling units may internally share the single front
entrance.
[2] The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require
the placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the
building, or would require the placement of more than
three off-street parking spaces in the required front yard.
(d) A previously residential building shall maintain a clearly
residential appearance, except as may be necessary for
restoration of a historic building.
(e) Dumpster screening: see § 220-62.
(f) Except within the DC District, a maximum total of four
dwelling units may be developed per lot unless a more
restrictive provision is established by another section of this
chapter.
(g) Each unit shall meet the definition of a dwelling unit and shall
meet the minimum floor area requirements of § 220-57C.
(h) The Borough's Existing Structures and Health Codes216 shall
be met. See provisions in the Existing Structures Code for
periodic inspections.
(15) Day-care center, child:
(a) See also "day care: family day-care home or group day care" as
an accessory use in § 220-31.
(b) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (or its successor agency)
registration certificate or license.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Existing Structures, Property Maintenance and Fire
Prevention, and Ch. 126, Health and Sanitation.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:871
(c) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article
VI shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(d) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use,
shall have a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet and a
minimum setback of 10 feet from an abutting residential lot
line.
(e) Shall include secure fencing around outdoor play areas.
(f) Outdoor play areas of a day-care center involving the care of
25 or more children at any one time shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from the exterior walls of an abutting
existing occupied dwelling.
(g) This use shall not be conducted in a dwelling that is physically
attached to another dwelling that does not have a common
owner.
(h) In residential districts, any permitted day-care use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(i) A day-care use may occur in a building that also includes
permitted or nonconforming dwelling units.
(j) See also the standards for Subsection A(30), Place of worship,
in this section, which allows a day-care center as an adjunct
use.
(16) Forestry, commercial:
(a) A forestry management plan shall be prepared and followed for
any commercial forestry involving more than two acres, other
than routine thinning of woods. This plan shall be prepared by
a professional forester.
(b) The forestry management plan shall be consistent with the
Timber Harvesting Guidelines of the Pennsylvania Forestry
Association.
(17) Group homes: Group homes are permitted within a lawful dwelling
unit, provided the following additional requirements are met:
(a) See definition in § 220-19.
(b) A group home shall not include any use meeting the definition
of a "treatment center."
(c) A group home shall include the housing of a maximum of six
unrelated persons, except:
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:872
[1] If a more restrictive requirement is established by another
Borough code;
[2] The number of bona fide paid professional staff shall not
count towards such maximum; and
[3] As may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board under
§ 220-11D.
(d) The facility shall have adequate trained staff supervision for
the number and type of residents. If the facility involves five or
more residents, then twenty-four-hour on-site staffing shall be
provided.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal,
state or county licensing or certification to the Zoning Officer.
(f) The group home shall register in writing its location, general
type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer.
(g) Any medical or counseling services shall be limited to a
maximum of three nonresidents per day. Any staff meetings
shall be limited to a maximum of five persons per day.
(h) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
per on-site employee, plus one space for every two residents
having a valid driver's license.
(i) If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall
be maintained that is closely similar to nearby dwellings, and
no sign shall identify the use.
(j) The persons living on site shall function as a common
household unit.
(18) Hotel/motel:
(a) See definitions in Article II, which distinguish a hotel/motel
from a boardinghouse.
(b) Buildings shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any residential lot
line.
(19) Junkyard (includes automobile salvage yard):
(a) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited,
other than what is customarily generated on-site and routinely
awaiting pickup.
(b) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least 100 feet from any
residential lot line and 50 feet from any other lot line and the
existing right-of-way of any public street.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:873
(c) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of
access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of
these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared
driveways shall be provided throughout the entire use to allow
access by emergency vehicles. Adequate off-street parking
areas shall be provided for customers.
(d) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at
approved driveway entrances) by a forty-foot-wide buffer yard
which complies with § 220-59, unless such storage is not
visible from an exterior lot line or street. The initial height of
the evergreen planting shall be six feet. Secure fencing with a
minimum height of eight feet shall be provided and wellmaintained
around all outdoor storage areas. Such fencing
shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening.
(e) Burning or incineration is prohibited.
(f) See the noise or dust regulations of Article V.
(g) All gasoline, antifreeze and oil shall be drained from all
vehicles and properly disposed of. All batteries shall be
removed from vehicles and properly stored in a suitable area
on an impervious and properly drained surface.
(h) Lot area: three acres minimum; 20 acres maximum.
(i) Tires: see the "outdoor storage and display" standards in
§ 220-31.
(20)Kennel:
(a) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs shall be
located at least 200 feet from all residential lot lines.
(b) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard
within any adjacent principal building.
(c) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. that are within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling. Runs for dogs shall be separated from each other by
visual barriers a minimum of four feet in height, to minimize
dog barking.
(21) Livestock, raising of:
(a) Any livestock shall be kept on property controlled by the
operator of the livestock use, with proper confinement
measures as necessary.
(b) Any structure, other than the inside of a dwelling, used for the
keeping of six or more animals over the age of four months
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:874
shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the lot line of any
existing dwelling.
(c) The applicant shall submit a written plan for the sanitary
management of animal wastes. Animal wastes shall be properly
managed to prevent health hazards, pollution of waterways
and odor, insect and rodent nuisances to other properties.
Recommendations of the Pennsylvania State University
Cooperative Extension Service and the County Conservation
District should be followed.
(22) Mineral extraction:
(a) Application requirements. A copy of all site plan information
that will be required by the PADEP shall also be submitted to
the Borough as part of the zoning application.
(b) A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse plan of
the area to be excavated shall be submitted.
(c) After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas shall
be reclaimed in phases to a nonhazardous and environmentally
sound state permitting some productive or beneficial future
use.
(d) A seventy-five-foot-wide yard covered by natural vegetative
ground cover (except at approved driveway crossings) shall be
required along all exterior lot lines that are within 250 feet of
an area of excavation. This yard shall include an earth berm
with a minimum average height of six feet and an average of
one shade tree for each 50 feet of distance along the lot lines.
Such shade trees shall be planted outside of any berm and any
fence.
(e) The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the excavated
area of a mineral extraction use from property that is not
owned by the owner or operator of the mineral extraction use:
[1] One hundred feet from the existing right-of-way of public
streets and from all exterior lot lines of the property;
[2] One hundred fifty feet from a commercial or industrial
building, unless released by the owner thereof;
[3] Two hundred fifty feet from a residential lot line, other
than an abandoned dwelling,
[4] One hundred fifty feet from the lot line of a publicly owned
recreation area that existed at time of the application for
the use or expansion.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:875
(f) The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be set
back 150 feet from the average waterline of a perennial stream
or the edge of a natural wetland of more than two acres.
(g) Truck access to the use shall be located to reasonably minimize
hazards on public streets and dust and noise nuisances to
residences.
(h) Fencing. The Zoning Hearing Board may require secure
fencing in locations where needed to protect public safety. As
an alternative, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve the use
of thorny vegetation to discourage public access. Also, warning
signs shall be placed at intervals of not less than 100 feet
around the outer edge of the use.
(i) Noise and performance standards: see Article V.
(j) County Conservation District. A soil erosion and sedimentation
plan shall be prepared by the applicant and found to be
acceptable to the County Conservation District.
(k) Hours of operation. The Zoning Hearing Board, as a condition
of special exception use approval, may reasonably limit the
hours of operation of the use and of related trucking and
blasting operations to protect the character of adjacent
residential areas.
(l) The activities and residual effects shall not create conditions
that are significantly hazardous to the health and safety of
neighboring residents.
(23) Membership club:
(a) See definition in Article II.
(b) Any active outdoor play areas shall be set back at least 30 feet
from any abutting residential lot line.
(24) Mobile/manufactured home: Installed on an individual lot or within
a mobile/ manufactured home park approved after the adoption of
this chapter.
(a) Construction. Any mobile/manufactured home placed on any
lot after the adoption of this chapter shall be constructed in
accordance with 1976 or later Safety and Construction
Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. (Note: These federal standards supersede any
BOCA Code for the actual construction of the home itself.)
(b) Each site shall be graded to provide a stable and well-drained
area.
(c) Each home shall have hitch, wheels and axles removed.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:876
(d) Anchoring. A mobile/manufactured home on an individual lot
or mobile/manufactured home park shall include a system that
secures the home to the ground to prevent shifting,
overturning or uneven settling of the home, with a secure base
for the tie-downs.
(e) Foundation treatment. The space between the bottom of the
home and the ground and/or home pad shall be enclosed using
a durable material that has the appearance of a foundation of a
site-built home.
(f) The front door of the home shall face onto a public street.
(g) See also the regulations of § 220-26.
(h) A mobile/manufactured home shall not be permitted within the
historic district.
(i) The home shall have a roof with a minimum pitch of 3.5:1.
(25) Mobile/manufactured home park:
(a) Plans and permits. Plans shall be submitted and reviewed by
the Borough for all mobile/manufactured home parks in
compliance with the mobile home park provisions of Chapter
190, Subdivision and Land Development, and all other
provisions of such chapter that apply to a land development,
including the submission, approval and improvements
provisions (other than specific provisions altered by this
section).
(b) The minimum tract area shall be five contiguous acres, which
shall be under single ownership, but which may include land in
an abutting existing mobile home park. The tract shall have a
minimum width at the minimum building setback line of 200
feet. Two abutting lots may be merged together to form a
single mobile/manufactured home park.
(c) Density. The maximum average overall density shall be five
dwelling units per acre.
[1] To calculate this density, land in common open space or
proposed streets within the park may be included, but land
within the one-hundred-year floodway or that has natural
slopes of 15% or greater shall not be included.
[2] Phases. If an existing mobile home park is to be expanded
into an area not previously part of that mobile home park,
the maximum density and minimum common open space
for the new area shall be considered separately from the
previously approved areas of the mobile home park. All
expansions to an existing park shall also meet all other
provisions of this and other applicable ordinances.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:877
(d) Landscaped perimeter. Each mobile/manufactured home park
shall include a twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped area including
substantial attractive evergreen and deciduous trees around
the perimeter of the site, except where such landscaping would
obstruct safe sight distances for traffic. A planting plan for
such area shall be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as
part of any required special exception approval. Such
landscaped area shall not be required between adjacent mobile
home park developments. This landscaped area shall be 35 feet
wide abutting existing single-family detached dwellings. The
same area of land may count towards both the landscaped area
and the building setback requirements.
(e) A dwelling, including any attached accessory building, shall be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from another dwelling within the
mobile home park, except that unenclosed porches, awnings
and decks may be 15 feet from the walls of another dwelling.
(f) The minimum separation between homes and edge of interior
street cartway or parking court cartway shall be 25 feet.
(g) The minimum principal and accessory building setbacks from
exterior/boundary lot lines shall be 40 feet.
(h) Each home shall comply with the above requirements for
mobile/manufactured homes in this § 220-30.
(i) Accessory structures. A detached accessory structure or
garage shall be separated a minimum of 15 feet from any
dwelling units which the accessory structure is not accessory
to.
(j) Common open space for a mobile home park. A minimum of
10% of the total lot area of the entire mobile home park shall
be set aside as common open space for the residents.
(k) Streets.
[1] Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives or private streets
and shall not be from public streets exterior to the
development.
[2] Streets within the mobile home park that provide access to
reach 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum paved
cartway of 24 feet, and other local private streets or
parking courts serving less than 20 homes shall have a
minimum paved cartway of 20 feet.
[3] Curbs and sidewalks are not required on the private
streets, but all private streets shall meet all other Borough
cartway construction standards.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:878
(l) Utilities. All units within the mobile home park shall be
connected to a public water and a public sewage system. The
system shall meet appropriate minimum water pressure/fire
flow and hydrant requirements.
(26) Nursing home:
(a) Licensing: see definition in Article II.
(b) A minimum of 20% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(c) See the Table of Dimensional Requirements in § 220-26, which
requires larger setbacks and lot areas for these uses in
residential districts.
(27) Outdoor storage and display: see this use under § 220-31.
(28) Personal care home: the standards for nursing homes in this
section shall apply.
(29) Picnic grove, private:
(a) All parking and activity areas shall be a minimum of 250 feet of
an existing dwelling. The use shall not operate between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) See noise and glare standards in Article V.
(c) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(30) Place of worship:
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Weekly religious education rooms and meeting rooms are
permitted accessory uses provided that such uses are of such a
character and intensity that they would be customary and
incidental to the place of worship. A primary or secondary
school and/or a child or adult day-care center are permitted on
the same lot as a place of worship provided the requirements
for such uses are also met. Noncommercial buses used
primarily to transport persons to and from religious services or
a permitted school on the lot may be parked on the lot. Other
uses shall only be permitted if all of the requirements for such
uses are also met, including being permitted in the applicable
district.
(c) Two dwelling units may be accessory to a place of worship on
the same lot provided that they are only used to house religious
leaders and their families.
(31) Recreation, commercial outdoor:
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:879
(a) Any outdoor activity area shall be located no closer to any lot
line than the required front yard depth and shall be screened
and, if necessary, sound insulation shall be provided to protect
the neighborhood from any possible noise.
(b) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard in accordance with § 220-59
shall be required.
(c) Any swimming pool shall meet the requirements for such use,
as stated in this article.
(d) Lighting, noise and glare control: see Article V.
(32) Recycling collection center:
(a) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid
waste disposal facility.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
(c) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if
needed and for off-street parking.
(d) A twenty-foot-wide buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 220-59 shall be provided between this use and any abutting
residential lot line.
(e) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being
an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a
public or private primary or secondary school, a place of
worship or a Borough-owned use, subject to the limitations of
this section.
(f) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the
use, except for that generated on-site and that accidentally
collected with the recyclables. Only materials being actively
collected for recycling may be stored on site.
(g) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning and closely
similar work. No burning or landfilling shall occur. No
mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other
than operations such as baling of cardboard.
(h) The use shall not include the collection or processing of pieces
of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except
within an industrial district.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:880
(i) The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 50 tons of
materials on the site if the use is within a residential district
and within 500 feet of an existing dwelling.
(33) Residential conversions: see Subsection A(14), Conversion of an
existing building, within this section.
(34) Restaurant:
(a) Screening of dumpster and waste containers: see § 220-62.
(b) See “drive-through" service in § 220-31.
(c) Drive-through service shall only be provided where specifically
permitted in the applicable district regulations.
(35) Retirement community:
(a) The use shall meet the definition stated in § 220-19.
(b) A retirement community shall only include the following:
[1] Personal care enter.
[2] Nursing home.
[3] Single-family detached dwellings.
[4] Twin dwellings.
[5] Townhouse/rowhouse dwellings.
[6] Apartments.
[7] Dining, community center and recreation uses that are
accessory to the residential uses and that are limited to
use by the residents and employees of the development
and their invited guests.
[8] Retail and personal service uses that are accessory to the
residential uses and are intended to primarily serve the
needs of residents and employees of the development and
their invited guests, and provided that such uses shall not
have individual exterior entrances but instead shall be
integrated into a principal building, and provided that no
establishment shall exceed 3,000 square feet of floor area.
(c) A retirement community shall meet the same dimensional
standards as would apply within the HDRM District, except for
the following:
[1] No commercial use, no apartments and no building over 35
feet in height shall be located within 150 feet of the lot line
of a residential use located outside of the INS District.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:881
[2] No residential use shall be located within 75 feet of the
existing right-of-way of an expressway.
[3] The maximum height shall be 35 feet. However, in areas
not regulated by Subsection A(35)(c)[1] above, the
maximum height shall be six stories or 72 feet, whichever
is more restrictive.
(d) A maximum total of 80% of the total lot area of a retirement
community shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
(e) Steep slopes. The slope provisions of § 220-26D and this
Subsection A(35)(e) shall apply, whichever is more restrictive.
As part of a retirement community in the CR District:
[1] No buildings and no off-street parking shall be located on
lands with a slope greater than 25%; and
[2] Land with a slope greater than 25% shall be deleted from
the lot area prior to calculating maximum building
coverage and maximum impervious coverage.
(f) Non-man-made slopes of greater than 25% shall not be
regraded in such a manner as to circumvent the requirements
of this chapter. Isolated areas of greater than 25% slope that
are less than 40 feet in total width (across an entire tract of
land) shall not be regulated under Subsection A(35)(e) above.
(g) In no case shall the overall density of a retirement community
in the CR District exceed an average of 15 dwelling units per
acre. Such density shall be calculated as follows, calculated in
acres and tenths of acres:
Total lot area proposed for retirement
community, prior to subdivision or land
development approval and prior to construction
of any new streets
_______
Minus 100% of areas with slopes greater than
25%
_______
Minus 50% of areas with slopes of 15% to 25% _______
With the resulting acreage multiplied by 15
dwelling units per acre, to result in maximum
total number of dwelling units within the
retirement community
_______
In determining maximum density, each three
nursing home or personal care beds shall be
considered equivalent to one dwelling unit.
(36) Rowhouses/townhouses and apartments:
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:882
(a) Maximum number of townhouses attached in any manner:
eight.
(b) Paved area setback. All off-street parking spaces, except
spaces on driveways immediately in front of a carport or
garage entrance, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any dwelling.
(c) Garages. It is strongly recommended that all townhouses be
designed so that garages and/or carports are not an overly
prominent part of the view from public streets. For this reason,
parking courts, common garage or carport structures or
garages at the rear of dwellings are encouraged instead of
individual garages opening onto the front of the building,
especially for narrow townhouse units.
(d) Mailboxes. Any mailboxes provided within the street right-ofway
should be clustered together in an orderly and attractive
arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding mailboxes of
noncoordinated types at the curbside are specifically
discouraged.
(e) Access. Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest reasonable number. No
townhouse dwelling within a tract of five or more dwelling
units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial
street.
(37) School, public or private, primary or secondary:
(a) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet, except one acre if over
200 students.
(b) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 25 feet of a residential lot
line.
(c) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically
permitted in the district.
(38) Self-storage development:
(a) All storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats
and trailers. No junk vehicles shall be stored within view of a
public street or a dwelling.
(c) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances,
animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:883
(d) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(e) The use shall not include a commercial auto repair garage
unless that use is permitted in the district and the use meets
those requirements.
(f) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(g) Any areas within 200 feet of a street right-of-way shall be
screened from that street by a buffer yard meeting § 220-59.
(h) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet.
(i) See buffer yard provisions in § 220-59.
(39) Solid waste transfer facility:
(a) All solid waste processing and storage shall be kept a minimum
of 150 feet from all of the following features: public street
right-of-way, exterior lot line or creek or river.
(b) All solid waste processing and storage shall be kept a minimum
of 300 feet from any dwelling that the operator of the transfer
facility does not own.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Hearing Board that the
use will have adequate access for fire-fighting purposes, and
will not routinely create noxious odors detectable off of the
site.
(d) The use shall not include any incineration or burning.
(e) All solid waste processing and storage shall occur within
enclosed buildings or enclosed containers. All unloading and
loading of solid waste shall occur within an enclosed building,
and over an impervious surface that drains to a holding tank
that is adequately treated.
(f) The use shall be surrounded by a secure fence and gates with a
minimum height of eight feet.
(g) The use shall have a minimum lot area of five acres, which may
include land extending into another municipality.
(h) The use shall be operated in a manner that prevents the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects, rodents or other
vectors.
(i) An attendant shall be on duty during all times of operation and
unloading.
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:884
(j) Under the authority of Act 101 of 1988,217 the hours of
operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(k) Tires: see "outdoor storage" in § 220-31.
(l) No radioactive, chemotherapeutic, infectious or toxic materials
shall be permitted on site.
(40) Swimming pool, nonhousehold:
(a) The water surface shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
existing dwelling.
(b) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(c) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall
be separated from the dwelling by a buffer yard meeting
§ 220-59.
(d) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, wellmaintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(e) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property. Such
method may be subject to approval of the Zoning Officer.
(41) Target range:
(a) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area
which is of sufficient height and thickness to adequately
protect the public safety. This barrier shall be made of earth for
an outdoor firearms range.
(b) An outdoor firearms target range shall comply with any
applicable published standards of the National Rifle
Association and other applicable federal, state and local
regulations.
(c) An outdoor firearms target range and any firing stations shall
be located a minimum of 250 feet from any residential lot line,
unless all firing would occur within a completely enclosed
sound-resistant building. Clay pigeon shooting shall be
directed away from homes and streets.
(d) An outdoor firearms target range shall be properly posted.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence that the noise limits of
Article V will be met.
(f) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated
and/or air conditioned to allow the building to remain
completely enclosed.
217. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:885
(42) Townhouses: see Subsection A(36), Rowhouses, in this section.
(43) Treatment centers:
(a) See definition in § 220-19.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of
persons intended to occupy the use during the life the permit.
Any future additions to this list shall require an additional
special exception approval.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the use will involve adequate on-site
supervision and security measures to protect public safety.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use
to protect public safety, such as conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
(e) If the use involves five or more residents, a suitable on-lot
outdoor recreation area shall be provided that is supervised by
the center's staff.
(f) Any such use shall be set back a minimum of 600 feet from any
existing treatment center.
(44) Veterinarian office (includes animal hospital):
(a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 50 feet from any residential lot line. Buildings
shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated
within the buildings cannot routinely be perceived within any
adjacent dwellings.
(c) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals for use
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided the runs are at least
150 feet from any existing dwelling and provided that the runs
for dogs are separated from each other by visual barriers a
minimum of four feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
(d) Although animals may be kept as an accessory use, a
commercial kennel shall only be allowed if a kennel is
permitted in that district and if the applicable requirements
are met.
(45) Small solar energy system. Small solar energy systems shall be
permitted in all zoning districts as appurtenances to any building
or as accessory structures and shall be subject to the following
regulations: [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
(a) The design of installation of small solar energy systems shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:886
ANSI, underwriter's laboratories (UL), the ASTM, or other
similar certifying organizations, and shall comply with the
building codes and all other applicable fire and life safety
requirements of the Borough of Columbia. The manufacturer's
specification shall be submitted as part of the application.
(b) All small solar energy systems shall be designed and located in
order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited
structure on adjacent lots as well as adjacent streets rights-ofway.
(c) All on-site utility and transmission lines extending to and from
the small solar energy system shall be placed underground.
(d) No part of any small solar energy system shall be located
within or above any front yard, along any street frontage, nor
within any required setback of any lot.
(e) Small solar energy systems mounted on the roof of any
building shall be subject to the maximum height requirements
specified within each zoning district. The owner shall provide
evidence in the form of stamped plans certified by a
professional engineer that the roof is capable of holding the
load.
(f) Small solar energy systems which are ground-mounted or
detached from the principal or accessory structure shall not
exceed 15 feet in height.
(g) The owner shall provide a copy of the letter from the electric
utility company indicating that it has received and processed
an application for interconnection of renewable generation
equipment with the application for a zoning permit. The owner
shall provide a copy of the final inspection report or other final
approval from the electric utility company to the Borough prior
to the issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy for the
small solar energy system. A system with no connection to the
electricity grid shall be exempt from this requirement.
(h) Should the installation of any small solar energy system be
intended for a property located within the historic district of
the Borough of Columbia, such system shall comply in all
respects with the Chapter 130, Historic District, and where
appropriate, have received approval of the Historical
Architectural Review Board and/or Borough Council.
(i) Small solar energy systems and in particular solar panels, shall
not display advertising, except for reasonable identification of
the small solar energy system manufacturer. Such sign shall be
no larger than is necessary to make such identification.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:887
(j) Access. On all rooftop solar system installations, modules shall
be installed in a manner that provides one three-foot-wide
clear access pathway from eave to the ridge on any roof slopes
where modules are located, and one three-foot-wide clear
access pathway on the ridge line on any roof slope. Pathways
shall run the full length of the roof line. Flat roof installations
shall have a three-foot pathway around all sides of the solar
system installation. [Added 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 919]
(46) Large solar energy production facilities. Large solar energy
production facilities shall be subject to the following regulations:
[Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
(a) The layout, design and installation of large solar energy
production facilities shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the ANSI, Underwriters
Laboratories (UL), the ASTM, or other similar certifying
organizations and shall comply with the building code and with
all other applicable fire and life safety requirements of the
Borough of Columbia. The manufacturer's specification shall
be submitted as part of the application.
(b) All on-site utility and transmission lines extending to and from
the large solar energy production facility shall be placed
underground.
(c) All large solar energy production facilities shall be designed
and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any
inhabited buildings on adjacent properties as well as adjacent
street rights-of-way.
(d) Large solar energy production facilities mounted on the roof of
any building shall be subject to the maximum height
regulations specified within each zoning district.
(e) The owner shall provide evidence in the form of stamped plans
certified by a professional engineer that the roof is capable of
holding the load.
(f) All ground-mounted and freestanding solar collectors of large
solar energy production facilities shall be completely enclosed
by a minimum eight-foot high fence with a self-locking gate.
(g) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations or fence.
(h) The large solar energy production facility owner is required to
notify the Borough immediately upon cessation or
abandonment of the operation. The large solar energy
production facility owner shall then have 12 months in which to
dismantle and remove the large solar energy production
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:888
facility from the property. At the time of issuance of the permit
for the construction of the large solar energy production
facility, the owner shall provide financial security in an amount
acceptable to the Borough to secure the expense of
dismantling and removing said structures.
(i) Should the installation of any large solar energy production
facilities be intended for a property located within the historic
district of the Borough of Columbia, such system shall comply
in all respects with Chapter 130, Historic District, and where
appropriate, have received approval of the Historical
Architectural Review Board and/or Borough Council.
(j) Large solar energy production facilities and in particular solar
panels, shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the small solar energy system manufacturer.
Such sign shall have an area of less than four square feet.
(47)Wind energy production facility. Wind energy production facility
shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 813]
(a) The layout, design and installation of wind energy production
facilities shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including those of the ANSI, Underwriters Laboratories (UL),
Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies,
VASTM, or other similar certifying organizations, and shall
comply with the building code and with all other applicable fire
and life safety requirements of the Borough of Columbia. The
manufacturer's specification shall be submitted as part of the
application.
(b) Wind energy production facilities shall not generate noise
which exceeds 55 decibels measured at any property line.
(c) All on-site utility and transmission lines extending to and from
the wind energy production facility shall be placed
underground.
(d) Wind energy production facilities shall be equipped with a
redundant braking system. This may include aerodynamic over
speed controls, including variable pitch, tip, and other similar
systems) and mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be
operated in a fail-safe mode. Staff regulation shall not be
considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed controls.
(e) Wind energy production facilities shall not be artificially
lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
(f) Wind turbines and towers shall not display advertising, except
for reasonable identification of the wind energy production
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:889
facilities manufacturer. Such sign shall have an area of less
than four square feet.
(g) Wind turbines and towers shall be a nonobtrusive color such as
white, off-white or gray.
(h) All wind energy production facilities shall, to the extent
feasible, be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any occupied
building on any adjacent lot.
(i) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and
substations or fencing.
(j) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment
shall be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by
nonauthorized persons.
(k) No portion of any wind energy production system shall extend
over parking areas, access drives, driveways or sidewalks.
(l) All wind energy production facilities shall be independent of
any other structure and shall be located a minimum distance of
one and 1/10th times the turbine height from any inhabited
structure, property line, street right-of-way, or overhead utility
line.
(m) The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind turbine
shall be 30 feet above the ground.
(n) All wind energy production facilities shall be completely
enclosed by a minimum of an eight-foot high fence with a selflocking
gate.
(o) The wind energy production facility owner is required to notify
the Borough immediately upon cessation or abandonment of
the operation. The wind energy production facility owner shall
then have 12 months in which to dismantle and remove the
wind energy production facility from the lot. At the time of
issuance of the permit for the construction of the wind energy
production facility, the owner shall provide financial security
and in an amount acceptable to the Borough to secure the
expense of dismantling and removing said structures.
(p) With the application, the applicant shall support a report from
a qualified engineer, licensed in the State of Pennsylvania,
documenting the following for review by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
[1] Description of the wind energy production facility,
including overview, project location, the rated capacity,
type and height of facility including generating capacity,
dimensions and respective manufacturers and a
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-30
1:890
description of the ancillary facilities (the description
should include technical, engineering, economic and other
pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed
design).
[2] Evidence of structural integrity of each tower structure.
[3] Structural failure characteristics of each tower structure
and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate
size to contain debris.
[4] Identification of the nearest wind energy production
system.
[5] Description of the technical options available and reasons
why the technical option selected was chosen over the
other options.
[6] Make, model, picture and manufacturer's specifications.
[7] The applicant shall also submit any other relevant studies,
reports, certifications and approvals as may be reasonably
requested by the Borough to insure compliance with this
subsection.
(q) Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above
ground surface.
(48) Short-term rental dwellings. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
912218]
(a) Short-term rental dwellings must be in a detached dwelling, a
detached mixed-use building, or a detached accessory
building. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces must be
provided. The spaces may be located in a garage immediately
available to the property for vehicular storage. This short-term
rental dwelling shall be occupied as a unit by a single entity.
There shall be no individual room rentals to separate entities.
(b) The property shall be registered annually and be compliant
with the Borough of Columbia's Rental Residential
Registration and Inspection Requirements as contained in the
Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code.
218. Editor's Note: This ordinance also contained the following provisions regarding shortterm
rentals: 1. Any renting of a property as a short-term rental, without the property
being registered, shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance. 2. Failure to
renew a short-term rental registration shall give rise to a presumption that the short-term
rental use of the property has been abandoned. 3. Three violations of this Ordinance
within a two-year period shall be sufficient cause to revoke the short-term rental of the
property for the unexpired term of the registration. An owner is prohibited from applying
for a new registration until the term of the revoked unexpired registration has expired. 4.
A schedule of fees may be established from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-30
1:891
§ 220-31. Additional requirements for accessory uses.
(c) The property shall be compliant with all federal, state, county
and local laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(d) No persons other than members of the entity renting the shortterm
rental shall be allowed on the premises during the period
of occupancy. No planned "personal or business events" as
described in the Short-Term Rental Registration Form shall be
held at the short-term rental site.
(e) The use of recreational vehicles, campers, or tents for
occupancy is prohibited.
(f) There shall be no overnight guests other than members of the
entity renting the facility.
(g) Occupancy shall be limited to no more than two persons per
designated bedroom.
(h) No pets shall be allowed other than service animals as defined
by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(i) The property shall be cleaned and made deficiency-free
following each occupancy.
(j) Following each occupancy, the property shall be inspected by
the property owner or its agent before the property is reoccupied
and must be deficiency-free before being reoccupied.
(k) Before each new occupancy, the property owner or his agent
shall email or fax the Borough of Columbia with a list of the
number of tenants contracted to occupy the dwelling.
(l) A Knox-Box® shall be installed in an approved manner and shall
contain all keys to the property.
(m) The property shall be supplied with a basic first aid kit, a tool
kit, the contact information for the owner or manager, trash
and recycling collection information, and a list of local
emergency contacts.
A. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customary
and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or conditional
use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this chapter. A
business shall only be conducted as an accessory to a dwelling if
specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Accessory setbacks. The accessory setback requirements of the
applicable district shall apply to every accessory building, structure or
use unless a standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this article for a particular accessory
§ 220-30 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:892
use. Accessory structure setback requirements shall not apply to
permitted surface parking lots, fences or permitted accessory signs.
C. Front yard setback. No accessory structure, use or building shall be
permitted in a required front yard in any district, unless specifically
permitted by this chapter.
D. Special standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Antenna, standard (includes amateur radio antenna):
(a) Height. No standard antenna, including its supporting
structure, shall have a total height above the average
surrounding ground level of greater than 75 feet.
(b) Anchoring. An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist
high winds.
(2) Bees, keeping of:
(a) Facilities for the keeping of bees shall be set back a minimum
of 40 feet from any lot line, except such setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet if the beekeeping is separated from other lot
lines by a secure fence at least five feet in height. Signs shall
be erected as necessary to warn persons of the presence of
bees.
(b) The bee facilities shall be located and managed in such as
manner as to minimize the potential of the bees entering
streets, sidewalks or unauthorized properties.
(3) Day care in combination with a dwelling:
(a) See § 220-25 and the definitions in § 220-19 concerning the
number of children who can be cared for in different zoning
districts in a family day-care home or a group day-care home.
(b) In any case, seven or more children (other than children who
are related to the primary caregiver) shall only be cared for at
one time within a single-family detached dwelling with a
minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet and a ten-foot
minimum setback from all existing dwellings on another lot(s).
In any case, four to six children, in addition to children who are
related to the primary caregiver, shall only be cared for at one
time within a dwelling that is not attached to another dwelling.
The care of fewer numbers of children may occur within any
lawful dwelling unit.
(c) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:893
(d) Any day-care center involving seven or more children shall be
considered a principal use and meet the standards of § 220-30
for such use, if permitted.
(e) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(f) If four to six children who are not related to a permanent
resident of the dwelling are cared for, then a minimum of 200
square feet of safe exterior play area shall be available.
(g) See also "day-care center" as a principal use in § 220-30, and
day care as accessory to a place of worship in § 220-25B.
(h) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate State Department
of Public Welfare (or its successor agency) registration
certificate or license if required by such agency.
(i) The use shall include a secure fence around any outdoor areas
abutting streets that are routinely used for outdoor play.
(4) Drive-through facilities:
(a) The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause
traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
(b) On-lot traffic circulation shall be clearly marked.
(c) A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an
adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding conflicts
with traffic onto, around and off of the site. Any drive-through
facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Fences and walls:
(a) Fences and walls are permitted by right in all districts. Any
fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed.
(b) No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the sight distance
requirements of § 220-59C.
(c) Fences:
[1] Front yard. Any fence located in the required front yard of
a lot in a residential district shall:
[a] Be an open-type of fence (such as picket or split rail)
with a minimum ratio of 1:1 of open to structural
areas;
§ 220-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:894
[b] Not exceed five feet in height; and
[c] Be constructed entirely of wood (plus any required
fasteners and any wire mesh attached on the inside of
the fence), or wrought iron or other material that
closely resembles wood or wrought iron.
[2] A fence shall not be required to comply with minimum
setbacks for accessory structures.
[3] Height. No maximum height shall apply to fences that are
not within a residential district. A fence located in a
residential district in a location other than a required front
yard shall have a maximum height of 6.5 feet, except a
maximum of height of 12 feet shall be permitted where the
applicant proves to the Zoning Officer that such taller
height is necessary to protect public safety around a
specific hazard.
[4] Setbacks. No fence shall be built within an existing street
right-of-way. A fence of a dwelling may be constructed
without a setback from a lot line in a residential district,
but a one-foot or greater setback is recommended to
provide for future maintenance of the fence.
[5] Fence materials. Barbed wire shall not be used as part of
fences around dwellings. Electrically charged fences shall
only be used to contain farm animals, and shall be of such
low intensity that they will not permanently injure humans.
No fence shall be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk
vehicles, appliances, tanks or barrels.
[6] Installation of fencing. All single-sided fencing shall be
installed with the finished side facing away from the
premises. New fencing may be built and constructed on
the property line with the concurrence of the adjoining
property owners and an easement agreement. Should the
applicant fail to obtain an easement agreement from the
adjoining property owners, a two-foot setback shall be
required for the installation of such fencing. No
installation of fencing shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer of the Borough
of Columbia. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 813]
(d) Walls:
[1] Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section, and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts.
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:895
[2] No wall of greater than three feet shall be located in the
required front yard in a residential district, except as a
backing for a permitted sign at an entrance to a
development.
[3] A wall in a residential district outside of a required front
yard shall have a maximum height of three feet if it is
within the minimum accessory structure setback and six
feet if it is not.
[4] Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(e) Also, see any historic district regulations that may be adopted
by the Borough.
(6) (Reserved)219
(7) Home occupations:
(a) All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The use shall be conducted primarily by a permanent
resident of the dwelling, and involve a maximum of one
person working on-site at any one time who does not
reside within the dwelling.
[2] The use shall be conducted indoors. No outdoor storage or
display related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
No changes shall occur to the exterior of a building that
would reduce its residential appearance as viewed from a
street.
[3] The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25%
of the total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The
use shall be secondary to the residential use.
[4] One off-street parking space shall be required per
nonresident employee. In addition, for a general home
occupation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
additional off-street parking if they determine it is
necessary for customer parking.
[5] The use shall not require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
[6] A maximum of one truck related to the home occupation
shall be parked overnight on the lot or on an adjacent
street. Such truck shall not exceed 12,000 pounds
aggregate gross vehicle weight. No excavating equipment
219. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(6), regarding garage sales, was repealed 2-12-2007 by
Ord. No. 775. See now Ch. 122, Garage and Yard Sales.
§ 220-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:896
shall be permitted to be parked overnight on the lot or on
an adjacent street.
[7] No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that
produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or
electronic interference detectable on another property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous,
flammable or explosive substances, other than types and
amounts typically found on a residential property. The use
shall not involve the storage or use of toxic or highly
hazardous substances.
[8] A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner
that is perceptible to other residents between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
[9] Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum
of six students per day.
[10] A barber or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees.
[11] The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist
shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
[12] A general home occupation may include one two-squarefoot
nonilluminated sign as permitted by Article VII. A light
home occupation shall not include any sign.
[13] The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a general home
occupation application, or limit its intensity through
conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too
intense for the proposed location. In making such
determination, the Board shall review the likely amounts
of traffic, the types of operations involved and related
nuisances, the amount of off-street and on-street parking
that is available, the density of the neighborhood, whether
the use would be adjacent to another dwelling, and
setbacks from other dwellings. The Zoning Hearing Board
may also permit up to three nonresident employees as a
special exception if the Board, after considering the above
criteria, determines that the property is especially wellsuited
to a more intense use.
[14] The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of
custom crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve
commercial repair of motor vehicles.
[15] The use may include sales using telephone, mail order or
electronic methods. On-site retail sales shall only be
permitted within a general home occupation, and if
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:897
specifically approved as part of a special exception
approval. Such retail sales shall be limited to:
[a] Sales that are accessory to an approved barber shop
or similar on-site service; or
[b] Sales that are by appointment only or that are limited
to a maximum of 16 hours per week.
[16] If more than one home occupation is accessory to a
dwelling, the total aggregate impact of the home
occupations shall be considered in determining
compliance with this chapter.
(b) In addition to the requirements listed in Subsection D(7)(a)
above, the following additional requirements shall apply to a
light home occupation:
[1] The use shall not involve customers routinely visiting the
home occupation.
[2] The use shall not involve any signs visible from the exterior
of the lot.
[3] The use shall only involve the following activities:
[a] Work routinely conducted within an office;
[b] Custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts;
[c] Cooking and baking for off-site sales and use;
[d] Creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood
carving);
[e] Repairs to and assembly of computers and computer
peripherals; and
[f] A construction tradesperson, provided that
nonresidents do not routinely operate trucks from the
lot.
[4] On-site retail sales shall be prohibited.
(8) Outdoor storage and display: commercial or industrial as a
principal or accessory use.
(a) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
sidewalk or other area intended or designed for
pedestrian use or required parking area.
(b) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodway.
§ 220-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:898
(c) Screening. See § 220-59.
(d) Any storage of more than 150 used tires shall only be
permitted as part of a Borough-approved junkyard. Any
storage of used tires shall involve stacks with a maximum
height of 15 feet, and that cover a maximum of 400 square feet.
Each stack shall be separated from other stacks from all lot
lines by a minimum of 75 feet.
(9) Pets, keeping of:
(a) The accessory keeping of pets in compliance with this
subsection is permitted by right in all districts.
(b) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner or of such types of animals that it creates a serious
nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a public
safety hazard. The owner of the animals shall be responsible
for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from
pets. No dangerous animals shall be kept outdoors in a
residential district, except within a secure, completely
enclosed cage or fenced area of sufficient height or on a leash
under full control of the owner.
(c) A maximum of three total dogs and/or cats, which shall not
include more than two dogs, may be permitted to be kept by
residents of each dwelling unit, except:
[1] A maximum of six total dogs and/or cats shall be permitted
to be kept by residents of a dwelling unit on a lot of 20,000
square feet or greater that includes a single dwelling unit.
Such limits shall only apply to dogs or cats over four
months in age. Any greater number of dogs and/or cats
shall need approval as a kennel.
(d) The keeping of one or two total pigeons (except as may be
preempted by the State Carrier Pigeon Law220), chickens,
ducks, geese and/or similar fowl shall be permitted on lot with
a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet.
(e) Animals shall be permitted provided they do not create
unsanitary conditions or noxious odors for neighbors.
(f) A minimum lot area of two acres shall be required for the
keeping of horses.
(g) Only those pets that are domesticated and are compatible with
the residential character shall be permitted as "keeping of
pets." Examples of permitted pets include dogs, cats, rabbits,
gerbils and lizards, and Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs (With
220. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 3951 et seq.
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:899
respect to Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs, however, only one per
dwelling unit shall be permitted.), but do not include bears,
goats, wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, cows, venomous snakes that
could be toxic to humans, hogs or sheep. [Amended
2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 775]
(h) It shall be unlawful on a residential property to maintain any
exotic wildlife, as defined by the Pennsylvania Game and
Wildlife Code,221 whether or not an exotic wildlife possession
permit has been issued.
(10) Residential accessory structure or use (see definition in Article II):
(a) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
located within the required accessory use setback as stated in
§ 220-26, unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
(b) Accessory buildings in a residential district shall meet the
following requirements:
[1] Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings: 1,000
square feet.
[2] Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
(c) Height: see § 220-26B.
(d) Parking of commercial vehicles and trucks. The parking of
commercial vehicles is prohibited on a principally residential
lot in a residential district, except for one of the following,
provided that such vehicle(s) is needed by residents of the
dwelling to travel to and from work:
[1] The parking of a maximum of two vehicles, each of up to
12,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight; or
[2] The parking of one vehicle with an aggregate gross vehicle
weight of over 12,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle
weight, provided such vehicle is kept a minimum of 30 feet
from any dwelling on another lot.
(e) Repairs. No maintenance or repair of either of the following
shall occur on a principally residential lot:
[1] Trucks with an aggregate gross vehicle weight of over
15,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight; or
[2] Vehicles not owned or leased by a resident of the lot or his/
her relative.
(f) See setback exceptions in § 220-59B.
221. Editor's Note: See 34 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 220-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:900
(11) Swimming pool, household (referred to hereafter as "pool"):
(a) Enclosure around in-ground pools. An new or existing inground
pool shall be completely surrounded by a secure fence,
wall, building or other suitable enclosure not less than four
feet in height. This enclosure shall be constructed to make it
very difficult for small children to climb up or slip through it.
All gates or door openings through such enclosure (other than
a door to a building) shall be self-closing and include a selflatching
device on the pool side for keeping the gate or door
securely closed during times it is not in use.
(b) Enclosure around aboveground pool. Any existing or new
above ground pool shall include a secure fence, wall, building
or other suitable enclosure a minimum of four feet high above
the surrounding average ground level. This enclosure may
include the walls of the pool itself. Any access ladder shall be
able to be raised and locked so that it is a minimum of four feet
above the surrounding ground level or otherwise inaccessible
to small children when the pool is unattended.
(c) Location. Any pool deck or shelter that is elevated above the
average surrounding ground level and the water surface of any
pool shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any lot line.
Patios around pools that are level with the average
surrounding ground level are not required to be set back from
lot lines. A pool is not permitted within a required front yard. A
pool shall meet requirements of any water or sewer easement.
(d) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property. Such
method may be subject to approval of the Zoning Officer.
(e) The Borough does not assume responsibility for guaranteeing
to the public that all new and existing pools fully comply with
these provisions.
(12) Telephones or vending machines:
(a) No outdoor pay telephone and no outdoor coin-operated
vending machine shall be placed on a public sidewalk in the
public right-of-way, except for newspaper/periodical vending
machines. A newspaper/periodical vending machine shall only
be permitted on a sidewalk if a four-foot-wide pedestrian path
is unobstructed.
(b) No pay telephone and no coin-operated vending machine shall
be permitted outdoors as accessory to a dwelling or a vacant
lot.
(13) Short-term rental dwellings. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
912222]
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:901
(a) Short-term rental dwellings must be in a detached dwelling, a
detached mixed-use building, or a detached accessory
building. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces must be
provided. The spaces may be located in a garage immediately
available to the property for vehicular storage. This short-term
rental dwelling shall be occupied as a unit by a single entity.
There shall be no individual room rentals to separate entities.
(b) The property shall be registered annually and be compliant
with the Borough of Columbia's Rental Residential
Registration and Inspection Requirements as contained in the
Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code.
(c) The property shall be compliant with all federal, state, county
and local laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(d) No persons other than members of the entity renting the shortterm
rental shall be allowed on the premises during the period
of occupancy. No planned "personal or business events" as
described in the Short-Term Rental Registration Form shall be
held at the short-term rental site.
(e) The use of recreational vehicles, campers, or tents for
occupancy is prohibited.
(f) There shall be no overnight guests other than members of the
entity renting the facility.
(g) Occupancy shall be limited to no more than two persons per
designated bedroom.
(h) No pets shall be allowed other than service animals as defined
by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(i) The property shall be cleaned and made deficiency-free
following each occupancy.
(j) Following each occupancy, the property shall be inspected by
the property owner or its agent before the property is reoccupied
and must be deficiency-free before being reoccupied.
(k) Before each new occupancy, the property owner or his agent
shall email or fax the Borough of Columbia with a list of the
number of tenants contracted to occupy the dwelling.
222. Editor's Note: This ordinance also contained the following provisions regarding shortterm
rentals: 1. Any renting of a property as a short-term rental, without the property
being registered, shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance. 2. Failure to
renew a short-term rental registration shall give rise to a presumption that the short-term
rental use of the property has been abandoned. 3. Three violations of this Ordinance
within a two-year period shall be sufficient cause to revoke the short-term rental of the
property for the unexpired term of the registration. An owner is prohibited from applying
for a new registration until the term of the revoked unexpired registration has expired. 4.
A schedule of fees may be established from time to time by Borough Council.
§ 220-31 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-31
1:902
(l) A Knox-Box® shall be installed in an approved manner and shall
contain all keys to the property.
(m) The property shall be supplied with a basic first aid kit, a tool
kit, the contact information for the owner or manager, trash
and recycling collection information, and a list of local
emergency contacts.
§ 220-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:903

ARTICLE V
Environmental Protection
§ 220-32. Erosion control.
The landowner, person and/or entity performing any earth disturbance shall
utilize sufficient measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of
creeks.
§ 220-33. Nuisances and hazards to public safety.
§ 220-34. Wetlands.
The Zoning Officer may require an applicant to prove that a suspect area
proposed for alteration does or does not meet the state or federal definition
of a "wetland."
§ 220-35. (Reserved)223
A. The disturbed land area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
B. Any earth disturbance over 5,000 square feet of land area shall require
the submission of an adequate erosion and sedimentation control plan
to the County Conservation District.
C. See state erosion control regulations. (Note: As of 1999, in 25 PA. Code
Chapter 102.)
A. No land owner, tenant nor lessee shall use or allow to be used any land
or structures in a way that results or threatens to result in any of the
following conditions:
(1) Transmission of communicable disease, including conditions that
may encourage the breeding of insects or rodents.
(2) A physical hazard to the public, or a physical hazard that could be
an attractive nuisance that would be accessible by children.
(3) Pollution to groundwaters or surface waters, other than as
authorized by a state or federal permit.
(4) Risks to public health and safety, such as but not limited to
explosion, fire or biological hazards.
(5) Interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property by
a neighboring landowner of ordinary sensitivities.
B. Additional information. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
the proposed use may have difficulty complying with the standards of
this article, then the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to provide
written descriptions of proposed machinery, hazardous substances,
operations and safeguards.
§ 220-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-36
1:905
§ 220-36. Noise.
A. No principal or accessory use, or operations or activities on its lot, shall
generate a sound level exceeding the limits established in the table
below, when measured at the specified locations:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District [Amended
10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 707]
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving
the Noise Hours/Days
Maximum Sound
Level
(dBA)
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Year's Day, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
At a lot line of a 57
residential use in a
residential district
and the Park and
Open Space Districts
and Conservation
Districts 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
plus all day Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Year's Day, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
52
Industrial districts All times and days 77
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Year's Day, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
All commercial and 67
business districts
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
plus all day Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Year's Day, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
62
NOTE: “dBA” means A-weighted decibel.
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
(2) Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
223. Editor's Note: Former § 220-35, Flood-prone areas, as amended, was repealed 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 869. See now Ch. 120, Floodplain Management.
§ 220-36 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-36
1:906
§ 220-37. Odors and dust.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive to persons of average
sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot.
§ 220-38. Control of light and glare.
This § 220-38 shall only regulate exterior lighting that spills across lot lines
or onto public streets.
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
(3) Household power tools and lawn mowers between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Agricultural activities, including permitted raising of livestock, but
not exempting a commercial kennel.
(5) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Borough Council
or a county, state or federal government agency or body.
(6) Unamplified human voices or the sound of a single animal.
(7) Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
(8) Vehicles operating on a public street, railroads and aircraft.
C. The prohibitions and restrictions on noise set forth in this § 220-36 shall
be interpreted in accordance with and consistent with Chapter 149,
Noise, of the Code of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. The Zoning Officer is giving the authority to enforce said
Chapter 149 in accordance with that chapter's terms. [Added
10-8-2001 by Ord. No. 707]
A. Streetlighting exempted. This § 220-38 shall not apply to streetlighting
that is owned, financed or maintained by the Borough or the state, nor
to an individual porch light of a dwelling.
B. Height of lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a lot line of an existing dwelling or approved
residential lot shall be placed at a height exceeding 35 feet above the
average surrounding ground level. This limitation shall not apply to
lights needed for air safety nor lights intended solely to illuminate an
architectural feature of a building, nor lighting of outdoor public
recreation facilities.
C. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or
adjacent lots.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-38
1:907
§ 220-39. Steep slopes.
See § 220-26D.
§ 220-40. Setbacks from river and creeks.
See § 220-26E.
D. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around
the light source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the
lighting from creating a nuisance to reasonable persons in adjacent
dwellings, and to prevent the lighting from shining into the eyes of
passing motorists.
E. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25 and January 10.
F. Spillover. Exterior lighting on an institutional, commercial or industrial
property shall not cause a spillover of light onto a residential lot that
exceeds 0.5 horizontal footcandle inside the residential lot line.
§ 220-38 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-40
1:908
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 220-41. Required number of parking spaces.
A. Overall requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
and the regulations of this article.
(2) Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in the Table of Off-Street
Parking Requirements shall comply with the requirements for the
most similar use listed in the Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer that an alternative standard should be used for that
use.
(3) Multiple uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more than
one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use.
(4) Parking landscaping. See §§ 220-59 and 220-804 of this chapter.
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
Residential Uses
Dwelling unit, other
than types listed
separately in this
table
2 per dwelling unit
[Note: If desired, one
space may be in a
garage and one space
in a driveway.]
Home occupation See § 220-30.
Housing
permanently
restricted to
persons 55 years
and older and/or the
physically
handicapped
1 per dwelling/rental
unit, except 0.4 per
dwelling/rental unit if
evidence is presented
that the nonphysically
handicapped persons
will clearly primarily
be over 70 years old
Nonresident
employee
§ 220-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-41
1:909
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
Boardinghouse 1 per rental unit or
bed for adult,
whichever is greater
Nonresident
employee
Group home See § 220-30.
Institutional Uses
Place of worship
(includes church)
1 per 5 seats in room
of largest capacity; if
individual seats are
not used, then each 30
inches of bench
seating length shall be
considered to be one
seat
Hospital 1 per 3 beds 1.2 employees
Nursing home 1 per 8 beds 1.2 employees
Personal care home 1 per 5 beds 1.2 employees
Day-care center 1 per 10 children, with
spaces designed for
safe and convenient
dropoff and pickup
1.2 employees
School, primary or
secondary
1 per 4 students aged
16 or older
Employee
Utility facility 1 per vehicle routinely
needed to service
facility
College, university
or trade school
1 per 1.5 students not
living on campus who
attend class at peak
times (plus required
spaces for on-campus
housing)
Employee
Library, community
center or cultural
center or museum
1 per 5 seats (or 1 per
250 square feet of
floor area accessible to
patrons and/or users if
seats are not typically
provided)
Employee
§ 220-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-41
1:910
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
Treatment center 1 per 2 residents aged
16 years or older plus
1 per nonresident
intended to be treated
on-site at peak times
Nonresident
employee
Swimming pool,
nonhousehold
1 per 50 square feet of
water surface, other
than wading pools
Employee
Emergency
services station
2 spaces per fire truck
or ambulance based at
the site (not including
reserve vehicles) plus
parking required for
any indoor recreation
use or other uses
conducted on site
Commercial Uses
All commercial uses, as applicable, shall provide additional
parking or storage needed for maximum number of vehicles
stored, displayed or based at the lot at any point in time. These
additional spaces are not required to meet the stall size and
parking aisle width requirements of this chapter.
Auto service station
or repair garage
5 per repair/service
bay and 1/4 per fuel
nozzle with such
spaces separated from
accessways to pumps
Employee; plus any
parking needed for
a convenience store
under "retail sales"
Auto, boat,
recreational vehicle
or manufactured
home sales
1 per 15 vehicles,
boats, RVs, or homes
displayed
Employee
Bed-and-breakfast
use
1 per rental unit plus
the 2 per dwelling unit
Nonresident
employee
Bowling alley 2 per lane plus 2 per
pool table
1.2 employees
Car wash Adequate waiting and
drying areas
1.2 employees
§ 220-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-41
1:911
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
Financial institution
(includes bank)
1 per 200 square feet
of floor area accessible
to customers, plus
"office" parking for any
administrative offices
1.2 employees
Funeral home 1 per 5 seats in rooms
intended to be in use
at one time for visitors
Employee
Miniature golf 1 per hole 1.2 employees
Haircutting/ hairstylin1g per customer seat
used for haircutting,
hair styling, hair
washing, manicuring
or similar work
1.2 employees
Hotel or motel 1 per rental unit plus 1
per 4 seats in any
meeting room (plus
any required by any
restaurant)
1.2 employees
Laundromat 1 per 3 washing
machines
On-site employee
Offices or clinic,
medical/dental
5 per physician and 4
per dentist
1.2 employees
Offices, other than
above
1 per 300 square feet
of total floor area
Personal service
use, other than
haircutting/ hairstyling
(min. of 2 per
establishment)
1 per 200 square feet
of floor area accessible
to customers
1.2 employees
Indoor recreation
(other than bowling
alley), membership
club or exercise
club
1 per 4 persons of
maximum capacity of
all facilities
1.2 employees
§ 220-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-41
1:912
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
Outdoor recreation
(other than uses
specifically listed
in this table)
1 per 4 persons of
capacity (50% may be
on grass overflow
areas with major
driveways in gravel)
1.2 employees
Restaurant 1 per 4 seats, or 3
spaces for a use
without customer seats
1.2 employees
Retail sales (other
than types
separately listed)
1 per 200 square feet
of floor area of rooms
accessible to
customers
Retail sales of only
furniture, lumber,
carpeting, bedding
or floor covering
1 per 400 square feet
of floor area of rooms
accessible to
customers
Tavern 1 per 30 square feet of
total floor area
1.2 employees
Theater or
auditorium
1 per 4 seats, 1/2 of
which may be met by
convenient parking
shared with other
business uses on the
same lot that are
typically not routinely
open beyond 9:00 p.m.
1.2 employees
Trade/hobby school 1 per 2 students onsite
during peak use
1.2 employee
Veterinarian office 4 per veterinarian 1.2 employee
Industrial Uses
In addition to parking or storage needed for maximum number of
vehicles stored, displayed or based at the lot at any point in time,
which spaces are not required to meet the stall size and aisle
width requirements of this chapter:
§ 220-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-41
1:913
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See also § 220-41B if within the DC District) [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 790]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space for
Each:
All industrial uses
(including
warehousing,
distribution and
manufacturing)
1 per 1.2 employees,
based upon the
maximum number of
employees on-site at
peak periods of time
1 visitor space for
every 10 managers
on the site
Self-storage
development
1 per 20 storage units 1.2 employee
B. Parking reduction in DC Downtown Commercial District.
(1) Purposes: to recognize the availability of on-street parking in the
DC District, and the limited ability to provide parking to serve
existing buildings, and the potential of customers walking to
businesses in the DC District.
(2) The parking requirements in the Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements shall be modified within the DC District as follows:
(a) No off-street parking shall be required for lawful
nonresidential uses within the DC District within buildings that
existed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(b) Off-street parking shall be required for any additional dwelling
units or any new construction of any building or any expansion
of a building beyond the 10% waiver provided in § 220-42C(2).
(c) Optional fee in lieu of parking.
[1] As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
permit the reduction of off-street parking requirements in
the DC District if the applicant commits to pay a fee in lieu
of providing a certain number of required off-street
parking spaces.
[2] For each required off-street parking space that is waived, a
fee shall be required of $2,000, unless such amount is
modified by resolution of Borough Council.
[3] All such fees shall be paid to the Borough or an authority
authorized by the Borough to receive such fees. All such
fees shall be accounted for separately. All such fees shall
only be used for the creation of additional on-street or offstreet
public parking to serve the downtown. Such fees
may also be used for the payment of debt for
§ 220-41 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-41
1:914
§ 220-42. General regulations for off-street parking.
improvements to increase the amount of public parking or
for the acquisition of land for public parking.
[4] The fee shall be a one-time payment. The reduction of the
required number of parking spaces shall continue with the
land over time, regardless of ownership of the property.
[5] The application shall be provided to the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Council for review prior to an
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(d) See also provisions in § 220-42 below regarding off-site
parking and flexibility in parking requirements.
A. General. Parking spaces and accessways shall be laid out to result in
safe and orderly use, and to fully take into account all of the following:
vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement within the
site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns and any drive-through facilities.
No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or impediment to traffic off
the lot.
B. Existing parking. Any parking spaces serving such preexisting
structures or uses at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not in the
future be reduced in number below the number required by this
chapter.
C. Change in use or expansion. A structure or use in existence at the
effective date of this chapter that expands or changes in use of an
existing principal building shall be required to provide all of the
required parking for the entire size and type of the resulting use, except
as follows:
(1) If an existing lawful use includes less parking than would be
required, then that deficit of parking shall be grandfathered for
new uses. For example, if an existing store included three parking
spaces and was required to provide seven spaces, there is a deficit
of four spaces. Therefore, if that store is converted to an office that
would need 10 spaces, the office would need to provide a total of six
spaces (10 minus the preexisting deficit of four).
(2) If a use expands by an aggregate total maximum of 10% in the
applicable measurement (such as building floor area) beyond what
existed at the time of adoption of this chapter, then no additional
parking is required. For example, if an existing building included
3,000 square feet, and a single minor addition of 300 square feet
was proposed, then additional parking would not be required.
D. Continuing obligation of parking and loading spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
§ 220-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-42
1:915
§ 220-43. Design standards for off-street parking.
exists, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this chapter. No required parking area or offstreet
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage
or display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking.
E. Location of parking.
(1) Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
abutting lot with the principal use served, unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that a
method of providing the spaces is guaranteed to be available
during all of the years the use is in operation within 300 feet
walking distance from the entrance of the principal use being
served. Such distance may be increased to 500 feet for employee
parking of a nonresidential use. A written and signed lease shall be
provided. The Zoning Hearing Board may require that the use be
approved for period of time consistent with the lease of the
parking, and that a renewal of the permit shall only be approved if
the parking lease is renewed.
(2) See § 220-26 concerning location of parking within front yards in
certain districts.
F. Flexibility in parking. As a special exception, an applicant may prove to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that the minimum amount
of off-street parking should be modified for a specific application
because of one or more of the following characteristics:
(1) The applicant proves that parking will be shared with another use
that will reduce the total amount of parking needed because the
uses have different peak times of parking need, and that there is a
legally guaranteed method to make sure that the parking will
continue to be available during all of the years that the use is in
operation; or
(2) The applicant proves that the parking demand for a particular use
is unusually low because of some unusual and peculiar
characteristic of the use.
(3) Within the Downtown Commercial District, see also § 220-41B
above.
A. General requirements.
(1) Backing onto a street. No parking area shall be designed to require
or encourage parked vehicles to back into a public street in order
to leave a parking space, except for a single-family or two-family
dwelling with its access onto a local street or parking court.
Parking spaces may back onto an alley.
§ 220-42 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-43
1:916
(2) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, except for
spaces serving a single-family, twin or townhouse dwelling.
(3) Parking areas shall not be within a required buffer yard or street
right-of-way.
(4) Separation from street. Except for parking spaces immediately in
front of individual dwellings, all areas for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a
continuous grass or landscaped planting strip, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot.
(5) Stacking and obstructions. Each lot shall provide adequate area
upon the lot to prevent back-up of vehicles on a public street while
awaiting entry to the lot, or while waiting for service at a drivethrough
facility.
B. Size and marking of parking spaces. Size and marking of parking
spaces shall be in accordance with Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Borough Code. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 852]
C. Aisles. Aisles of parking lots shall be in accordance with Chapter 190,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
D. Access drives and driveways.
(1) Width of driveway/accessway at entrance onto a public street, at
the edge of the cartway:1
1-Way Use 2-Way Use
Minimum 12 feet1 25 feet1
Maximum 20 feet1 30 feet1
1 NOTE: Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for
an entrance to a state road, or the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a wider width is needed for
tractor-trailer trucks.
(2) Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway entry. The Borough may require an applicant to install an
appropriate type and size of pipe at a driveway crossing.
E. Paving, grading and drainage. Paving, grating and drainage shall be in
accordance with Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development, of
the Borough Code. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
§ 220-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-43
1:917
§ 220-44. Off-street loading.
F. Lighting of parking areas. See "light and glare control" in Article V.
G. Handicapped parking.
(1) Number of spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a revised regulation is officially established under the Federal
Americans With Disabilities Act:
Total Number of Parking
Spaces on Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
4 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number
of spaces over 1,000
(2) Handicapped parking spaces shall meet and comply with current
Americans With Disabilities Act regulations. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852224]
A. Each use shall provide off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this section, sufficient to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use and the maximum size vehicle, in a
manner that will not routinely obstruct traffic on a public street. If a
reasonable alternative does not exist, traffic may be obstructed for
occasional loading and unloading along an alley.
B. At the time of review under this chapter. the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Zoning Officer on whether the use will have sufficient
numbers and sizes of loading facilities. The Planning Commission and/
or Borough Council may provide advice to the Zoning Officer on this
matter as part of any plan review by such boards. For the purposes of
224. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection G(3) through (6).
§ 220-43 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-44
1:918
this section, the words "loading" and "unloading" are used
interchangeably.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall not intrude into
approved buffer areas and landscaped areas.
D. Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided where required by state or
federal regulations or other local ordinances. The specific locations of
these lanes are subject to review by Borough fire officials.
§ 220-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-44
1:919

ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 220-45. Applicability.
§ 220-46. Nonconforming signs.
§ 220-47. Miscellaneous signs not requiring permits.
A. Purposes. This article is intended to promote and maintain overall
community aesthetic quality; establish reasonable time, place and
manner of regulations for the exercise of free speech, without
regulating content; promote traffic safety by avoiding distractions and
sight distance obstructions; and protect property values and ensure
compatibility with the character of neighboring uses.
B. Permit required. A zoning permit shall be required for all signs except
for signs meeting the requirements of § 220-47, and nonilluminated
window signs constructed of paper, cardboard or similar materials and
that are not of a permanent nature. Only types, sizes and heights of
signs that are specifically permitted by this chapter within the
applicable district shall be allowed. Within the Historic District, the
appearance of a sign may be required to be approved under Chapter
130, Historic District.
C. Changes on signs. Any lawfully existing sign (including nonconforming
signs) may be painted or repaired or changed in logo or message
without a new permit under this chapter provided that the changes do
not increase the sign area or otherwise result in noncompliance or an
increased nonconformity with this chapter.
A. Signs legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter and which
do not conform to the requirements of the chapter shall be considered
nonconforming signs.
B. An existing nonconforming sign may only be replaced with a
conforming sign, except a lawful nonconforming sign serving a lawful
nonconforming principal use on the same lot may be replaced with a
new sign advertising the nonconforming use if the new sign is not more
nonconforming in any manner than the previous sign.
A. The following signs shall be permitted by right within all zoning
districts within the following regulations, and shall not be required to
have a permit under this article:
§ 220-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:921
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Christmas tree
sign: advertises
the seasonal
sale of
Christmas
trees.
2 8 30 Shall only be
posted during
seasons when
such products
are actively
offered for sale.
Charitable
event sign:
advertises a
special event
held a
maximum of 9
days in any
calendar year
that primarily is
held to benefit a
U.S. Internal
Revenue
Service
certified taxexempt
nonprofit
organization.
2 4 40 Shall be placed a
maximum of 30
days prior to
event and
removed a
maximum of 7
days after event.
Contractor's
sign: advertises
a building
tradesperson,
engineer or
architect who is
actively
conducting
significant work
on a particular
lot that is not
such person's
place of
business.
2 8 40 Shall only be
permitted while
such work is
actively and
clearly underway
and a maximum
of 10 days
afterward. Such
signs shall not be
placed on the lot
for more than 1
year, unless a
1-year extension
is granted by the
Zoning Officer.
Shall not be
illuminated.
§ 220-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-47
1:922
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Directional
sign: provides
information
indicating
traffic direction,
entry or exit,
loading or
service area,
directions to
apartment
numbers or
parking courts
in a
development,
fire lanes,
parking or
closely similar
information
regarding the
same lot as the
sign is on, and
that does not
include
advertising.
No
maximum
3, in
addition
to signs
painted
on
pavement
3, in
addition to
signs
painted on
pavement
Directional signs
within a
residential
development
shall not be
illuminated.
Flag: a banner
or pennant
made of fabric
or materials
with a similar
appearance
that is hung in
such a way to
flow in the wind
and that
includes some
type of
commercial
message.
2 50 50 Governmental
flags and flags
without a
commercial
message are not
regulated by this
chapter.
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:923
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Garage sale
sign: advertises
an occasional
garage sale/
porch sale or
auction.
2 per
event
2 per sign 2 per sign Shall be placed a
maximum of 48
hours before
permitted garage
sale or auction
begins, and be
removed a
maximum of 24
hours after event
ends.
Home
occupation
sign: advertises
a permitted
home
occupation.
1 2 2 Shall not be
illuminated,
except for a sign
of a medical
doctor. Shall be
set back a
minimum of 10
feet from the
street right-ofway,
unless
printed on a
mailbox. May be
freestanding,
attached flat on
a building wall or
within a window.
Identification
sign: only
identifies the
name and/or
occupation of
the resident
and/or the
name, street
address and/or
use of a lot, but
that does not
include
advertising.
1 1, except
2 for a
principal
nonresidential
use
6 Maximum height
of 8 feet.
§ 220-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-47
1:924
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Open house
sign: advertises
the temporary
and periodic
open house of a
property for
sale or rent.
2 per
event
4 4 Shall be placed a
maximum of 5
days before open
house begins,
and be removed
a maximum of 24
hours after open
house ends. Such
sign shall not be
posted more than
5 consecutive
days.
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:925
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Political sign:
advertises a
person or party
seeking
political office
or a political
cause or
opinion on a
referendum or
matter of
political
concern and
which relates to
a scheduled
election or
matter of
upcoming vote
by a
governmental
body.
No
maximum
Maximum
total of 30
Maximum
total of 60
Shall be placed a
maximum of 60
days prior to
election, vote or
referendum and
removed a
maximum of 7
days after such
election, vote or
referendum.
Persons posting
political signs
shall maintain a
written list of
locations of such
signs, unless
posting signs on
their own
property. Political
signs shall not be
placed on private
property without
the prior consent
of the owner. If a
political sign
does not meet
these
requirements,
then it shall be
regulated as an
"off-premises
sign."
Public services
sign: advertises
the availability
of rest rooms,
telephone or
other similar
public
convenience.
No
maximum
2 2
§ 220-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-47
1:926
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Real estate
sign: advertises
the availability
of property on
which the sign
is located for
sale, rent or
lease.
1 per
street the
lot abuts
6 30 Shall only be
placed on the
property while it
is actively for
sale, lease or
rent, and shall be
rremoved a
maximum of 7
days after
settlement or
start of lease.
Service
organization/
place of
worship sign:
an off-premises
sign stating
name of a
recognized
incorporated
service
organization or
place of
worship and
that states the
place and times
of meetings or
services and/or
an arrow
directing
persons to such
location.
2 2 2 Maximum of 2
such signs per
such
organization or
place of worship.
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:927
Type and
Definition of
Signs Not
Requiring
Permits
Maximum
Number
of Signs
Per Lot
Maximum
Sign
Area Per
Sign1 on
Residential
Lots
Maximum
Sign Area
Per Sign1
on Nonresidential
Lots
Other
Requirements
Time and
temperature
sign: with a sole
purpose to
announce the
current time
and
temperature
and any
nonprofit public
service
messages.
1 Not
permitted
30
Trespassing
sign: indicating
that a road is
private, that
trespassing is
prohibited on a
lot, or
controlling
certain
activities such
as hunting and
fishing on the
lot.
No
maximum
2 4
1 NOTE: Maximum sign areas are for each of 2 sides of each
permitted sign, measured in square feet.
B. In addition, the following types of signs are not regulated by this
chapter:
(1) Historic sign: memorializes an important historic place, event or
person and that is specifically authorized by the Borough or a
county, state or federal agency.
(2) Holiday decorations: commemorates a holiday recognized by the
Borough, county, state or federal government and that does not
include advertising.
(3) Not readable sign: not readable from any public street or any
exterior lot line.
§ 220-47 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-47
1:928
§ 220-48. Freestanding, wall and window signs.
(4) Official sign: erected by the state, county, Borough or other legally
constituted governmental body, or specifically authorized by
Borough ordinance or resolution, and which exists for public
purposes.
(5) Required sign: only includes information required to be posted
outdoors by a government agency or the Borough.
(6) Right-of-way sign: posted within the existing right-of-way of a
public street and officially authorized by the Borough or PennDOT.
A. The following are the signs permitted on a lot within the specified
districts and within the following regulations, in addition to exempt
signs and temporary signs permitted in all districts by other provisions
of this article. See definitions of the types of signs in § 220-55.
Zoning District
or Type of Use
Maximum Total
Height of
Freestanding
Signs
Maximum Area
of Wall Signs
Maximum Area
of Window Signs
Maximum Area
and Number of
Freestanding
Signs
P, C or residential
districts for
permitted
principal
nonresidential
uses.
8 feet 20 square feet on
each side of a
principal
building
May be used in
place of a wall
sign with the
same restrictions
1 sign on each
street the lot
abuts, each with a
maximum sign
area of 20 square
feet2
For home
occupation signs,
see § 220-47. No
new signs in these
districts shall be
internally
illuminated.
DC, RC, NC or
MDRB Districts.
No new
freestanding signs
in the DC, RC or
MDRB Districts
shall be internally
illuminated.
8 feet 10% of the area
of the building
side on which
the signs are
attached.1
Temporary
nonilluminated
window signs are
not regulated.
Other window
signs are
regulated under
wall signs.
1 sign per street
that the lot abuts,
each with a
maximum area of
20 square feet2
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-48
1:929
Zoning District
or Type of Use
Maximum Total
Height of
Freestanding
Signs
Maximum Area
of Wall Signs
Maximum Area
of Window Signs
Maximum Area
and Number of
Freestanding
Signs
All districts not
listed above
20 feet 15% of the area
of the building
side on which
the signs are
attached
Temporary
nonilluminated
window signs are
not regulated.
Other window
signs are
regulated under
wall signs.
1 sign per street
that the lot abuts,
each with a
maximum area of
50 square feet2, 3
NOTES:
1 In the DC, MDRB and RC Districts, one projecting sign may also be permitted per lot, provided
such sign meets minimum clearance over the sidewalk as provided in the Building Code, is
constructed entirely from wood or materials with a closely similar appearance (and metal
fasteners), has a maximum sign area on each of 2 sides of 8 square feet, and is securely attached
to the building.
2 If the permitted freestanding sign area is not used, such sign area may be added to the
permitted wall sign area.
3 If a lot includes 6 or more principal uses, then the maximum freestanding sign area may be
increased to 80 square feet.
B. Maximum height of wall signs. The maximum height of wall signs shall
be equal to the top of the roof along the wall to which they are attached.
C. Portable signs (including signs on mobile stands) and other temporary
signs.
(1) Purpose. These standards recognize portable signs as a particular
type of sign that has the characteristics of a temporary sign but
that has been inappropriately used as a permanent sign. This
section is based on the policy that if a use desires to regularly
display a sign for regularly changing messages, that it erect a
permanent sign within all of the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
PORTABLE SIGN — A freestanding sign that is attached to a
chassis or legs that allows it to be towed or carried from one
location to another and that is not permanently attached to the
ground.
(3) Portable signs are prohibited in all districts, except for charitable
event signs permitted by § 220-47.
§ 220-48 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-49
1:930
§ 220-49. Abandoned or outdated signs.
Signs advertising a use no longer in existence (other than a sign relating
to a building that is clearly temporarily vacant and being offered to new
tenants or for purchase) shall be removed within 180 days of the cessation
of such use.
§ 220-50. Location of signs.
The following shall regulate the location of signs:
§ 220-51. Illumination of signs.
See "light and glare control" in Article V.
§ 220-52. Vehicles functioning as signs.
Any vehicle or structure to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the
carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the primary purpose
of the vehicle or structure but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall be
considered a freestanding sign and as such shall be subject to requirements
for freestanding signs in the district in which such vehicle or structure is
located.
A. Setbacks.
(1) A sign shall not project over any existing street right-of-way, except
for permitted projecting signs within the DC, RC and MDRB
Districts.
(2) A freestanding illuminated sign for a commercial or industrial
business (except in the DC District) shall not be located within 10
feet of an abutting lot line of a lot that only includes one dwelling
unit.
(3) These setbacks shall not apply to official signs, nameplate signs,
public service signs and directional signs.
B. Sight distance. No sign shall be so located that it interferes with the
sight distance requirements of § 220-59.
C. Off-premises. No signs except permitted off-premises, official, political
or public service signs shall be erected on a property to which it does
not relate.
D. Permission of owner. No sign shall be posted on any property or sign
pole or public utility pole, unless permission has been received by the
owner.
E. Utility poles. No sign shall be attached to a utility pole using metal
fasteners, except by a utility or government agency.
§ 220-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-53
1:931
§ 220-53. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
§ 220-54. Construction of signs.
Every permanent sign permitted in this section shall be constructed of
durable materials and shall be kept in good condition and repair. The Zoning
Officer shall by written notice require a property owner or lessee to repair
or remove a dilapidated or unsafe sign within a specified period of time. If
such order is not complied with, the Borough may repair or remove such
sign at the expense of such owner or lessee.
§ 220-55. Measurement and major types of signs.
A. Any moving object used to attract attention to a commercial use. Flags
and banners except as is permitted by § 220-47 and except for flags or
banners meeting the requirements for a particular type of sign.
B. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated or moving signs of any type,
except time and temperature signs may flash. In addition, flashing
lights visible from a street shall not be used to attract attention to a
business. This restriction specifically includes window signs, but does
not prohibit Christmas lighting or displays, within § 220-47.
C. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor.
D. Signs which contain information that states or implies that a lot may be
used for any purpose not permitted under the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
E. Signs that are of such character, form, shape or color that they imitate
or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device or that have any
characteristics which are likely to confuse or distract the operator of a
motor vehicle on a public street (such as prominent use of the words
"danger").
F. Signs or displays visible from a lot line that include words or images
that are obscene or pornographic.
G. Balloons of greater than 25 cubic feet that are tethered to the ground or
a structure for periods of over a day and that are primarily intended for
advertising purposes.
H. Floodlights and outdoor lasers for advertising purposes.
A. Sign definitions. The following definitions shall be used in determining
whether signs meet the measurement and type requirements of this
article:
BUILDING FACE — The vertical area of a particular side of a building,
but not including the area of any slanted roof.
§ 220-53 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-55
1:932
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which is self-supporting upon the
ground or which is primarily supported by poles attached to the ground
and not primarily supported by a building.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level surrounding a sign to the highest point of the sign and
its supporting structure. Religious symbols, when not accompanied by
lettering, shall not be restricted by the sign heights of this article when
attached to a tower or spire of a place of worship.
ILLUMINATED SIGN, INTERNALLY — A sign illuminated by light from
within the sign rather than a source adjacent to or outside of the sign. A
sign within a display case with lights only shining onto the front of the
sign shall be considered to be externally illuminated.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See Article II.
SIGN — See Article II.
WALL SIGN — A sign primarily supported by or painted on a wall of a
building and which does not project more than two feet from such wall.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is readily visible and can be at least
partially read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a
window or transparent door or that can be read through a window or
transparent door.
B. Measurement of sign area.
(1) Sign area shall include all lettering, wording and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with related background areas on
which they are displayed. One freestanding sign may include
several signs that are all attached to one structure, with the total
sign area being the area of a common geometric form that could
encompass all signs.
(2) The sign area shall not include any structurally supporting
framework, bracing, or clearly defined wooden framing if such area
does not include any display, lettering or sign and if such area is
clearly incidental to the sign area itself.
(3) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted directly on a building or window, other than an
illuminated background that is a part of the sign, the sign area shall
be the smallest rectangle that includes all of the letters and
symbols.
(4) The maximum sign area of sign shall be for each of two sides of a
sign, provided that only one side of a sign is readable from any
location.
(5) Unless otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs
are maximum sizes.
§ 220-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-56
1:933
§ 220-56. Off-premises signs.
A. Purposes. Off-premises signs are controlled by this chapter for the
following purposes, to: ensure that a physical environment is
maintained that is attractive to desirable types of development,
especially light industrial and office parks; prevent visual pollution in
the Borough and protect property values, especially in consideration of
the fact that most commercial areas of the Borough are within close
proximity to existing residences; prevent glare on adjacent property
and streets; avoid the creation of additional visual distractions to
motorists, especially along busy arterial streets that involve complex
turning movements and numerous traffic hazards; recognize the
numerous alternative forms of free speech available in the Borough,
including existing nonconforming off-premises signs, on-premises signs
and temporary signs and printed and electronic media; carry out the
purposes listed in § 220-45.
B. Nonconforming off-premises signs. This section is not intended to
require the removal of an existing lawfully placed off-premises sign that
is in structurally sound condition.
C. PennDOT sign. Signs erected and maintained by PennDOT are
permitted by right in all districts.
D. Permitted off-premises signs. An off-premises sign is only permitted if it
meet the following requirements:
(1) District. An off-premises sign is only permitted in the HC District.
(2) Location. An off-premises sign shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from all lot lines and street rights-of-way.
(3) Maximum sign area: 300 square feet.
(4) Spacing. Any off-premises sign shall be separated by a minimum of
1,200 feet from any other off-premises sign, including signs on
either side of a street and including existing signs in other
municipalities. No lot shall include more than one off-premises
sign.
(5) Maximum height: 25 feet above the elevation of the adjacent street,
measured at the street center line.
(6) Attached. No off-premises sign or sign face shall be attached in any
way to any other off-premises sign, except that a sign may have two
sign faces of 150 square feet each if they are placed approximately
back to back.
(7) Control of lighting and glare. See standards in § 220-38.
(8) Residences. No off-premises sign greater than 10 square feet in
sign area shall be located within 200 feet of an existing dwelling.
§ 220-56 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-56
1:934
(9) Condition. The sign shall be maintained in a good and safe
condition. The area around the sign shall be kept free of debris.
§ 220-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-56
1:935

ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 220-57. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings; minimum size of dwellings.
§ 220-58. Height exceptions.
§ 220-59. Special lot and yard requirements, sight distance and
buffer yards.
A. Frontage required onto improved street. Each lot to be created and
each principal structure erected or moved shall be on a lot which
directly abuts a public street, a street proposed to be dedicated to the
Borough by the subdivision plan which created or creates such lot, or a
private street which meets all of the requirements of Chapter 190,
Subdivision and Land Development. In the case of townhouses,
manufactured/mobile home park, or low-rise apartment, each unit may
have access onto a parking court which then has access onto a public or
private street meeting Borough standards.
B. Principal uses per lot.
(1) A lot in a commercial or industrial district may include more than
one permitted principal use per lot, provided that all of the
requirements are met for each use. If differing minimum lot areas
apply for different uses on the lot, then the most restrictive lot area
shall apply.
(2) A lot within a residential district shall not include more than one
principal use unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
C. Minimum size of dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 500 square feet of enclosed habitable, indoor, heated floor area, and
which shall be primarily above the ground level. Dwelling units shall
also comply with any occupancy limits established in any other Borough
codes, such as an Existing Structures Code.225
A. Except as set forth in Article IV, § 220-30A(12), of this chapter, the
maximum structure height specified for each district shall not apply to:
antenna, communications antennas, or communications towers that
meet the requirements of this chapter, water towers, clock or bell
towers, steeples of places of worship, electrical transmission lines,
elevator shafts, windmills, skylights, chimneys or other appurtenances
usually required to be customarily placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No.
718]
B. See also the Borough Airport Approach Ordinance.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Existing Structures, Property Maintenance and Fire
Prevention.
§ 220-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-59
1:937
§ 220-60. Landscaping. [Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
A. In general:
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this chapter. This includes, but is not
limited to, setback areas, nonimpervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
(2) Emergency access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles and fire ladders.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
(1) Corner lots. For a corner lot, the minimum side yard depth abutting
a public street shall be equal to the minimum depth of the front
yard.
(2) Projections into required yards.
(a) Cornices, eaves, sills or other similar architectural features,
exterior stairways, fire escapes or other required means of
egress, rain leads, chimneys, "Bilko"-type doors for basement
access, window awnings, chaise for heating pipes or other
similar structures that do not include space usable by persons
may extend or project into a required yard not more than three
feet, except as may be required within a drainage or utility
easement.
(b) Steps, stoops, fire escapes, handicapped ramps, and landings
necessary to provide entrance to a building may be located
within a required setback area.
(3) Front yard setback exception. In any district within a block
containing a lot proposed for a construction or expansion of a
building, where 50% or more of the improved lots on such block
frontage currently have front yards of less depth than is currently
required for that district, and where the clear majority of such lots
are already developed, the average of such existing front setbacks
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the remainder of
the frontage.
C. Sight clearance at intersections. See the applicable provisions of
Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in § 190-29Q of such
chapter.)
D. Buffer yards. Buffer yards and screening shall be required under
certain situations as noted in the appropriate article and section of
Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 852]
§ 220-59 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-60
1:938
§ 220-61. Nonconformities.
(Note: See also Chapter 190, Subdivision and Land Development, if a new
lot is created, lot lines are changed or land development approval is
needed.)
A. Any landscaped part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or
apartment lot shall be kept free of debris, rubbish and noxious weeds.
B. Any landscaping on any commercial, industrial, institutional or
apartment lot that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be
replaced by the current property owner when practical considering
growing seasons, within a maximum of 120 days.
A. Proof and registration of nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility
of, with the burden of proof upon, a party asserting a nonconformity to
provide the evidence that it is lawful. A property owner may request a
written statement of nonconformity from the Zoning Officer after
providing sufficient evidence.
B. Continuation. A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot as defined
by this chapter may be continued and may be sold and continued by
new owners. Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
C. Expansion of or construction upon nonconformities.
(1) Nonconforming structure.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded provided:
[1] That such action will not increase the severity or amount
of the nonconformity (such as the area of the building
extending into the required yard) or create any new
nonconformity; and
[2] That any expanded area will comply with the applicable
setbacks in that district and other requirements of this
chapter.
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(c) Extension along a nonconforming setback. If an existing
building has a lawfully nonconforming side or rear building
setback, additions may occur to increase the height above such
setback or to extend other portions of the building out to the
nonconforming side or rear setback line, provided that:
[1] The structure shall not be extended beyond the existing
nonconforming setback line;
§ 220-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-61
1:939
[2] No additional nonconformity is created;
[3] The new nonconforming extension is not greater than 25%
of the existing floor area;
[4] All other requirements of this chapter shall be met; and
[5] Such additions shall not be permitted for a nonresidential
building that abuts an existing primarily residential use.
(2) Nonconforming lots.
(a) Permitted construction on a nonconforming lot. New permitted
structures for a single permitted by right principal use and its
customary accessory uses may be constructed, reconstructed
or expanded on a nonconforming lot of record as a permitted
by right use if minimum setback requirements are met.
(b) Lot width. The fact that an existing lawful lot of record does not
meet the minimum lot width requirements of this chapter shall
not by itself cause such lot to be considered to be a
nonconforming lot.
(3) Expansion of a nonconforming nonresidential use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under Article I.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use, or
the total land area covered by the nonconforming use,
whichever is more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater
than 25% beyond what existed in the nonconforming use at the
time the use first became nonconforming. The above maximum
increase shall be measured in aggregate over the entire life of
the nonconformity. All expansions of the nonconforming use
and/or building(s) that occurred since the use originally
became nonconforming shall count towards the above
maximum increase.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(4) Expansion of a nonconforming residential use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded as a permitted by
§ 220-61 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-61
1:940
right use provided that: the number of dwelling units or rooming
house units are not increased; the expansion meets all applicable
setbacks; no new types of nonconformities are created; and a
nonconformity is not made more severe.
(5) Nonconforming sign. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
interpreted to provide a right to expand or extend a nonconforming
sign. Instead, any expansions or extensions of a nonconforming
sign shall comply with this chapter.
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities. A nonconforming structure
that has been destroyed or damaged may be rebuilt in a nonconforming
fashion only if: the application for a building permit is submitted within
18 months after the date of damage or destruction; work begins in
earnest within 12 months afterwards and continues; and no
nonconformity may be created or increased by any reconstruction. The
property shall be properly secured during such time in such a way to
keep out trespassers and to avoid harm to neighboring properties.
E. Abandonment of a nonconformity.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued, razed,
removed or abandoned for 12 or more months, subsequent use of
such building or land shall conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, except:
(a) As provided for in Subsection D, Damaged or destroyed
nonconformities, of this section.
(b) The applicant shall be responsible to provide evidence that the
nonconformity was not abandoned.
(c) An existing lawful separate dwelling unit may be unrented for
any period of time without being considered abandoned under
this chapter.
F. Changes from one nonconforming use to another.
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land shall not
revert to a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming
use only if permitted as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. However, special exception approval is not needed for a
simple change within an existing building from one lawful
nonconforming retail store use to another retail store use or from
one lawful nonconforming personal service use to another personal
service use provided that the new use complies with any Zoning
Hearing Board conditions that applied to the previous use and is
not more objectionable in external effects than the previous use.
(3) Where special exception approval is required for a change of a
nonconforming use, the Board shall determine whether the
§ 220-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-61
1:941
§ 220-62. Dumpster screening and location.
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equal or less objectionable in external effects than
the preexisting nonconforming use with regard to:
(a) Traffic safety and generation (especially truck traffic);
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire,
hazardous substances, and explosive hazards;
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage;
(d) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings; and
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a nonconforming
adult use.
G. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
A. Any newly placed solid waste dumpster shall be screened on at least
three of four sides as necessary to screen views from public streets and
dwellings. In addition, some form of mostly solid gate shall enclose the
fourth side.
B. Such screening shall consist of decorative masonry walls, mostly solid
weather-resistant wood fencing, fencing of a similar appearance, or
primarily evergreen plantings.
C. Setback from dwellings. To the maximum extent feasible, as determined
by the Zoning Officer, a solid waste container with a capacity of over 15
cubic feet shall be kept a minimum of 20 feet from the walls of a
dwelling on an abutting lot.
D. If a solid waste dumpster is moved from one part of a lot to another part
of a lot, then it shall come into compliance with this § 220-62.
E. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during
actual construction or demolition on the premises, nor containers for
the storage of cardboard or paper for recycling.
§ 220-61 COLUMBIA CODE § 220-62
1:942
Appendix
Chapter A223
WILLIAM F. LOCKARD TRUST FUND
§ A223-1. Acceptance of bequest.
Said bequest is hereby accepted in trust for the purposes and conditions
imposed by the terms of said will.
§ A223-2. Title.
Said Trust Fund shall be known as the "William F. Lockard Trust Fund."
§ A223-3. Trustees; terms.
Upon the passage of this ordinance, Council shall elect five citizens, each of
whom shall possess the qualifications imposed and shall serve the terms as
stipulated in the will226 of donor.
§ A223-4. Annual election of trustees.
Annually thereafter, Council shall elect one citizen possessing the
qualifications stipulated who shall serve the term provided in said will.
§ A223-5. Power and authority of trustees.
Said Board of Trustees shall have and possess the power and authority to
receive, invest, appropriate and distribute the principal and income227 of
said Trust Fund in accordance with the conditions imposed by the will of the
donor.
§ A223-6. Records required.
Said Board of Trustees shall keep records of its acts showing how the
principal of said Trust Fund is invested and how the expenditure of the
income is made and shall make report thereof to Council at the end of each
calendar year.
Chapter A224
COLUMBIA MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
226. Editor's Note: Said will directs that, for the purposes of administering and distributing
said Trust Fund, the Borough of Columbia shall elect five citizens of said Borough, each of
whom shall have resided therein not less than five years, shall not be under 30 years of
age and shall be owners of real estate to the value of not less than $2,000.
227. Editor's Note: The income arising from said Trust Fund shall, according to the terms of
said will, be used to purchase fuel, provisions and clothing for deserving widows and
orphans living in said Borough, as well as providing night schools for residents of said
Borough and for other purposes specified.
§ 220-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A224-1
1:943
§ A224-1. Intention.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Columbia hereby signifies its
intention and desire to organize an Authority under the provisions of the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382), as
amended.228
§ A224-2. Authorization; Articles of Incorporation.
The Chief Burgess, the President of the Borough Council and the Secretary
of the Borough Council are hereby authorized and directed to execute on
behalf of the Borough of Columbia Articles of Incorporation in substantially
the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended,
the municipal authorities of the Borough of Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an Authority thereunder, do hereby
certify:
(a) The name of the Authority is "Columbia Municipal Authority."
(b) Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May
2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of
1945," as amended.
(c) No other Authority has been organized under the said
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, or under the Act approved
the 28th day of June 1935, P.L. 463, or is in existence in or for the
Borough of Columbia, Pennsylvania.
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of
Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and the names and
addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows:
Name Office Address
Walter Roye Chief Burgess 820 Walnut Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Robert Wickenheiser President of Borough
Council
536 South Ninth Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Edward J. Dinkel Secretary of Borough
Council
260 South Fourth Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Columbia Trust
Company
Treasurer of Borough
Council
Fourth and Locust Streets,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
228. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ A224-1 COLUMBIA CODE § A224-2
1:944
Name Office Address
Charles Rochow Member of Borough
Council
535 Locust Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Philip J. Price Member of Borough
Council
228 Lawrence Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Charles G.
Slottenberger
Member of Borough
Council
237 Walnut Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Woodrow A. Zeamer Member of Borough
Council
135 South Eighth Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
C. Stanley Albright Member of Borough
Council
935 Walnut Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
James Ellwein Member of Borough
Council
134 South Fifth Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Charles F. Gundel Member of Borough
Council
134 South Third Street,
Columbia, Pennsylvania
Breneman Shultz Member of Borough
Council
612 Union Street Columbia,
Pennsylvania
(e) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority are as follows:
Name Address Term
Theodore Kain 1051 Walnut Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania
One year
Harry Denison 21 South Fourth Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania
Two years
Dr. William B. Boyle 433 Walnut Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania
Three years
Fred W. Wagner 13th & Central Avenue, Columbia,
Pennsylvania
Four years
R. Clark McCachren 1012 Walnut Street, Columbia,
Pennsylvania
Five years
Whose terms of office shall commence on the date of appointment and
shall be computed from January 1, 1951.
(f) Said Authority is organized for all of the purposes set forth in the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended, and shall have
all of the powers granted in said Act.
(g) The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority, certified
from the record of the incorporating municipality, together with
proofs of publication of notice of intention to file these Articles
of Incorporation with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, are each submitted herewith.
§ A224-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A224-2
1:945
In witness whereof, the undersigned have executed these Articles of
Incorporation on behalf of the Borough of Columbia, the incorporating
municipality above named, and have caused to be affixed hereto the seal
thereof, this _______ day of ______________, 1950.
Chief Burgess
President of Borough Council
(SEAL)
Attest:
Edward J. Dinkel
Secretary of Borough Council
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
: SS.
County of Lancaster :
On this ______ day of _____________ 1950, before me, a Notary Public
in and for the county aforesaid, personally appeared Walter Roye, Chief
Burgess, Robert Wickenheiser, President of Borough Council and Edward
J. Dinkel, Secretary of Borough Council, of the Borough of Columbia, the
municipal corporation named in and which executed the foregoing Articles
of Incorporation, who, being severally duly sworn according to law, depose
and say that they were personally present at the execution of the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation and saw the common or corporate seal of the
Borough of Columbia affixed thereto; that the seal affixed thereto is the
common or corporate seal of said Borough of Columbia; that the foregoing
Articles of Incorporation were duly signed, sealed and delivered by and as
and for the act and deed of the said Borough by the authority and at the
direction of the Borough Council, pursuant to an ordinance duly enacted
on the 13th day of November 1950, and that the names of Walter Roye
as Chief Burgess, of Robert Wiekenheiser as President of Borough Council
and of Edward J. Dinkel as Secretary of Borough Council are in their proper
and respective handwritings.
Sworn to and subscribed before me
this ______ day of __________, AD.
1950.
Notary Public
My commission expires:
§ A224-2 COLUMBIA CODE § A224-3
1:946
§ A224-3. Directions to perform necessary acts to effect
incorporation.
The proper officers of the Borough are hereby directed to cause a notice of
this ordinance to be published one time in the Lancaster Law Review, the
legal periodical of Lancaster County, and one time in the Columbia News,
a newspaper published and of general circulation in Lancaster County, as
required by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended;229 to
file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the required proofs of
publication of notice of this ordinance and a certified copy of this ordinance
with the Secretary of the Commonwealth; and to do, execute and perform
any and all official acts and to pay all fees and costs necessary or
appropriate to effect the incorporation of the Columbia Municipal Authority.
§ A224-4. Purpose; powers.
Said Authority shall be for all of the purposes set forth in the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 and shall have all of the power granted in said
Act.230
Chapter A225
EMPLOYEE PROGRAMS
229. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
230. Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ A224-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A224-4
1:947

ARTICLE I
Compensation in Lieu of Pensions
[Adopted 3-11-1963 by Ord. No. 367 (Appendix Part I, Art. I, of the
1971 Code)]
§ A225-1. Qualification for benefits; calculations. [Amended
5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 479; 10-11-1971 by Ord. No. 481; 12-20-1981
by Ord. No. 570; 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 680; 3-11-2002 by Ord. No.
710]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Borough Code of 1927, May 4, P.L. 519,231
as amended, employees of not less than 12 years of continuous, satisfactory,
full-time service immediately prior to retirement who are not less than 62
years of age and who are not at the time of their retirement members of a
pensioning or retirement system which has been adopted by the Borough
of Columbia, upon cessation of service and while this ordinance remains
in effect, shall be paid the sum of $100 per month. "Twelve years of
continuous, satisfactory, full-time service" shall be construed to mean 12
years of satisfactory, full-time service with no more than one separation in
employment which may not exceed 12 months.
§ A225-2. Source of payments.
Such payments shall be made out of the general Borough funds.
§ A225-3. Membership in other retirement systems. [Amended
5-10-1971 by Ord. No. 479]
Nothing herein shall preclude any employee from joining in any pension
system or municipal retirement system that the Borough may adopt.
231. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ A225-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A225-3
1:949

ARTICLE II
Borough Pension Program
[Adopted 12-30-1981 as Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 570 (Appendix Part I, Art.
V, of the 1971 Code)]
§ A225-4. Adoption of program.
Council may, from time to time by resolution, adopt a pension program for
public employees to implement the terms of any agreement between the
Borough of Columbia and the employees of the Borough of Columbia, which
program shall become part of the within ordinance by reference made in
such resolution.
§ A225-5. Appropriation of funds.
Council shall, from time to time by resolution, make appropriations from the
proper fund or funds of the Borough of Columbia in the necessary amount
to pay into such pension program in accordance with the pension program,
agreement, trust or such other document or documents as may be entered
into and executed to implement the pension program.
§ A225-6. Administration.
The President of the Borough Council, Secretary and such other officer
or officers as may by resolution be designated by Borough Council be
and they hereby are authorized and directed to execute and deliver all
documents, plans, programs or agreements and to take such actions as
may be necessary and proper for the valid promulgation of such pension
program on behalf of the Borough of Columbia.
§ A225-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A225-6
1:951

ARTICLE III
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 11-13-1989 by Ord. No. 618; amended in its entirety
10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 755232]
§ A225-7. Repealer.
This ordinance specifically restates and replaces all other ordinances or
parts of ordinances which established the Police Pension Plan with the
Borough of Columbia Police Pension Plan restated January 1, 2003, attached
hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A.233
§ A225-8. Establishment. [Amended 1-8-2019 by Ord. No. 909]
'This ordinance establishes the Borough of Columbia Police Pension Plan
restated January 1, 2008, for the uniformed employees of Columbia Borough
through the adoption of the Borough of Columbia Police Pension Plan
restated January l, 2008, attached hereto and incorporated herein as
Exhibit A, effective January 1, 2008, as amended from time to time.
§ A225-9. Savings provisions.
In the event that any provision, sentence, section, clause or parts of this
Ordinance or the attached Borough of Columbia Police Pension Plan
restated January 1, 2003, be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect or impair any remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part
of the Retirement Plan, it being the intent of the Borough of Columbia that
such remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A225-10. Police Pension Board created; composition.
There is hereby created a Columbia Police Pension Board, hereinafter
referred to as the "Board," which shall have charge of the regulation, care,
management, investment, disposal, administration and distribution of the
fund. The Board shall consist of five official members and two ex officio
members. The official members shall be as follows: the Mayor and Chief of
Police of the Borough, whose membership shall be concurrent with their
respective tenure of office; one full-time member of the Borough Police
Department, other than the Chief of Police, who shall be selected by a
majority vote of the full-time police officers of the Borough and who shall
serve for a term of two years; one member of the Borough Council, who
shall serve for a term of two years from his appointment and during his
tenure of office; and one citizen of the Borough to serve for a term of
two years, who shall be jointly selected by the Borough and the police
bargaining unit representative. In the event that the Borough Council and
the police bargaining unit representative cannot jointly agree on such
232. Editor's Note: This ordinance restated the pension plan, as restated effective 1-1-2003 by
Ord. No. 732, and reincorporated provisions of Ord. No. 618 relating to the Police Pension
Board and the pension plan.
233. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ A225-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A225-10
1:953
citizen member, both parties shall submit three names of citizens, from
which one name shall be drawn by lot. The ex officio members of the Board
shall be the Borough Solicitor and the solicitor for the police bargaining
unit.
§ A225-11. Powers and duties of Board.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
§ A225-12. Determination of benefits.
A. To administer the Borough of Columbia Police Pension Fund in
accordance with an agreement of trust entered into by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Columbia and a corporate fiduciary, which
agreement of trust shall permit the fiduciary to manage and operate the
fund and to receive, hold, invest and disburse any sum or sums as may
be necessary to carry out the plan and all other applicable statutes,
ordinances and regulations.
B. To provide guidance to the Trustee of the Borough of Columbia Police
Pension Fund for the investment of all moneys deposited in such fund.
C. To make rules and regulations for the governance of the affairs of the
Board to better enable it to carry out its powers and duties imposed
hereunder.
D. To employ, upon approval of the Borough Council, and compensate
actuaries, accountants and attorneys as it may deem necessary to carry
out its duties hereunder. The expenses of the administration of the fund
shall be paid from the assets of the fund.
E. To make all decisions pertinent to the award of any pension to any
applicant or participant or for the return of any individual contributions
to any person who may be entitled to the same under the pension fund.
F. To retain, upon approval of the Borough Council, any trustee for the
management of the pension fund and to designate the depository of the
pension fund.
A. The Board shall have full power and authority to make all decisions in
accordance with the terms of this article, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) To determine all questions relating to the eligibility of officers to
become participants in the plan.
(2) To compute and certify to the corporate fiduciary appointed by the
Borough Council the amount and kind of benefits payable to
participants.
(3) To make and publish such rules and regulations for the
administration of the pension fund as are not inconsistent with the
terms of this article.
§ A225-10 COLUMBIA CODE § A225-12
1:954
§ A225-13. Rights of members.
Any member of the Police Pension Fund shall have the right to:
§ A225-14. Election of officers; meetings; records.
The Board shall annually elect a Chairman and a Secretary from among
its official members. The Treasurer of the Borough of Columbia shall serve
as Treasurer of the fund. Three members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for all purposes. The Treasurer and the aforesaid solicitors shall
not, for any purpose, be deemed to be official members of the Board,
nor shall they be entitled to vote at any meetings of the Board, but they
shall be entitled to attend all such meetings and to participate in any
discussions therein. The Board shall meet at least semiannually, or more
often if necessary, and shall keep minutes and records of its proceedings,
decisions and findings and shall, annually or when requested by the Mayor
or the Council of the Borough, make a complete and detailed financial
statement to the Council. Both the official and ex officio members of the
Board shall receive written notification of the date, time and location of
each Board meeting from the Board Secretary at least seven days in
advance of such meeting date. All books and records of the Board shall
be open to inspection by any Board member, member of Borough Council,
other Borough official, any Borough citizen or the agent or representative
of any such person at all reasonable times. The accounts of the Board shall
be annually audited by the auditors of the Borough or in such other manner
as the Board and the Council may determine.
§ A225-15. Membership compulsory.
All full-time police officers of the Borough of Columbia shall be included in
the Police Pension Plan hereby established. Membership in said plan is and
shall be compulsory for all full-time members of said police force. All rights
and privileges vested in any full-time member of the police force by virtue of
B. The Borough Council shall supply full and timely information to the
Board on all matters relating to the pay of all members of the police
force, their retirement, death or other cause for termination of
employment and such other pertinent data as the Board may require to
carry out its duties and responsibilities hereunder. The Board shall be
responsible to transmit to the corporate fiduciary of the pension fund
such information as it requires to carry out its responsibilities under its
agreement with the Borough.
A. Inquire of the Board as to his or her status or condition in the pension
fund, including prospective benefits to which such member may be
entitled in the future.
B. Examine records of the Board pertaining to his or her pension records.
C. Appear personally before the Board with or without counsel and to be
heard on any matter pertaining to his or her rights under the plan.
§ A225-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A225-15
1:955
Ordinance No. 326234 of this Borough shall continue in force and effect and
shall be deemed hereby to be transferred to the Police Pension Plan hereby
created and to the fund hereby created.
§ A225-16. Maintenance of fund.
The fund hereby established shall be maintained by moneys or other assets
received from the following sources:
§ A225-17. Members' contributions.
All full-time police officers shall pay into the Columbia Police Pension Fund,
monthly, 5% of their gross monthly salary. Said payments shall be made by
each full-time member of the Police Department during such periods of time
as required by the Borough Council.
§ A225-18. Application of certain receipts.
A. By such amount, as determined by the Borough Council, of payments
received from the Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
from the moneys received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign
casualty and foreign fire insurance companies for purposes of pension
retirement benefits for members of municipal plans.
B. By contributions from each member of the police force.
C. By appropriations made by the Borough Council from the general fund
of the Borough.
D. By gift, grant, devise or bequest of money or property, real, personal or
mixed, to or in trust for the use of the fund.
A. The amount of the payments made by the State Treasurer from the
moneys received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty
and foreign fire insurance companies which are determined by the
Borough Council to be deposited in the fund shall be used and applied
as follows:
(1) To reduce any unfunded liability, defined as the present value of the
liability of the fund on account of retirement benefits payable under
this article to members of the police force for service prior to the
date upon which they first made contributions to the plan, offset by
the value of any assets transferred to the plan from a previous
pension fund, or after such liability has been funded.
(2) To apply against the annual obligation of the Borough for future
service cost, defined as the amount of money required to be
contributed annually into the plan on account of benefits payable
under this article to members of the police force for service
234. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 326, adopted 1-12-1959, as amended, was superseded by Ord. No.
605, adopted 6-8-1987, which formerly comprised this article.
§ A225-15 COLUMBIA CODE § A225-18
1:956
§ A225-19. Adjustment of member contributions.
If an actuarial study shows that the condition of the fund is such that
payments into the fund by members may be reduced below the percentages
prescribed in § A225-17 hereof or eliminated and that, if such payments
are reduced or eliminated, contributions from the general fund of the
Borough will not be required to keep the fund actuarially sound, the Board
may recommend to the Council that such contributions be reduced or
eliminated, whereupon the Borough Council may, by resolution, on an
annual basis, reduce or eliminate payments into the fund by members.
§ A225-20. Payments from fund.
Payments from the fund shall only be made by direction of the Board. All
checks on said fund shall be signed by the Treasurer of the Borough and
countersigned by the Chairman of the Board.
subsequent to the date of the establishment of the plan, or to the
extent that the payment made be in excess of such obligation.
(3) To reduce member contributions.
B. Any other moneys paid into the fund shall be applied equally against the
member and Borough obligations for future service cost.
§ A225-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A225-20
1:957
Chapter A226
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A226-1. Definition of terms.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following capitalized terms, phrases,
words and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521
through 573 (the "Cable Act") or Federal Communications Commission
("FCC") regulations, unless otherwise defined herein. References to FCC
rules and regulations in this agreement are made to current rules and
regulations, as hereafter modified, amended or adopted. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory.
AFFILIATE — When used in relation to Comcast, another person who or
which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by or is under common
ownership or control with Comcast. For the purposes hereof, the words
"owns," "owned" and "common ownership" shall mean a direct or indirect
stock, partnership, membership or other equity interest of 25% or more.
BASIC CABLE or BASIC SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast channels.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Columbia; Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, or
the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough.
CABLE ACT — The Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 through
561), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as now enacted or as hereafter further
amended.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
CABLE SERVICE —
Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system;
or
A.
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service.
B.
§ A225-20 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-1
1:958
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
COMCAST — Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, Inc.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date this agreement becomes binding upon all
parties hereto pursuant to the terms hereof.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or the successor
governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The authorization, or renewal hereof, issued by the
Franchising Authority as provided by this ordinance, whether such
authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution,
contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the
operation, construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The Borough.
GRANTEE — Comcast of Southeast Pennsylvania, Inc.
GROSS REVENUE and GROSS REVENUES — All revenue received by
Comcast from the operation of the cable system to deliver cable services
in the Borough by Comcast, including, but not limited to, subscription
fees, subscriber equipment sales or rentals, premium services, fees from
each cable programming tier, digital service fees, change-in-service fees,
additional set and outlet fees, converter fees, remote fees, late fees, NSF
check charges, installation and service fees and charges, disconnection
fees, pay-per-view fees, fees for any and all music services, video-ondemand,
commissions or revenues from home shopping channels, any and
all local advertising revenues (excluding agency commissions, including
national, regional and local advertising received by the area system), and
revenue received from leased access. These items shall be paid to the
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right or rightof-
way;
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to 47
U.S.C. §§ 201 through 276, except that such facility shall be considered
a cable system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)] to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
C.
D. An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573; or
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility system.
E.
§ A226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-1
1:959
Borough whether they are incurred directly by Comcast or by an affiliate of
Comcast that offers cable service over the cable system.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, joint-stock
company trust, corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC WAY and PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface of, and the
space below, any public street, highway, turnpike, bridge, land path, alley,
court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle
or other public right-of-way, including public utility easements, dedicated
utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses, and any
temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now
or hereafter held by the Borough in the service area which shall entitle
the Borough and Comcast to the use thereof for the purpose of installing,
operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. Public way and
public rights-of-way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held
by the Borough within the service area for the purpose of public travel
or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and
shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper
use and meaning entitle the Borough and Comcast to use thereof for the
purpose of installing, operating, maintaining or repairing such cable system
over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, pedestals, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may
be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Columbia Borough School District in Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the Borough, and
shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SERVICE TIER — A category of cable service or other similar services
provided by Comcast and for which a separate rate is charged by Comcast.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — All public rights-of-way and public grounds or
waters within or belonging to the Borough, including but not limited to
streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges,
tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers and
alleys.
SUBSCRIBER — A member of the general public who lawfully receives
video programming distributed by a cable television system and does not
further distribute it.
SYSTEM — The cable system which has been and is to be constructed,
operated, repaired and maintained by Comcast in the Borough.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
§ A226-1 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-2
1:960
§ A226-2. Grant of franchise.
Subject to all of the terms, covenants and provisions of this ordinance
and in consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the
conditions and reservations herein specified, the Borough hereby grants to
Comcast a nonexclusive franchise right, privilege, authority and easement
to erect, construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above,
over and under streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid
out or dedicated and all such extensions thereof and additions thereto
in the Borough, and public utility rights-of-way and easements to which
the Borough is empowered to grant such rights thereto; all poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors
and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system,
for the interception, sale, transmission and distribution of television
programs and other audio visual electrical signals and the right to transmit
the same to the persons of the Borough, on the terms and conditions
hereinafter set forth. The Borough expressly reserves the right to grant
similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways, rights-of-way, easements and
public places to any person at any time during the term of this agreement.
§ A226-3. Terms of grant.
A. Term of franchise.
(1) Upon continuing full, complete and faithful performance by
Comcast of the terms of this agreement, and unless sooner
terminated in accordance with other provisions of this agreement,
the permission herein granted shall commence on the effective
date as hereinafter set forth and shall expire on September 26,
2019.
(2) Comcast has the option of extending this franchise agreement for
additional periods of five years, unless either Comcast or the
Borough provides the other party not less than one year's written
notice of the intent not to extend this agreement. Upon extension of
this agreement, Comcast shall provide the Borough with a letter
setting forth the new expiration date.
B. Effective date. The Borough shall promptly notify Comcast in writing of
the date that the ordinance is finally passed and adopted, as well as the
date by which a written acceptance is required to be filed. Comcast
shall file a written acceptance of this ordinance with the Borough
Manager of the Borough within 20 days after the passage and final
adoption of this ordinance by Borough Council. Subject to the filing of
the written acceptance by Comcast, the effective date of this ordinance
shall be the date of acceptance and approval by Comcast.
C. Franchise area. The franchise granted herein is for the present
territorial limits of the Borough and for any areas henceforth added
thereto during the term of this franchise.
§ A226-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-4
1:961
§ A226-4. Conditions of occupancy of public ways.
A. Use of streets, pole attachments.
(1) In accordance with existing Borough Code and regulations,
Comcast shall first obtain the approval of the appropriate Borough
officials prior to commencing any construction in the streets,
alleys, public grounds or places of the Borough.
(2) Comcast's rights and privileges shall be subject to any prior lawful
use or occupancy of the streets or other public property and shall
not be so used as to interfere with existing improvements or with
new improvements the Borough may deem proper to make or as to
hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges or
other public property. In the event any equipment or facilities of
Comcast shall interfere with such improvement, existing or
intended to be made by the Borough, Comcast shall, upon notice
from the Borough, forthwith relocate said equipment and facilities
at Comcast's expense so as to eliminate said interference.
(3) Except in cases of emergency, Comcast shall not open or disturb
the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or public place for any
purpose without first having obtained a permit to do so from the
Borough and, where applicable, any other state or local
government or agency.
(4) Nothing in this agreement or any franchise granted hereunder
shall authorize Comcast to erect and maintain in the Borough new
poles where existing poles are servicing the area. In accordance
with existing Borough regulations, Comcast shall obtain permission
from the appropriate Borough officials before erecting any new
poles or underground conduit where none exists at the time
Comcast seeks to install its network.
(5) In case of disturbance of any streets, sidewalk, alley, public way or
paved area, Comcast shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the Borough Engineer, replace and restore
such street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area to the same or
similar condition as existed prior to the disturbance and in
accordance with any state or local law, rule or regulation governing
street openings and repairs.
(6) If at any time during the period of this ordinance the Borough shall
lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or alignment or routing
of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, Comcast, upon
reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove, relay and relocate
its poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and other
fixtures at its own expense.
(7) Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by Comcast
shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on such public way.
§ A226-4 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-4
1:962
(8) Comcast shall, at the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the Borough, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of the building, provided Comcast is
given not less than 10 days' advance written notice and the person
so making the request reimburses Comcast for its reasonable costs
in so raising or lowering its wires.
(9) Comcast shall at all times keep on file true and accurate as-built
maps or plats of all existing facilities located in Borough streets and
a list of educational, community and municipal buildings to which
special services are being provided, which shall be made available
to the Borough upon 15 days' written request, or sooner under
exigent circumstances. Copies will be made available via hard copy
within 60 days of completion of any system upgrade.
(10) Construction and maintenance of the cable system shall be in
compliance with all ordinances, rules, regulations or orders now in
effect or hereinafter issued by the Borough and by any federal or
state commission or any other public authority and, as to pole
attachments, utility joint attachment practices.
(11) All installations of equipment shall be durable, of a permanent
nature and installed in accordance with current best cable system
engineering practices and appropriate codes. Comcast shall
comply with all laws, rules, regulations and manufacturers'
standards and installation specifications heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established, including, but not limited to, those
concerning street work, street excavation and the use, removal and
relocation of property within a street.
(12) All cables and wires shall be installed parallel with existing
telephone and electric wires whenever possible. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled in
accordance with engineering and safety considerations as
mandated by all ordinances, rules, regulations or orders now in
effect or hereafter issued by the Borough and by any federal or
state commission or any other public authority and, as to pole
attachments, utility joint attachment practices. All installations
shall be underground in those areas of the Borough where public
utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time
of installation, Comcast may install its service above ground.
(13) The Borough specifically reserves the right to vacate any right-ofway
notwithstanding the existence of cable system construction,
equipment or service lines within any such right-of-way. In the
event any such right-of-way is so vacated, Comcast, at its own cost
and expense, shall obtain and provide other means of providing
cable service to subscribers.
§ A226-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-4
1:963
§ A226-5. Service standards.
B. Installation of cable service. All installation of cable service shall be
performed in a workmanlike manner, using materials of good and
durable quality with due regard to the preservation and protection of
existing structures.
C. Trimming of trees and shrubbery.
(1) Comcast shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural
growth overhanging any of its cable system in the franchise area so
as to prevent contact with Comcast's wires, cables or other
equipment. All such trimming shall be done at Comcast's sole cost
and expense. Comcast shall be responsible for any damage caused
by such trimming.
(2) Comcast shall comply with Chapter 202 of the Borough's Code,
specifically §§ 202-12, 202-15, 202-16, 202-18, 202-20, 202-21 and
202-23.
A. Emergency communications. Comcast shall comply with emergency or
disaster notification requirements of the FCC, state and local
emergency and disaster agencies, provided that local requirements are
consistent with state and federal emergency rules, regulations or
obligations. All performance and technical standards governing
construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing,
maintenance and dismantling of the cable system provided herein shall
be in accordance with all FCC and other federal, state or local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
B. Repair notification. Whenever it is necessary to interrupt service for the
purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installation, Comcast shall
do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to
subscribers. To that end, Comcast shall use its best efforts to make any
repairs, adjustments or installations which do not involve entering
private property from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. The requirements for
maintenance of equipment contained in this provision shall not apply to
the subscriber's television receiver.
C. Refunds and credits. In the event of substandard delivery of video or
audio programming or other lawful communication service for any
reason, other than force majeure or due to a problem solely caused by a
subscriber, or with the prior consent of Borough, and such loss shall
continue for a period in duration as set by the nationwide corporate
policy of Comcast, or six hours, whichever is less, during any one
calendar day, then, upon request of a subscriber, Comcast shall reduce
the invoice of that subscriber for the month in which such substandard
delivery or loss shall have occurred by the fraction 1/30 multiplied by
the number of calendar days during which such substandard delivery or
loss greater in duration than as specified herein shall occur.
§ A226-4 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-5
1:964
§ A226-6. Compliance and monitoring.
D. Interference. Subject to federal technical standards, Comcast shall at
all times operate its cable system so as not to affect or interfere
adversely with existing radio and television reception and shall prevent
the emission of radiation from the cable system.
E. Nondiscrimination of service. Comcast shall serve any person desiring
cable service, provided that the subscriber fulfills her financial
obligations to Comcast. It is understood that this Subsection E is limited
by the terms and conditions of § A226-11A(2). Comcast shall not, as to
rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect,
make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject
any person to prejudice or disadvantage, providing that nothing in this
ordinance and franchise agreement shall be deemed or prohibit the
establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate
schedules to which any customer coming within such classification
might be entitled; provided, however, that any such classification shall
be reasonable in nature and based upon substantial evidence of the
need for the classifications.
F. Removal of cable system and equipment. Subject to federal and state
law, Comcast shall remove or cause to be removed from the streets,
alleys and public ways of the Borough and from all public property all of
the cable system, wires, poles, installations and other of Comcast's
equipment of any kind or nature whatsoever which had been installed
under the authority of this ordinance and franchise agreement, upon
the lawful revocation of this ordinance and franchise agreement,
cessation of operations under this ordinance and franchise agreement
by Comcast or its successors and assigns or the forfeiture or lawful
revocation of this permission under any of the provisions of this
ordinance and franchise agreement.
A. Compliance with technical standards. Comcast shall comply with the
technical standards and requirements contained in Subpart K of Part 76
of the FCC's rules and regulations. Upon written request, Comcast shall
furnish the Borough with copies of any reports produced in connection
with system performance tests. Comcast shall provide the reports to the
Borough within 60 days of receiving the request.
B. Books and records. In addition to the rights of inspection and copying
otherwise set forth in this agreement or allowed by law, Comcast agrees
that the Borough may review such of its books and records, during
normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis at Comcast's
principal place of business, as is reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of this agreement. All information
specifically marked by Comcast as proprietary or confidential in nature
and furnished to the Borough or its designated representatives shall be
treated as confidential in conformity with and subject to such disclosure
as may be required by Pennsylvania law. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary, Comcast shall not be required to provide subscriber
§ A226-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-6
1:965
§ A226-7. Channel packaging.
Comcast shall make available video programming to subscribers in broad
categories.
§ A226-8. Franchise fees and other payments.
information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act. The Borough
and its officially designated representatives agree to treat any such
information or records which Comcast reasonably believes would
provide an unfair advantage to Comcast's competitors (e.g., system
design maps, engineering plans and programming contracts) as
confidential and only to disclose the information or records to Borough
employees, agents or representatives who have a need to know or
in order to enforce the provisions of this agreement. In the event a
request is made by an individual or entity not an employee, agent
or representative of the Borough or by an employee, agent or
representative of the Borough not acting in his or her official capacity
for information related to the franchise and marked by Comcast as
confidential and/or proprietary, the Borough shall permit Comcast to
protect its interest to the extent permitted by law before providing
documents or access to documents to the requestor.
A. Franchise fee.
(1) Comcast shall pay to the Borough a franchise fee equal to 5% of
gross revenues received by Comcast from the operation of the
cable system on an annual basis. For purpose of this section, the
twelve-month period applicable under the franchise for the
computation of the franchise fee shall be a calendar year, unless
otherwise agreed to in writing by the Borough and Comcast. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a verified report from Comcast
showing the basis for the computation, including a detailed verified
statement of the revenues collected during the year and a
breakdown by category of revenue. Upon written request of the
Borough, Comcast shall provide such additional information or
certification as may be reasonably requested.
(2) The Borough may increase or decrease the franchise fee upon 60
days' written notice to Comcast, provided that the franchise fee
may not exceed the maximum percentage set forth in the Cable Act.
In the event that the Act is modified to authorize a franchise fee
higher than 5%, the Borough may, in its discretion, request in
writing that Comcast calculate and remit the franchise fee based on
the revised franchise fee.
B. Interest. In the event that any franchise fee or other payment is not
made or the requisite documentation and certification is not provided
on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be
compounded annually and set at the one-year United States Treasury
Bill rate existent on the date payment was due. Any amount recomputed
§ A226-6 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-8
1:966
to reflect the correct payment due shall bear interest as described from
the date such payment was originally due.
C. Audit.
(1) On an annual basis, upon 30 days' prior written notice given on or
prior to September 30 of the year following that for which franchise
fees have been paid, the Borough shall have the right to conduct an
independent audit of Comcast's records reasonably related to the
sources, amounts and computation of gross revenue in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. Upon written
request, Comcast shall make available to the Borough (or its
designee) pertinent materials (relating directly to the audit) within
30 days of receipt of the request. The Borough shall have the right
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this
section; provided, however, that such recomputation shall take
place within 36 months following the close of the year being
reviewed. So long as Comcast does not dispute the additional
amount owed as determined by the Borough, any additional
amount due to the Borough as a result of the recomputation shall
be paid within 30 days following written notice to Comcast by the
Borough, which notice shall include an explanation of the
recomputation. In the event that said recomputation determines
that funds are owed to the Borough in an amount greater than or
equal to 10% of the amount paid to the Borough, the cost of the
audit and recomputation, at the election of the Borough, shall be
borne by Comcast.
(2) In the event that Comcast and the Borough do not agree that the
amount represents an underpayment, upon the completion of any
such audit by the Borough, the Borough shall provide Comcast with
a final report, which sets forth the Borough's findings in detail,
including any and all substantiating documentation. Comcast shall
have 30 days from the receipt of the report to provide the Borough
with a written response, including any substantiating
documentation. Any finally settled amount(s) due to the Borough as
a result of such inspection shall be paid within 30 days from receipt
of written notice of the acceptance of such finally settled amount
from the Borough. For purposes of this Subsection C, the term
finally settled amount(s) shall mean the agreed upon
underpayment, if any, to the Borough by Comcast as a result of any
such audit.
(3) If the parties cannot agree on a final settlement amount, the parties
shall submit the dispute to a mutually agreed upon mediator within
60 days of reaching an impasse. In the event an agreement is not
reached at mediation, either party may bring an action to have the
disputed amount determined by a court of law.
D. Rates and charges. Pursuant to the Cable Act and FCC regulations, the
Borough may regulate the rates for the provision of basic cable service.
§ A226-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-9
1:967
§ A226-9. Franchise violations, damages and revocation.
A. Violations.
(1) If the Borough has reason to believe that Comcast violated any
provision of this agreement, it shall notify Comcast, in writing, by
certified first class United States mail, postage prepaid, of the
nature of such violation and the section of this agreement which it
believes has been violated. In its written notice, the Borough shall
set forth the specific violation or breach and, if feasible, shall
provide Comcast with documentation supporting the claim of
violation or breach.
(2) Comcast shall have 90 days to cure such violation after written
notice is received by taking appropriate steps to comply with the
terms of this agreement. If the nature of the violation is such that it
cannot be fully cured within 90 days due to circumstances outside
of Comcast's control, the period of time in which Comcast must
cure the violation shall be extended by the Borough, in writing, for
such additional time as necessary to complete the cure, provided
that Comcast shall have promptly commenced to cure and is
diligently pursuing its efforts to cure in the reasonable judgment of
the Borough.
(3) If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed under
Subsection A(2), then Comcast shall be liable for liquidated
damages in accordance with Subsection B.
B. Liquidated damages.
(1) Because Comcast's failure to comply with provisions of this
agreement will result in injury to the Borough and because it will
be difficult to measure the extent of such injury, the Borough may
assess liquidated damages against Comcast after notice and an
opportunity to cure in accordance with Subsection A in the
following amounts, provided Comcast has had an opportunity to
cure in accordance with Subsection A(2). Such damages shall not
be a substitute for specific performance by Comcast, but shall be in
addition to such performance.
(2) The first day for which liquidated damages may be assessed, if
there has been no cure after the end of the applicable cure period,
shall be the day after the end of the applicable cure period,
including any extension of the cure period granted by the Borough.
(3) In no event may liquidated damages be assessed for a time period
exceeding 120 days. If after that amount of time Comcast has not
cured or commenced to cure the alleged breach to the satisfaction
of the Borough, the Borough may pursue other remedies, including
those provided for in this agreement.
§ A226-9 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-9
1:968
(a) For failure to comply with technical standards (including,
without limitation, § A226-6A herein): $150 per day for each
day the violation continues;
(b) For failure to provide and maintain cable service: $100 per day
for each day the violation continues;
(c) For failure to make repairs and restorations: $100 per day for
each day the violation continues;
(d) For failure to disconnect, relocate or remove equipment: $100
per day for each day the violation continues;
(e) For failure to comply with any customer service standards set
forth herein: $100 per violation;
(f) For failure to cooperate with the right of inspection: $150 per
day for each day the violation continues;
(g) For failure to submit reports in a timely fashion: $50 per day
for each day the violation continues;
(h) For failure to provide a performance bond: $100 per day for
each day the violation continues;
(i) For failure to comply with transfer or renewal provisions: $150
per day for each day the violation continues;
(j) For failure to comply with removal of system provision: $150
per for each day the violation continues.
C. Performance bond.
(1) Comcast shall obtain, at its sole cost and expense, within 30 days of
the execution of this franchise, and shall maintain during the
franchise term, a performance bond running in favor of the
Borough to secure faithful performance by Comcast of any and all
obligations under this agreement. Such financial security shall be
issued by a bonding company in the form of a surety bond, provided
that said bonding company is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth. This performance bond, however, shall
not limit the liability of Comcast for any failure to perform its
obligations under this agreement.
(2) The performance bond shall be in the amount of $35,000. Comcast
shall not reduce, cancel or change said bond from the requirements
set forth herein without the express written consent of the
Borough.
(3) In the event Comcast seeks to perform a major system upgrade, it
shall increase the amount of said performance bond to $100,000
for the duration of the major system upgrade activities. For the
purposes of this section, the term "major system upgrade" means
§ A226-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-9
1:969
construction activities, including replacement of equipment or
facilities, undertaken by Comcast to increase the bandwidth of the
cable system.
D. Revocation.
(1) In addition to the other rights, remedies and powers reserved or
retained by the Borough under this agreement or otherwise, the
Borough reserves the right to forfeit and terminate the franchise
and all rights and privileges of Comcast or any successor thereto in
the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of this
agreement. In interpreting this agreement, material provisions
shall include all provisions labeled as such and all others, which,
under all the facts and circumstances indicated, are a significant
provision of this agreement. A material breach by Comcast shall
include, but is not limited to, the following acts and omissions:
(a) Comcast is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of
any fraud or deceit upon the Borough in its operation of the
cable system or any other activities pursuant to this
agreement;
(b) Comcast seeks, or an involuntary case is brought against
Comcast seeking, liquidation, reorganization or other relief
under any bankruptcy, insolvency or other similar law or
seeking the appointment of a trustee, receiver, custodian or
other similar official of a substantial part of Comcast's property
and such proceeding shall remain undismissed or unstayed for
a period of 60 days;
(c) Comcast transfers or assigns this franchise, the cable system
or any significant portion thereof, or more than 35% of the
equitable ownership of the cable system, or a change or
transfer of control of the cable system occurs, without the
consent of the Borough.
(d) Comcast repeatedly fails, after notice and opportunity to cure,
to maintain signal quality pursuant to the standards set forth
by the FCC.
(e) Comcast fails to operate over 25% of the cable system (as
determined by linear miles or portions thereof) for a period in
excess of 15 consecutive days except when approval of such
interruption is obtained from the Borough.
(2) The foregoing shall not constitute a violation of a material term or
condition if the violation occurs without the fault of Comcast or
occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Comcast
shall not be in violation of this agreement and no revocation shall
be effected if Comcast is prevented from performing its duties and
obligations or observing the terms and conditions of this franchise
by any acts of God, labor disputes, manufacturers' or contractors'
§ A226-9 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-9
1:970
§ A226-10. Indemnity and insurance.
inability to timely provide personnel or material or other causes
of like or different nature beyond the control of Comcast.
Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the intention
of the Borough to subject Comcast to revocation by the Borough
where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or
minimal negative impact on subscribers within the service area
or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties
and hardship to Comcast which would outweigh the benefit to be
derived by the Borough or subscribers.
(3) This franchise shall be revoked in accordance with applicable
federal laws and the terms of this ordinance and agreement only by
a written decision of the Borough Council of the Borough after an
appropriate public hearing affording Comcast due process and full
opportunity to be heard, to introduce evidence, to question
witnesses and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate in
accordance with federal law. All notice requirements shall be met
by providing Comcast at least 60 days' prior written notice, having
been served upon Comcast by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of any public hearing concerning the proposed
revocation of this franchise. Such notice shall state with specificity
the grounds for revocation. The Borough Council, after a public
hearing and upon finding the existence of grounds for revocation,
may either declare this franchise terminated or excuse such
grounds upon a showing by Comcast of mitigating circumstances
or good cause for the existence of such grounds.
A. Indemnification. Comcast shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
Borough, its officers, employees and agents from and against any
liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury
(including accidental death) which arise out of the construction,
operation, maintenance or removal of the cable system, including, but
not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees, provided that the Borough
shall give Comcast written notice of its obligation to indemnify the
Borough within 10 business days of receipt of a claim or action
pursuant to this section. If the Borough determines that it is necessary
for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel
shall be the responsibility of the Borough.
B. Insurance.
(1) Comcast shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of this franchise insurance with an insurance
company licensed to do business and doing business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All companies will be required to
be rated A-VII or better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and
Poor's. Comcast shall provide the Borough with proof of such
insurance so required at the effective date.
§ A226-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-10
1:971
(2) Comcast shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the
duration of this franchise insurance coverage in the following types
and minimum amounts:
Type Amount
Workers' compensation and
statutory employers liability
$100,000/$500,000/$100,000
Commercial general (public)
liability, to include coverage
for the following where the
exposure exists:
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage:
$5,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Premises operations
Independent contractors
Products/completed
operations
Personal injury
Contractual liability
Explosion, collapse, and
underground property
damage
Comprehensive automobile
insurance to include coverage
for loading and unloading
hazards for:
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage:
$1,000,000 per occurrence or its
equivalent
Owned/leased automobiles
Nonowned automobiles
Hired automobiles
(3) Upon written request, the Borough shall receive, without expense,
copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverages and the
amounts stated above.
(4) Comcast agrees that with respect to the above-required insurance,
all insurance certificates will contain the following required
provisions:
(a) Name the Borough and its officers, employees, Council
members and elected representatives as additional insured
parties (as the interests of each insured may appear) as to all
applicable coverages (except workers' compensation);
(b) Provide an endorsement stating the following: "Should any
policies of insurance be canceled, non-renewed, reduced in
coverage or changed in a material way before the expiration
date of said policies of insurance, the issuer shall deliver 30
days' advance written notice to the Borough."
§ A226-10 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-11
1:972
§ A226-11. Provision of service.
A. Service to be provided.
(1) Cable service shall be made available to substantially all individual
dwellings, residences, institutions, organizations and all other
entities within the limits of the Borough, in accordance with the
provisions of this agreement and all laws governing the rights of
privacy and passage.
(2) Comcast shall offer cable service to all residential dwellings,
institutions, organizations and all other entities where there is a
density of 25 homes per aerial mile and are within 125 feet of the
feeder line. Such standard installations shall be implemented
within seven business days after an order has been placed.
(3) Each subscriber shall be offered cable service on a uniform,
nondiscriminatory basis.
(4) All cable equipment shall be removed from a subscriber's property
when so requested by a subscriber in accordance with law.
(5) Cable, whether underground or aerial, shall conform to the various
other ordinances in effect within the Borough pertaining to
construction so long as such ordinances do not conflict with the
terms of this agreement.
(6) The system shall be designed for reliable operation 24 hours per
day and shall ensure that service impairment or interruption occurs
only for good cause. Interruptions of service shall be for the
shortest times possible.
(7) Comcast shall maintain a local business or customer service center
within 50 miles of the Borough, and such offices shall be open for
business during normal business hours (as defined in § A226-12A
below). Additionally, Comcast shall have a publicly listed telephone
number by which persons can communicate with Comcast.
(8) Comcast shall build its cable system so that it is capable of
providing service to subscribers located along a public way.
Installation of a cable drop line will be provided by Comcast at its
then prevailing charge, except as provided below under the
following circumstances:
(a) Where the drop to the subscriber location is more than 125
feet in length or, if buried, when adverse terrain or other
unusual conditions are encountered, in addition to the
prevailing installation charge, Comcast may charge the
subscriber the difference between Comcast's cost of installing
a one-hundred-twenty-five-foot drop and the cost of installing a
longer drop.
§ A226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-11
1:973
(b) Those portions of the service area that do not have the
necessary density of 25 potential subscribers per cable mile
shall be served by Comcast if the potential subscribers agree to
a grant-in-aid of construction. As provided in Subsection
A(8)(a) above, Comcast may charge the subscriber the
difference between Comcast's cost of installing a one-hundredtwenty-
five-foot drop and the cost of installing a longer drop.
(9) Comcast shall comply with the Pennsylvania Tenants' Right to
Cable Television statute, Title 68, Article V-B, Sections 250.501-B to
250.510-B.
B. Service to community facilities.
(1) Comcast shall provide without charge one outlet of basic and
standard (nonpremium) cable service (i.e., basic service exclusive
of premium channels), including the requisite converter box or
other requisite equipment for signal reception, to all municipal
buildings listed in Attachment A235 hereto, all public libraries and
all public and private schools receiving funding pursuant to Title I
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C.
§ 6301 et seq., as amended, not including home schools, that are
located in service area.
(2) Comcast shall also provide without charge one outlet for cable
modem Internet access service to the Borough's administration
building, all public libraries and all public and private schools
receiving funding pursuant to Title I of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, 20 U.S.C. § 6301 et seq., as
amended, not including home schools, that are located in the
service area.
(3) With respect to the complimentary services described in
Subsections B(1) and (2) above, Comcast shall not be required to
provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the
feeder cable to such premises exceeds 150 feet of cable, unless the
Borough agrees to pay the difference between Comcast's cost of
installing a one-hundred-fifty-foot drop and the cost of installing a
longer drop. In the event more than one outlet is provided to such
buildings, the Borough shall pay the standard installation and
service fees associated therewith.
(4) At any time after the effective date of this agreement, the Borough
may provide a business plan for educational or governmental ("E/
G") access services that includes at a minimum: provision for
management, personnel, production schedules, production
location, equipment lists, maintenance, documentation of
community interest and a three-month estimated usage plan
including but not limited to five consecutive hours a day, five days a
235. Editor's Note: Attachment A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A226-11 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-11
1:974
§ A226-12. Customer service.
week of nonrepeated, noncharacter-generated programming. Upon
mutual agreement to and acceptance of the plan, Comcast will
make available channel capacity of access use or programming.
The Borough will provide at least 12 months' prior notice to
Comcast of its intent to submit a business plan for E/G access
so that Comcast may make appropriate arrangements regarding
municipal use of channel space.
(5) The E/G channel shall be used for noncommercial community
programming related to educational and/or governmental
activities. The Borough shall have complete control over the
content, scheduling, administration and all other aspects of E/G
channel. Comcast shall have no control over or responsibility for
the content of E/G access cablecast programming.
(6) Comcast shall not move or otherwise relocate the channel positions
of the E/G channel once established, without 30 days' written
notice to the Borough, the School District and subscribers.
(7) The E/G channel shall be maintained, managed and coordinated by
the Borough's designee, including but not limited to the School
District.
A. Office hours. Comcast's local business office shall be open during
normal business hours. The term "normal business hours" shall mean
those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are
open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business hours must
include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
B. Telephone access. In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(1)(i),
Comcast shall provide and maintain a toll-free telephone access line
which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. Trained representatives shall be available to respond to customer
telephone inquiries during normal business hours. After normal
business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an
automated response system. Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the
next business day.
C. Answering time. In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(1)(ii), under
normal operating conditions, telephone answering time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds after
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than
90% of the time under normal operating conditions. The term "normal
operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within
the control of Comcast. Those conditions which are not within the
control of Comcast include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
§ A226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-12
1:975
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of Comcast include, but are not limited to,
special promotions, pay-per view events, rate increases, regular peak
or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.
D. Busy signals. In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(1)(iv), under
normal operating conditions, the customer shall receive a busy signal
less than 3% of the time.
E. Equipment. In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(1)(iii), Comcast
shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to
measure compliance with the telephone answering requirements above
unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to
comply.
F. Installation and service calls.
(1) Comcast shall maintain a competent staff of employees sufficient to
provide adequate and prompt service to its subscribers.
(2) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(2)(i), standard
installations will be performed within seven business days after an
order has been placed. "Standard installations" are those that are
located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
(3) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(2)(ii), excluding
conditions beyond its control, Comcast shall begin working on
service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours
after the interruption becomes known. The term "service
interruption" shall mean the loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels. All other service calls not affecting public health,
safety or welfare shall be commenced within a maximum of 48
hours after notice to Comcast or scheduled at the convenience of
the customer.
(4) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(2)(iii), upon scheduling of
appointments with the customer for installations, service calls and
other activities, Comcast shall provide the customer with either a
specific time or an appointment window of a maximum of four
hours during normal business hours. Comcast may schedule
service calls and installation activities outside of normal business
hours for the express convenience of the customer.
(5) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.309(c)(2)(iv) and (v), Comcast
may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of
business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If
a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be
§ A226-12 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-12
1:976
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the
customer.
G. Notices.
(1) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.1602(b), Comcast shall provide
written information on each of the following areas at the time of
installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at
any time upon request:
(a) Products and services offered;
(b) Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
(c) Installation and service maintenance policies;
(d) Instructions on how to use the cable service;
(e) Channel positions of programming carried on the cable
system;
(f) Billing and complaint procedures, including the Borough's
address and telephone number.
(2) In accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.1603(b), Comcast shall notify all
subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or
channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such
changes if the change is within the control of Comcast.
(3) Comcast shall also provide written notice to a subscriber of any
increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or
associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed
increase is effective. The notice shall include the Borough's name
and address.
(4) Comcast shall maintain such files as required by the FCC to make
available to the public containing all written notices provided to
subscribers pursuant to the requirements contained herein.
(5) Comcast shall provide sample bills showing the cost to the
subscriber of each service tier package, including the franchise fee,
to the Borough upon written request.
H. Billing.
(1) Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable and will be
itemized in accordance with FCC or other federal and state
requirements.
(2) Comcast shall include on the face of each bill the name of the
municipality to which each subscriber is assigned by Comcast.
§ A226-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-12
1:977
(3) Comcast shall provide bill payment facilities at its local business
office to accept such payments at least during normal business
hours.
(4) With respect to advance billing, late fees and the collection of past
due debts owed to it by subscribers, Comcast may exercise its
rights under applicable law.
I. Customer complaint procedures. Comcast shall establish clear written
procedures for resolving all customer complaints, which shall include at
least the following:
(1) Comcast shall provide the customer with a response to a written
complaint addressed to the local Comcast office within 15 days of
its receipt. Such response shall include the results of its initial
inquiry into the subject matter of the complaint and either its
decision based on those results or its need to perform further
investigation into the complaint.
(2) If the Borough is contacted directly about a customer complaint, it
shall promptly refer the customer to Comcast.
(3) Any subscriber who, in good faith, disputes all or part of any bill
sent by Comcast has the option of withholding the disputed amount
without finance charges until Comcast has investigated the dispute
in good faith and has made a determination that the amount is
owed provided that:
(a) The subscriber provides a written complaint to Comcast in a
timely fashion and includes identifying information;
(b) The subscriber pays all undisputed charges; and
(c) The subscriber cooperates in determining the appropriateness
of the charges in dispute.
(4) Comcast shall maintain a record of customer trouble calls received
by Comcast that have generated a service response action in the
Borough. Upon written request, Comcast shall make available to
the Borough a copy of such records. Comcast agrees to maintain
such records for at least 36 months from the date of receipt.
J. Disconnection. Comcast may disconnect or terminate a subscriber's
service for cause:
(1) If at least 30 days have elapsed from the due date of the bill in
which subscriber has failed to pay; and
(2) If Comcast has provided at least 10 days' written notice to the
affected subscriber prior to disconnection, specifying the effective
date after which cable services are subject to disconnection; and
§ A226-12 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-12
1:978
§ A226-13. Transfer, assignment and foreclosure.
(3) If there is no pending written dispute regarding the bill to which
Comcast has not issued a final decision in writing; or
(4) If at any time and without notice Comcast determines in good faith
that subscriber has tampered with or abused Comcast's equipment
or services or is engaged in theft of cable service.
K. Damaged or lost equipment. In the event that a subscriber is unable to
provide documentation to substantiate that a converter or other
equipment was stolen or destroyed by fire, Comcast shall be entitled to
assess a replacement cost for the equipment. In the event that a
subscriber supplies Comcast with a police or fire report which
evidences that the loss of the equipment resulted from theft or fire,
Comcast may waive any charges.
L. Privacy.
(1) Comcast shall respect the rights of privacy of every subscriber and
shall not violate such rights through the use of any device or signal
associated with the cable system. Comcast shall at all times comply
with the privacy provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act and all
other applicable federal privacy laws and regulations.
(2) All references in this Subsection L are subject to the provisions of
P.L. 107-56 (October 26, 2001), Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct
Terrorism Act of 2001, known as the "USA Patriot Act."
(3) C. Upon a request by a subscriber, Comcast shall make available for
inspection at a reasonable time and at its principal place of
business all personal subscriber information that Comcast
maintains regarding said subscriber. Comcast shall ensure that all
information related to billing and service requests is accurate and
up-to-date and shall promptly correct any errors upon discovery.
A. Nontransferability. The franchise herein granted is personal to
Comcast. It cannot be transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of as a
whole, or in part, either by sale of stock, forced sale, merger,
consolidation, change in control of Comcast or otherwise without the
prior written consent of the Borough expressed by ordinance and then
only under such conditions as may be therein prescribed.
B. Consent. Comcast shall make written application to the Borough for the
Borough's consent described in Subsection A above. As part of such
application, Comcast shall provide the Borough with all information
required by FCC Form 394. No such consent shall be required for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, hypothecation or by assignment to a
financial institution of any rights, title or interest of Comcast in the
cable system or in the franchise in order to secure indebtedness or a
transfer to an entity owned and/or controlled by Comcast Corporation.
§ A226-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-13
1:979
§ A226-14. Notice.
Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response to be served upon the Borough or Comcast shall be in writing and
shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five business
days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed
envelope by certified first class or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a
post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the United States
Postal Service. The notices or responses to the Borough shall be addressed
as follows: Columbia Borough, Attention: Borough Manager, 308 Locust
Street, Columbia, PA 17512, and to Comcast, Attention: General Manager,
1131 South Duke Street, Lancaster, PA 17602; with a copy to Comcast,
Attention: Government Relations Department, 1500 Market Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19102.
§ A226-15. Miscellaneous provisions.
C. Foreclosure. Any foreclosure or judicial sale of all, or any part, of the
cable system shall be considered a default under this agreement.
Initiation of any such proceedings shall be treated as a notification of a
change of control of Comcast.
D. Effect of consent. The consent of the Borough to any transferor
assignment or change of control described above shall be provided only
after a timely public hearing before the Borough Council of the
Borough. Comcast shall be given notice of any such public hearing, and
Comcast shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at any such
hearing.
E. Effective date of transfer. Any consent by the Borough for any transfer
or assignment or change of control described above shall not be
effective until the proposed transferee or assignee shall have executed
a legally binding document stating that it shall be bound by all the
terms and conditions contained in this agreement.
F. Termination. The Borough shall have the right to terminate this
franchise 120 days after the election or appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of Comcast, whether in
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other similar action or
proceedings, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of the 120 days or unless:
(1) Within 120 days after the election or appointment such receiver or
trustee shall have fully complied with all provisions of this
agreement and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
(2) Within said 120 days such receiver or trustee shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to
be bound by each and every provision of this agreement.
§ A226-13 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-15
1:980
A. Headings. The headings to sections contained herein are intended
solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such headings shall not affect
the meaning or interpretation of the text therein.
B. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. Comcast shall, at all
times during the term of this agreement, be subject to the exercise of
the police power by the Borough and to such other lawful ordinances,
rules and regulations as the Borough shall hereafter adopt. Comcast
shall comply with all ordinances, codes, statutes, rules and regulations
of the Borough of Columbia to the extent they are not contrary to the
terms of this agreement, the County of Lancaster, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the United States of America which are now in effect
or hereafter enacted.
C. Actions of the parties. In any action by Comcast and the Borough or any
representative thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof,
such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner.
D. Americans with Disabilities Act. Comcast recognizes and will abide by
the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
E. Waiver.
(1) No course of dealing between the Borough and Comcast nor the
failure of the Borough to enforce or to timely enforce any provision
of this agreement or any federal, state or local law, code,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall be deemed to be a waiver of or
acquiescence in the actions of Comcast in contravention of that or
any other provision, law, code, ordinance, rule or regulation.
(2) No course of dealing between the Borough and Comcast nor the
failure of Comcast to enforce or to timely enforce any provision of
this agreement or any federal, state or local law, code, ordinance,
rule or regulation shall be deemed to be a waiver of or
acquiescence in the actions of the Borough in contravention of that
or any other provision, law, code, ordinance, rule or regulation.
(3) Any waiver of any provision of this agreement or federal, state or
local law, code, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be in writing and
operate only as a waiver as expressed in such writing and shall not
be of any other force or effect.
F. Additional miscellaneous provisions.
(1) This franchise is subject to all orders, rules and/or regulations of
the FCC or other federal or state agencies applicable to a cable
system and such other orders, rules and/or regulations as any such
agency or agencies may from time to time adopt.
(2) If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision of this
agreement or ordinance is determined to be illegal, invalid or
§ A226-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A226-15
1:981
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any
federal or state regulatory agency having jurisdiction thereof, such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other
section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision thereof, all of
which shall remain in full force and effect for the term of this
agreement.
(3) The effective date of this agreement shall be the date of ordination
and enactment of the agreement by ordinance duly adopted by the
Borough Council.
(4) This written instrument contains the entire agreement between the
parties, supersedes all prior agreements, ordinances or proposals
except as specifically incorporated herein and cannot be changed
without written amendment approved by both the Borough and
Comcast.
(5) When the sense so requires, words of any gender used in this
agreement shall be held to include any other gender, and words in
the singular shall be held to include the plural, and vice versa.
(6) Level playing field. If the Borough grants an additional franchise
("additional franchise") for construction and operation of a cable
system or open video system ("OVS"), such additional franchise(s)
cannot impose material obligations which are more favorable or
less burdensome than those contained in this agreement or impair
Comcast's ability to perform its commitments under this
agreement. Such material obligations are limited to the following:
Comcast's obligations under this agreement to pay a franchise fee;
Comcast's obligations under this agreement to meet system
requirements; Comcast's obligations under this agreement to
provide PEG channel or support; and Comcast's obligations to meet
build-out, construction and equipment standards specified herein.
In the event this franchise is renewed and the Borough seeks to
impose additional obligations upon Comcast and if such obligations
are more burdensome and less favorable than those contained in
the additional franchise(s) with the Borough, the Borough shall
take into account any additional franchise(s) previously granted
and find that the proposed additional obligations in the renewal are
reasonable under Section 626 of the Cable Act, taking into account
the costs and burden of meeting such noncomparable obligations
and the benefits which the additional franchise(s) may have given
the Borough.
(7) Force majeure. Comcast shall not be held in default under, or in
noncompliance with, the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any
enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default
(including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise),
where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were
caused by strike, riot, war, earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually
severe rain or snow storm, hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic
§ A226-15 COLUMBIA CODE § A226-15
1:982
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
722 9-8-2003 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
723 11-10-2003 Skateboards, scooters and
skates
Ch. 177
724 12-16-2003 Street acceptance NCM
725 12-8-2003 Annual tax levy NCM
726 12-16-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
727 2-9-2004 Health and sanitation Ch. 126
act of nature, labor disputes, failure of utility service necessary to
operate the cable system, governmental, administrative or judicial
order or regulation or other event that is reasonably beyond
Comcast's ability to anticipate or control. This provision also covers
work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or
monitor their own utility poles on which Comcast's cable or
equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials or
qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
(8) No third-party beneficiaries. Nothing in this franchise agreement is
or was intended to confer third-party beneficiary status on any
member of the public to enforce the terms of this franchise
agreement.
(9) Modification. No provision of this franchise agreement shall be
amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an
instrument, in writing, duly executed by the Borough and Comcast,
which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the Borough
through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by the
Borough, as required by applicable law.
(10) Governing law. This franchise agreement shall be deemed to be
executed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall be
governed in all respects, including validity, interpretation and
effect, and construed in accordance with the laws of the United
States of America and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
applicable to contracts entered into and performed entirely within
the commonwealth.
§ A226-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:983
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
728 2-9-2004 Board of Health Ch. 33
729 3-8-2004 Handicapped parking Ch. 207, Art. XVI
730 3-8-2004 Nonstormwater discharges Ch. 153
731 5-10-2004 Tax exemptions for
industrial, commercial and
other business property
Superseded by
Ord. No. 817
732 5-10-2004 Police Pension Plan Ch. A225, Art. III
733 6-14-2004 Snow emergency
procedures and routes
Ch. 207, Art. XVII
734 6-14-2004 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
735 8-9-2004 Manager amendment Ch. 40
736 8-9-2004 Attorney's fees Ch. 116, Art. I
737 8-9-2004 Care and control of animals
amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II
738 8-9-2004 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 47
739 8-9-2004 Trees amendment Ch. 202
740 Street vacation NCM
741 9-13-2004 Cable television franchise Ch. A226
742 10-11-2004 Existing structures,
property maintenance ad
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
743 1-10-2005 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 24
744 12-28-2004 Tax rate reduction NCM
745 12-28-2004 Annual tax levy NCM
746 12-28-2004 Emergency and municipal
services tax
Ch. 194, Art. IV
747 3-14-2005 General provisions for
streets, sidewalks and
buildings amendment
Ch. 186, Art. IV
748 3-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 207, Arts. I
and II
749 4-11-2005 Issuance of general
obligation note
NCM
750 4-26-2005 Issuance of general
obligation note
NCM
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:984
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
751 5-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
752 7-26-2005 Issuance of general
obligation note
NCM
753 8-8-2005 Intergovernmental
agreement: participation in
Lancaster Intermunicipal
Committee
NCM
754 9-12-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
755 10-10-200 Police pension plan
amendment
Ch. A225, Art. III
756 11-14-2005 Intergovernmental
agreement: management
support services
NCM
757 Loan from USDA NCM
758 1-9-2006 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
759 1-9-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 194, Art. IV
760 12-29-2005 Annual tax levy NCM
761 2-7-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 194, Art. IV
762 2-13-2006 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 24
763 2-13-2006 Annual tax levy amendment NCM
764 3-21-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 186, Art. II
765 Loan from USDA:
amendment to Ord. No.
757
NCM
766 4-10-2006 Solid waste amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 798
767 6-12-2006 Street vacation NCM
768 Vetoed
769 Tabled
770 8-14-2006 Parks and Recreation
Board amendment
Ch. 47
771 12-11-2006 Historic district
amendment
Ch. 130
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:985
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
772 12-11-2006 Authorization to join
Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Risk
Management Association
NCM
773 12-11-2006 Annual tax levy NCM
774 1-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. XVI
775 2-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
776 1-8-2007 Sewer regulations
amendment
Ch. 173, Art. II
777 1-22-2007 Authorization to join
Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment
Trust
NCM
778 2-12-2007 Intergovernmental
agreement amendment:
sewage collection,
transportation, treatment
and disposal
NCM
779 Vetoed
780 5-14-2007 Garage and yard sales Ch. 122
781 10-24-2007 Bond NCM
782 7-9-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
783 12-10-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 194, Art. IV
784 12-10-2007 Disorderly conduct Ch. 108
785 12-10-2007 Approval and authorization
for Borough to enter
amended agreement for
establishment of the
Lancaster County Uniform
Construction Code Board of
Appeals
NCM
786 12-10-2007 Annual tax levy NCM
787 3-10-2008 Truck traffic amendment Ch. 207, Art. XI
788 1-4-2010 Intergovernmental
agreement: crash scene
investigative unit
NCM
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:986
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
789 4-14-2008 Skateboards, scooters and
skates amendment
Ch. 177
790 5-12-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
791 8-8-2008 One-way streets
amendment; through
highways and stop
intersections amendment;
truck traffic amendment
Ch. 207, Arts. VII,
X and XI
792 Not adopted
793 Not adopted
794 10-13-2008 Intergovernmental
agreement: purchase of
energy supplies
NCM
795 12-8-2008 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
796 1-12-2009 Body art establishments Ch. 88
797 1-27-2009 Parking amendment;
handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 207, Arts. II
and XVI
798 2-9-2009 Solid waste Ch. 181
799 4-13-2009 Truck traffic amendment Ch. 207, Art. XI
800 5-26-2009 Street vacation NCM
801 3-23-2009 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
802 6-30-2009 Taxation: boundaries for
deteriorated areas
Repealed by Ord.
No. 847
803 8-13-2009 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated dwellings
Superseded by
Ord. No. 824
804 12-21-2009 Annual tax levy NCM
805 3-23-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
806 2-8-2010 Council meetings
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. II
807 10-11-2010 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 108
808 Bond NCM
809 12-13-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
810 1-10-2011 Railway lighting agreement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:987
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
811 2-14-2011 Trusts and funds: Columbia
Historic Market House
Trust
Ch. 66, Art. I
812 3-14-2011 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
813 3-14-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
814 Not adopted
815 Not adopted
816 8-8-2011 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated dwellings
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 824
817 8-8-2011 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated industrial,
commercial or other
business properties
Superseded by
Ord. No. 823
818 9-12-2011 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
819 9-12-2011 Earned income tax Ch. 194, Art. III
820 10-10-2011 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
821 12-12-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
822 1-9-2012 Designation of boundaries
of deteriorated areas
Superseded by
Ord. No. 846
823 12-12-2011 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated industrial,
commercial or other
business properties
Superseded by
Ord. No. 840
824 1-9-2012 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated dwellings
Superseded by
Ord. No. 841
825 Not adopted
826 6-11-2012 Borough property
amendment
Not adopted
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:988
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
827 6-11-2012 Care and control of animals
amendment; health and
sanitation amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II; Ch.
126
828 7-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
829 7-22-2013 Pawnbrokers, antique
dealers and secondhand
goods dealers
Ch. 158
830 Not adopted
831 3-11-2013 Parking amendment;
parking meters
amendment; one-way
streets amendment;
handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 207, Arts. II,
III, VII, XVI
832 11-12-2012 Police Department:
warrantless arrests
Ch. 56, Art. II
833 12-10-2012 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
834 2-25-2013 General provisions
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 845
835 2-25-2013 Care and control of animals
amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II
836 3-11-2013 General obligation note NCM
837 8-1-2013 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement:
river trail
NCM
838 8-12-2013 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
839 10-14-2013 Civil Service Commission
rules and regulations
Ch. 15, Art. I
840 1-13-2014 Tax exemptions for
industrial, commercial and
other business property
Ch. 194, Art. VI
841 1-13-2014 Tax exemption for
improvements to
deteriorated residential
property
Ch. 194, Art. VII
842 12-9-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
843 12-9-2013 Risk management NCM
844 1-13-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 184
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:989
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
845 1-13-2014 Authorization for
codification
NCM
846 1-13-2014 Designation of boundaries
for deteriorated properties
exemptions
Ch. 194, Art. VII,
footnote only
847 2-10-2014 Effective date for
designation of boundaries
for deteriorated properties
exemptions
Ch. 194, Art. VII,
footnote only
848 4-14-2014 Trucked waste Ch. 204
849 4-28-2014 Trees amendment Ch. 202
850 11-10-2014 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 190
851 Number not used
852 11-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
853 7-14-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement for crash scene
investigative unit
NCM
854 8-11-2014 Outdoor fires Ch. 117
855 7-28-2014 General provisions:
enforcement of certain
ordinances
Ch. 1, Art. II
856 9-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. X
857 11-24-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement for joining
insurance cooperative
NCM
858 12-22-2014 Tax rate for 2015 See Ch. 194, Art. I
859 2-23-2015 Bond amendment NCM
Res. No.
15-14
7-15-2015 Enforcement of certain
ordinances amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
860 8-24-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
861 8-10-2015 Borough property
amendment
Ch. 90
862 8-10-2015 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
863 Vetoed by Mayor
864 8-10-2015 Street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 186, Art. II
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:990
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
865 10-26-2015 Sewer Inspector and sewer
permits amendment
Ch. 173, Art. I
866 10-26-2015 Authorization to enter
memorandum of
understanding with
Lancaster County
Conservation District
NCM
867 12-14-2015 Tax rate for 2016 See Ch. 194, Art. I
868 3-14-2016 Administration of
government: duties and
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
869 3-14-2016 Floodplain management;
zoning amendment
Ch. 120; Ch. 220
870 9-12-2016 Solid waste amendment Ch. 181
871 6-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
872 9-12-2016 Dissolution of Columbia
Municipal Authority
NCM
873 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
874 12-12-2016 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
875 11-14-2016 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
876 Number not used
877 12-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 220
878 12-12-2016 Administration of
government: duties and
general regulations
amendment; Manager
amendment; existing
structures, property
maintenance and fire
prevention amendment;
sewers and sewerage
amendment; subdivision
and land development
amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch.
40; Ch. 112; Ch.
173; Ch. 190
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:991
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
879 12-12-2016 Alcoholic beverages: bring
your own bottle (BYOB)
clubs
Ch. 77, Art. II
880 11-14-2016 Bond NCM
881 12-12-2016 Tax rate for 2017 See Ch. 194, Art. I
882 3-13-2017 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
883 4-10-2017 Tax exemptions for
industrial, commercial and
other business property
amendment
Ch. 194, Art. VI
884 5-8-2017 Existing structures,
property maintenance and
fire prevention amendment
Ch. 112
885 Zoning amendment Not yet adopted
886 9-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic: snow
emergency procedures and
routes amendment
Ch. 207, Art. XVII
887 9-11-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 186, Art. V
888 9-11-2017 Skateboards, hoverboards/
electronically motorized
boards, scooters, and
skates amendment
Ch. 177
889 12-11-2017 Transient Retail Business
Amendment
Ch. 198
890 12-11-2017 Tax rate for 2018 See Ch. 194, Art. I
891 12-11-2017 Fire Department
Amendment; Alarms: Key
Lock Boxes; Contractors:
Restoration Services
Providers
Ch. 24; Ch. 74,
Art. II; Ch. 97, Art.
I
892 12-11-2017 Manager Amendment Ch. 40
893 12-11-2017 Intergovernmental
agreement for establishing
multi-municipal litigation
consortium
NCM
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:992
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
894 12-11-2017 Existing Structures,
Property Maintenance and
Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 112
895 1-9-2018 Administration of
Government: Duties and
General Regulations
Amendment; Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch.
47
896 2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VII
897 3-12-2018 Revolving Loan Program Repealed by Ord.
No. 913
898 5-14-2018 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 181
899 8-13-2018 Fireworks Ch. 118
900 8-13-2018 Existing Structures,
Property Maintenance and
Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 112
901 9-10-2018 Taxation: Volunteer Service
Tax Credit
Ch. 194, Art. VIII
902 9-10-2018 Historic District
Amendment
Ch. 130
903 9-18-2018 Taxation: Keystone
Opportunity Expansion
Zone Exemption
Ch. 194, Art. VIII
904 11-12-2018 Taxation: Volunteer Service
Tax Credit Amendment
Ch. 194, Art. IX
905 10-8-2018 Historic District
Amendment
Ch. 130
906 11-12-2018 Rental Property: Lead Paint
Safe Report
Ch. 166, Art. I
907 12-13-2018 Tax Rate for 2019 See Ch. 194, Art. I
908 12-10-2018 Taxation: Keystone
Opportunity Expansion
Zone Exemtpion
Amendment
Ch. 194, Art. VIII
909 1-8-2019 Employee Programs
Amendment
Ch. A225
Res. No.
2019-01
1-8-2019 Fee Schedule NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:993
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2019-02
1-8-2019 Designation of Depositories NCM
Res. No.
2019-03
1-8-2019 Agreement NCM
Res. No.
2019-04
1-8-2019 Sale of Surplus Equipment NCM
Res. No.
2019-05
2-12-2019 Disposition of Records NCM
Res. No.
2019-06
2-12-2019 Disposal of Equipment NCM
Res. No.
2019-07
2-12-2019 Protocols and Rules of
Decorum for Public
Meetings
NCM
Res. No.
2019-08
2-12-2019 Lease NCM
Res. No.
2019-09
5-14-2019 Public Meetings: Protocols
and Rules of Decorum
Ch. 58, Art. I
Res. No.
2019-10
3-26-2019 Sale of Equipment NCM
910 4-9-2019 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 5
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Res. No.
2019-11
4-9-2019 Agreement NCM 10
Res. No.
2019-12
4-23-2019 Sale of Surplus
Equipment
NCM 10
911 5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
Hazardous Vehicle
Parking
Ch. 207,
Art. XVIII
10
912 6-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220 10
913 7-9-2019 Revolving Loan
Program Repealer
NCM 10
Res. No.
2019-13
7-23-2019 Amusements: Video
Gaming Terminals
Ch. 80, Art.
I
10
914 7-23-2019 Bond NCM 10
915 7-23-2019 Fire Inspector
Amendment
Ch. 27 10
§ DL-1 COLUMBIA CODE § DL-1
1:994
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
916 7-23-2019 Existing Structures,
Property
Maintenance and
Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 112 10
Res. No.
2019-14
8-13-2019 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 10
Res. No.
2019-15
8-13-2019 Capital
Improvement Fund
NCM 10
917 8-13-2019 Alarms: Key Lock
Boxes Amendment
Ch. 74, Art.
II
10
Res. No.
2019-16
9-24-2019 Fee Schedule NCM 10
Res. No.
2019-17
9-24-2019 Certificate of
Approval
NCM 10
918 10-22-2019 Fire Department
Amendment; Fire
Police Amendment;
Alarms: General
Provisions
Amendment; Garage
and Yard Sales
Amendment;
Taxation: Volunteer
Service Tax Credit
Amendment
Ch. 24; Ch.
31; Ch. 74,
Art. I; Ch.
122; Ch.
194, Art.
VIII
10
919 12-16-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 220 11
920 12-10-2019 Demolition Permits
Amendment
Ch. 105 11
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:995